CHAPTER

6:

Order
in

and

Freedom

Nature

Organic and inorganic patterns
Sharing and dinergy are both basic pattern-torming processes that unite diversities. That there
exists a basic unity within the manitold diversities ot this world is one oi the oldest observations
ot mankind. Ancient cultures attributed this unity to divinities, or to a single creator. The
presocratic philosophers .sought the secret ot this unity in a universal substance — Thales saw it
in water, Anaximenes in air, and Heraclitus in tire. This last philosopher is credited with
having developed the concept ot "unity in diversity."
In more recent times, this concept has become basic tor both art and science. The American
mathematician Ci. D. Birkhott in 1928 developed a theory ot aesthetic measure based on this
principle, which he reterred to as "order in complexity. "^^ The measure ot aesthetic value,
according to this theory, is in direct proportion to order and in inverse proportion to complexity. H. E. Huntley, in his book about the golden section mentioned earlier, quotes J. Bronowski: "Science is nothing other than the search to discover unity in the wild variety ot
nature, or more exactly, in the variety ot our experience. Poetry, painting, the arts are the
same search, in Coleridge's phrase, tor unity in variety."''*
One ot the most beautitul examples ot this principle in nature is the snowtlake: every one is
ditterent, yet all are united by their basic hexagonal pattern, (tig. 127) Each snowtlake is
restricted to one pattern, repeated and reflected twelve times (see triangles and arrows). Such
unitormity is characteristic ot all inorganic, crystalline patterns, which have more order .md
unitormity than living patterns.
Hexagonal patterns, such as the snowtlake, are more common in inorganic than in organic
nature, which tavors pentagonal patterns. There are, however, interesting connections

Fig. 127. SnovvtLikcs. Arrows itidic.ite triangul.ir pattern
repeated 12 times in each flake.

ORDEK ANO FREtDOM IN NAIURE ' 79

5

2o isosceles f^co^^Lts coyyv he Ctrns/Ti^-

xcttxAxgles oiaX of ccvT2bocuut ,wxth a.
SUt alcmg-HiS {£:^J:c</iyyi£,^see ut left)
f^-t °jO° ej^Crriie j-askint\. .JlvC/vitij rvJtr^^

Pe^ptcM've

\ri t^(Byj^ sUcrvj H\<i hf^o -

f-ii; 128 Mivlfl ot icosdhcdron
between hexagonal and pentagonal patterns. One of these appears in the icosahedron (fig.
128) consisting of twenty triangular faces, which has a hexagonal outline when viewed from
one side, and a pentagonal one when viewed from the other side. Its diagonal planes (connecting diagonally opposite edges) are golden rectangles.'" Perhaps the example of the icosahedron
is a reflection of the relationship existing between inorganic and organic matter, the latter
being built up trom the former, as in the human body which is two-thirds water.
The unity within the diversities ot organic and inorganic patterns is also seen in the spiral
patterns ot certain galaxies (fig. 129) which echo on a cosmic scale the minute dinergic spiral
patterns ot shells and flowers.
so

THF PcnX FR Of L IMITS

Fig. \2'-). Spir.il galaxy's maiid.ila pattern is similar to spirals ot organic growth
c~)kn[-K AND HRhinXIM IN NA IUKK / 81

Pincconcs likewise untold in similar patterns. The seed-containing scales grow along the
intersections oi two sets at helixes — spirals that untold in three-dimensional space like the
DNA molecule. In plan-view, the spiral projections ot these helixes resemble miniature galaxies, (tig. 130) In the cone ot the Jettrey pine, tigure 131, thirteen helixes move in one direction
and eight move in the other, closely approximating golden section proportions.
In the early l^OOs in England, T. A. Cook published a profusely illustrated book, The Curves
oj Life, about the prevalence ot the golden section's proportions in nature and art.^* But he
stressed not the paradoxical combination ot unity and diversity, but rather diversity alone, as if
unity would necessarily mean unitormity, which is tortunately not so. Two American books
which appeared about the same time, Xature's HarinoHU I'mly and Proportional Form by Samuel
(Oilman and C Arthur C^oan,'''^ also describe the role ot the golden section in the harmonious
patterns ot nature and art. But these books emphasize only the unity ot these patterns. That
diversity and unity are dinergically joined in all harmonies ot nature and art is a point not
stressed in these books, though it is the truth documented by all their examples.
Reality unites and diversities at one and the same time. Montaigne observed in the titteenth
century: "As nci event and no shape is entirely like another, so none is entirely different trom

hig. 131. 1 Icli.xLs lit |cttrc-\' piufconc-.

another . ... It our faces were not similar, we could nox distniguish man from beast; li thev
were not dissimilar we could not distinguish man from man."''"
How nature accomplishes the seemingly impossible, creating forms that are both similar and
dissunilar, united and diverse at the same time, has been brilliantly demonstrated by Sir D'Arcy
Wentworth Thompson's "theory of transformations" to which earlier reference was made.*"'
With the help of this theory, the shape of one species can be seen to derive from the shape of
another, related species. This distinguished author derived, for instance, from the shape of the
very common porcupine fish (Diodoii), the shape of a very different-looking sunfish [Ortluiiioriscus nioLi) by transforming the right-angled network of coordinates, within which the former
was plotted, into a corresponding but deformed network of curved lines that fitted the latter,
(fig. 132) This could be done because, as the author says, "There is something, an essential and
undisputable something, that is common to them."'"' What this essential something might be
can perhaps be found by comparing the basic proportions of these two shapes: they are both
variations of the golden section's proportions. The porcupine fish fits into two reciprocal
golden rectangles, while the sunfish fits into two 3-4-5 triangles.
The zoologist Paul Weiss, in his inaugural address as president of the American Association

ORDER AND IREEDOM IN NATURE / 85

tor the Advancement ot Science in 1953, interpreted the unity within diversities in the patterns
ot organic nature as a combination ot order and freedom. This combination is as paradoxical as
It is dinergic: order <ind unity involves constr.unt, while diversity implies the freedom to ditter.
"Lite is t)rder, but order with tolerances."''"'
Siunvtlakes have shown us that this principle is also present in inorganic nature. Other
inorg.inic patterns that demonstrate tlie principle ot order and freedom can be seen in the
movement ot pendulums. The sh.ipes in figure 13.^ were made by a harrnonograph, which
consisted of two pendulums that registered their simultaneous movements with the help of a
tablet attached to one and a pen .itt.iched to the other. When their lengths — which determine
the swing times ot the two pendulums — were left entirely free ot any constraints or relationship to each other, the pattern bec.mie chaotic, like tangled wool. (C) When, however, the
lengths were adjusted so that their swing times related tii each other in ratios expressible in
small whole numbers, then the p.itterns became harmonious, as A, B, and D illustrate. The
pendulums still swung freely, but now the lines also reflect, by the number of looped configurations on each side, the proportional limits between the length, and thus between the swing
times, ot the generating pendulums.''-' The difference between chaotic and harmonious lines
produced here bv gr.ivitv is analogous to the difference between noise and musical sound
discussed earlier.
There are curunis similarities between h<irnu>nograph patterns and certain shell shapes.
Figure 1.34 shows the cross section of a nautilus shell and a harmonograph pattern produced by
two pendulums that were equally long but swinging in opposite directions. The two patterns
are diverse in origin, but there is a similarity between their graceful lines. This similarity is
rooted in the fact that dinergic proportion.il rel.itionships create both patterns: increments of
growth in the shell and swing times in the pendulums.
(Iravity is weight. The lifting ot weight by its dinergic sharing is grace. It is the seemingly
effortless release from burden that charms us in grace, hence its divine connotation, (juivity and
(•niLi' is the title ot Simone Weil's posthuiiKHisly edited iKUebooks in which she movingly
records her observations about the strange wavs in which necessity and beauty, order and
freedom, gravity and grace, unity and diversity <ire linked together in nature as well as in
To our
prevuHis examples ot unitv m diversitv. let us ik>w add a tew from the worlds ot
destiny.''''
human
insects ,ind (^t humans.

l.VV V',11 ictif- ot JmcrgK li.irnioiiour-ipli ['.iltcrtis
S4

I til- I'dW l-K O] I IMl IS

D

Fig. 134. A. Pattern drawn hy harnionograph.
B. Cross section ot chambered nautilus shell.

ORDHR AND f-i<hErX^M IN NATURE / S.S

^ttt^(}toM} weevil

^ Cioverston boftr (n Uzmu) beetle. )

fid'jjjjj. h'pu/ywi'aJ a. I J Ml )

L a^^iAiUM. Mo^dLrdc IstytrttUie.

From

f it;. 13^. L'nM\ m the ilivcrMtics o( hct-tlf sli.i

beetles to butterflies

The largest insccr urdcr is Coleoptera, the order ot
beetles. Figure 135 shows a random selection of species,
belonging to different families and subfamilies, all having
different shapes and yet all united by the same kind of
proportional relatie)nships between their interconnected
parts. This drawing shows that these relationships range
between the 0.618 ratio of the golden section and the 0.75
ratio of the Pythagorean triangle. The graph at the lower
left shows the diverse ways in which these proportional
relationships are approximated. As a result of these
shared relationships, the overall proportions as well as
the detailed articulations of every one of these beetle
shapes approximate the visual equivalents of musical
root harmonies of fifth-diapente and fourth-diatessaron.

S6

WW VOW VW 01 1 IMI i s

10

^

0

S

10

15

20

ZS

= 0.6/9
• ■^/ = a&/s
= 0.6/8
7-1 -.11 -3 = 0.6'^
4.C; 7.? = 0 630
2- :3.3
3. 3.- ^3 =0.623
£.2.-/0 =■0.620
3.8.6.2 = 0.6/?

'p-O.ki'i..-(he. frjti^

- 3S ^O.OS

Fig. 136. Proportional analysis of niydas tly

V

The body of the myJas tly (order of Diptera) (Hg. 136) tits into
two golden rectangles. Growth seems to have proceeded ni this tlv
ixom the thora.x upwards and downwards. Constructions ot the
giilden section show the growth process with a series of diminishing
golden rectangles (shaded). Succeeding stages of growth are in
golden reciprocal relationships. The harnn>nic rhythms of the
growth process are illustrated by w.ive and bar diagrams and by
numeric and graphic tabulation. The shape of the wings shares the
basic proportional relations of the bcKly. A golden rectangle contains the narrower part c^f the wing, while a square ctirresponding
to the width of the wing fits the broader part, the rel.ition between
square and rectangle being the reciprocal "rel.ition of neighbors."
Though dragonflies, damselfies, darners, .md skimmers (order of
Odonata) don't look like flies, they nevertheless share the same
basic proportitinal limitations. The common skimmer's over.ill
shape, for instance, neatly tits inti> .i single gcilden rectangle, (fig.
OKOfcR AND I KFJ-DOM IN NATURE / 87

137) Alcing the Kmgitudinal axis ot the body, the head,
pronotuni, thoracic <ind abdominal segments, and wing
K>cations shtnv simil.ir rehitions ot neighbors as the mydas fly.
This relatumship connec ts the last segment ot the abdc^men to
the elongated apex, which serves to expel water from the
body, thus .liding flight by "jet propulsion."^ The common
skmnner's huid wuig has the same proportions as the mydas
flv's wuig. Its narrower p.irt fittmg into a gc:>lden rectangle,
while the broader portion is ctmtained in a square equal to the
wing width. The elongated trcmt wing tits into twci golden
rectangles and their reciprocal.
The proporticins ot the wings ot other insects, such as mayflies, bees, wasps, .ints, crickets, anci grasshoppers, show similar proportion, il limitations. What is more, the same wing
shapes appear outside the animal kingdom, tor instance in the
winged seeds of the maple tree. Figure 138 shows four random
pairs o[ winged maple seeds. In specimen 1, the two wings
completely overlap, fitting into a golden rectangle and its
reciprocal. In specimen 2, the two wings tit into a single
golden rectangle, and the widest point of the two combined
wings is at the gt^lden section point of its length. In specimen
3, the right wing has grown along the diagonal ot a golden
rect.ingle, while the left wing tits into a golden rectangle and a
sc]u.ire, the width of which corresponds to the full width c^t the
wing (in the pc:)sition it occupies within the whole configuration). Specimen 4 shows a further variation, each of the wings
corresponding to the diagcMials ot 3:4 rectangles.
«H

l lli; I'OW 1 R Ol 1 IMl I s

[3)

/9« Z 2i(-, = 47 -IXv ;

Jfl^ ' 5.5/6

51'-, ' ",i

Considering each winged seed separately, we find that lA
tits into two golden rectangles; 2A tits into a golden rect<ingle
and a square, ctirresponding to its width; 3A tits mtci two
golden rectangles and their reciprocd; and 4A tits into two
golden rectangles and a square equaling the wing width. In
each ot these specimens, the seed itselt extends to the golden
section point along the length ot one ot the golden rect.uigles
that trame the overall shape.
The variety and beauty ot buttertlies (order ot Lepidoptera)
is proverbial. The proportioning ot buttertlv wings varies
trom species to species, yet there is <» unitv in these diversities,
a unity created by the same proportional limitations we
observed earlier, with the 1:2 = 0.5 proportion added, corresponding tothe octave-diapason.
For each buttertly illustrated here, six basic proportional
relationships were checked: total or h.ilt the wing width (2A
or A) to wing height (B); body length (C) to total wing height
(B); body length (C) to total or half the wing width (2A or
A); length ot hind wing (E) to length ot tront wing (D); width
ot tront wing (G) to its own length (D); and width ot hind
wmg (F) to its own length (E).

Fig. l.iS. I'ropnrtidii.il p.ittt rm nf w mmtl maple seeds.

lM<l)tR ANDI UI i nOM IN NAtUlU-. ,W

he

I ^'' I'l

.in.il\Ms ot ( .7,'./m^ /Mri;.i<>;((^
Figure 13^^ shows a specimen of C.L\iuis pdniiissiuf, belonging to the taniily ot Parnassadiae: a
ligln gr.iv huttertlv with ilistinctive round, red dots on its hind wings and crescent-shaped dark,
markings .iround the edges ot rhe wings. It shows octave-diapason rehitionships between body
lengtli and total wing height (2), and between width and length ot the tront wings (5). Fifthdiapente harmonv is approxim.ited bv the relationship ot bi)dy length to halt wing width (3),
while tourth-diatessaron appears m three rel.itu>nships: halt the wing width to wing height (1),
length ot hind wing to length ot tront wing (4), and width to length ot hind wing (6).
(nitterences between mathem.itic.dlv exact ,ind actual proportions are indicated with d in the
drawing.)

;0 ^ 0

10 20 JO 40 50
III

60

7o

60

so /oo
^ ■

6i

A

64

F
E
LftzmtLCt/U-

Fig. 14(1. I'toportional an.iK sis

i H o-i an
cloiklcj sw.illowtail.

38 £0.6/5...

Figure 140 represents ,1 clouded swallowtail in ventral view. It is a large, beautitul buttertlv,
belonging tii the taniily ot Papilionidae, with wings that appear woven ot dark lace, and with
the characteristic elongation oi the hind wing which accounts tor its name and makes the hind
wing as long as the front wing. We tind the equivalent ot diapason in the relationship oi bodv
length to halt the wing width (2), while diatessaron relates halt the wing width to the wing
height (1). There are three diapente relationships in this specimen: one is between bodv length
and 6).
wing height (3), the other two are between the width and length ot each e>t the wings, (5
OKDER AND l-RHtDOM IN NAIUIU; 'Jl

The /chr.i biutcrny, (tig. 141 ) (I Icluoiiius clhiritonius), which belongs to the tainily ot Heliconk!.i(.-, is tlark brown with bright yellow stripes. It h.is elong.iteil front wings which fit into the
v rectangle, composed i>t two reciprocal golden rect. ingles. An enl.irged version of this same
proportion eiicompasss the overall sh.ipe ot this butterfly. The 21-millimeter body length and
the 34-millimeter total wing width of this specimen correspond to Fibonacci numbers, bringing
.ilnnit <i iiiultiplicit V ot diverse di.ipente harmonies (see 1 , 2, 3, 4, 5). The propcirtions of the hind
wmg appro.ximate 3:4 = ().7.S, the visual equivalent ot diatessaron.
It is ama/ing to beluild sue h unit\' m the manitolil diversities of nature, each species developing freely its uniqueness. \et all united bv sh.iring the same simple, dinergic and harmonious
proportional limitations. Butterflies tlutter. dr.igontlies dart, and beetles bore. The allosaurus
must have nK)ved with ,i heavy, lumbering gait, unlike the graceful gallop of the ht)rse, the slow
crawl of the crab, and the sudden leap of the frog. I low unique each is, and how different than
winged m.iple si-eds, d.iisies and Miiitlowers, and \et they all are united bv sharing the proportional limitations of music.il root luirmonies. This unitv of diversities extends also to the
proportions ot human an<itomy, .is the following ex.imples intend tii show.
•>: 1 111 I'ciw 1 K oi I iMiis

Human

harmonies

The perception ot hum.in proportions has varied greatly throughout the ages. One ot the
earliest written documents dealing with human proportions is bv Marcus Vitruvius Pollio, the
first-century Roman architect and writer. He begins his I'cii Books on A re hit cc lure with the
recommendation that temples, in order to be magnificent, shc)uld be constructed on the analogy
of the well-shaped human body, in which, he says, there is a perfect harmony between all
parts. ''^ We shall see more of Vitruvius's ideas on temples in the next chapter. Here we are
concerned with his examples of harmonious human proportions. Among these he mentions that
the height of a well-shaped man is the same as the span of his outstretched arms, these two
equal measures yielding a square which encompasses the whole body, while the hands and feet
touch a circle centered upon the navel.
This relatedness of the human body to the circle and the square rests upon the archetypal idea
of "squaring the circle," which fascinated the ancients, because these shapes were considered
perfect and even sacred, the circle having been looked upon as a symbol of the heavenlv orbits,
the square as a representation of the "foursquare" firmness of the earth. The two combined in
the human body suggests in the language of symbolic patterns that we unite within ourselves
the diversities of heaven and earth, an idea shared by many mythologies and religions.
When the Renaissance rediscovered the classical remains of Clreece and Rome, Leonardo da
Vinci illustrated Vitruvius's version of this idea with his own famous drawing (fig. 142). The
bar diagrams ,ind the triangular diagram, which here are added to the dr.iwing, show how the
adjacent parts of this body share proportions which fall within the range of the golden section

IIKPI R AND f-KhhlH^M IN NA I UlU- / 9.^

14_v hra I lua I'.uioli, aiitlior ot Dwina I'rop.^rth'ih'. with .1 stuJcllt.
1 11!-; Pcn\ tK Oh 1 IMllN

&ntiput

Stow

aiflfaDnfrfct
2)?atiimar
^Iramdnm fub
moiw
^umni( bunifrt
3u3uli

^Iniw to^rorii
^ummumcoja ft*
miirfni
^imur

3nfra m4mrtla»
iumhi tibiinant
oiimir
0inu» coratum
©uifium frtnur
'^tm a(utt»
@upt<t gtnn
(3?irlrnti( ttfHn*

tflriorts
3mumfur«f^
^ifiim furor
tmcncn*

racn»
iiin
wfu»
3niS
®u

n

3mumtalior«
nort»

1+

Fig. 144. Durcr\ studic-- ot huni.iii propurtions
using harmonic ^(..ilcs.

JUam
and the Pythagorean triangle. Leonardo, .dong with many ot the Renaiss.ince masters, vv.is a
great student of harmonious proportions and illustrated the mathematician Luca Pacioli s hook
Diviiia Proportioiic. about the golden section, published in 1509. (Fig. 143) Leonardo summarized

his studies of good proportions in memorable words: ". . . every part is disposed lo unite with
the whole, that it may thereby escape from its incompleteness."
This disposition of the human biKly's diverse parts to unite with the whole .dso tascinated
another great Renaissance painter, Albrecht Dlirer, who published several vt>lumes abmit
human proportions. His theories include the use of harmonic scales, as shown in tigurc 144,
illustrating these relationships along drawings ot .i child's .nid .i man's bodies.
CMUM-R ANO f REtPO.M IN NAIL'KE '

I he kIcm th.it the root harmonics of music — in accordance with revived Pvthagt)rean
concepts — correspond to good proportu'ms ui the human body, and should theretore also be
followed in architecture, became a leading ide.i annMig the masters ot the Renaissance. Following that time, some ot these ideas about human harmonies took a mystical turn, strengthened by
studies oi Kabb<ilah, the )ewish mvstical tr.iditiitn, which became available in Latin translations
ot ancient Hebrew texts. The Englishman I^obert Fludd depicted man as a microcosm, united
with the m<icroct)sm ot the universe, ct)mbining dark, earthlv potentialities with light, heavenly
ones, .ittuned to universal musical harmonies like a immochord stretching trom earth to
heaven.''** (tig. 14.S)
Later, the Ages oi F.nlightenment and Rationalism trowned upon such mystical ideas. The
painter Hog.irth considered it "a strange notion" that there should be any correspondence
between be.uity .is seen by the eye and h.irnumy as heard bv the ear. The Scottish philosopher
Hume made the point th.it be.iutv is m the eve ot the beholder and that it is entirely subjective.
The Fnglishman F:dmund Burke said that "no two things can have less resemblance or analogy
than .1 man, a lunise or a temple." By the end ot the nineteenth century, |ohn Ruskin asserted
that "propiirtions are intinite as piissible .iirs m music, and it must be lett to the inspiration ot
the artist to invent be.iutitul proportions."''''

I HI I'ow hR cn I iMi rs

0

5

0
(Li citt^'i/inrtii
2^ i ncAts

0.6I&-

A;3 (hi 2-h t>:f \J-j a.b i) c X
\

i.f f-.j ^q:n j.k

ho/nd- Ci-i^n- hiJAik

Fig. 14f). I'ropot tions of the male bodv.

Futures 14f) and 147 arc based upon the author's me.isurements of human skeletons, mtegr.ited
with uiforniation gleaned from measurements oi live models as well as trom <inatomical
textbooks. All dimensions are those ofaverage-sized adults .is reported by U.S. governmental
surveys.
U AND PRFFIH-iM IN NAI UlU

Fii; 147. Proportions ot the female body.

98 / THE POWER OF LIMITS

These drawings of the female figure show that raised arms and outstretched legs touch yet another circle, beyond the one centered at the
navel. The center ot this new circle is close to the center oi gravity of the
whole body, near the pomt where the vertebral column emerges from the
sacrum, as in the frog. This circle is somewhat larger than Vitruvius's and
Leonardo's, because they both refer to a figure standing on the soles of
the feet, thus excluding the length of the feet themselves, while the
present drawings include the length of the feet, fully extended like a
ballet
The dancer's.
diagrams in figures 146 and 147 show again how all parts of the
himian body share the same proportional limitations. Thus, the length
relationships of hand to arm to trunk (to the starting point of the spine in
the pelvis) are shared, as in the thoroughbred horse, by the relationships
of head to neck, trunk, legs, and feet. The entire human bone structure
fits neatly into three golden rectangles and a reciprocal, the latter containing the head. (See Appendices I & II.)
The unity we share with plants and animals is again visible from the
fact that our growth, like theirs, seems to unfold from a single center,
which in our case is at the top of the sacrum, just as in the frog. It may be
recalled how the spirals of the daisy and sunflower also unfold from the
center.
Because of its central location within the animal body, the ancients
considered the sacrum of their sacrificial animals particularly sacred,
hence its name: c'5 sacrum, "sacred bone" in Latin. It is the center of the
circle around the extended extremities, as shown in the skeleton in figures
146 & 147, and it is also the center of gravity of the entire body.

ORDER AND FREEDOM IN NATURE / W

l-iu- 14H. LJnit\' lit longitiiLlinal propunnnis iii vvomcii
.iikl nicn ot diverse- mzcs.

a i"
r
> ■ J
^
•U■ 1
■
A further instance oi unity ni diversity within human anatomy is the surprising correspondence between proportions ot diversely sized bone structures ot both sexes, as the comparative
table in Appendix I indicates. Figure 148 shows that all corresponding longitudinal dimensions
ot tall, average and small women and men tend to tall upon coaxial circles.
The wave diagrams ot tigure 148 are simplitied versions ot the ones seen earlier, with
proportions corresponding to the ones in Appendices I and 11. The trend towards unity ot these
wave patterns is so marked that they are almost identical, appearing to be stroboscopic images
ot one and the same moving pattern. These rhythmic waves are reminiscent of the gracefully
swinging loops ot pendulum patterns and the tanlike overlapping stages ot growth in the daisy's
central pattern.
The graph in Appendix I indicates the spread ot approximations to musical root harmonies.
This graph could be looked upon as a kind ot musical score ot the human body's silent
harmonies, or rather as variations upon this singular theme song.
As great as the diversities ot temale and male bodies are, still women and men are united by
the almost complete identitv ot their anatomic proportions, at least as tar as the length of their
bones are concerned. The only ditterence is a general retinement in the measurements of the
female skeleton and a widening ot the pelvic girdle.

10(1

rut row ER C1H LIMI i s

Fig. 149. Unity and diversity ot
propcirtunis m the lumi.m hand.

Finally, wc find an astiHiishmu; unity between the proportional harmonies of the vvliole hotlv
and Its diverse parts. Figure 149 shows a man's hand, traced irom an .x-r,iv photo. 23Even though
this hand is somewhat deformed by arthritis, the length of the bones lined up on their .t.xes show
that all joints tend to tall upon coaxial circles. The rendering of the wave diagr.ims emphasizes
the united rhythm ot these proportions. The h.md is .i microcosm mirroring the m.icrocosm of
the body. It grows out ot the wrist <is the spine grows out ot the sacrum, and as wings grow out
ot the buttertly, or as leaves and tlciwers gniw out ot their stems.

— i 6 (>■)}

0 15Of, 18

0.5-

ORDl R AN! ) 1 Ri l l H )M IN N.'\ I UUI- Id!

"Beauty is the harnnniy and cotKord of all parts, achieved in such a manner that nothing
could be added or taken away or altered except for the worse. These are the words of
another master of the Renaissance, Leon f^attista Albcrti, an architect and author of a famous
treatise on architecture.
The human body has the potentials tor such harmony and beauty. This is C)bvious in the
graceful movements of an accomplished ballet dancer, for instance, (fig. 150) The American
Heritage Dictionary gives as the first meaning, of the word "grace": "seemingly effortless beauty
or charm of movement, form or proportion." I^allet is certainly anything but effortless, like
.my cuher form of art, but there is a freedom of movement in ballet that appears miraculously
easy. This freedom turns upon order, the order of discipline that prepares and sustains all great
accomplishments.
One of the secrets of this order in ballet is the support of the body's entire weight upon a
single point: the center of gravity in the sacrum, which is upheld by only one outstretched leg
on the tip of the toes. Cirowth, gravity and grace concentrated in one point of our sacrum is the
power of limits enshrined in our bones.
Simone Weil, wht)se thoughts about grace and gravity were mentioned earlier, notes in
another volume of her notebooks: "Something infinitely small, under certain conditions, operates in a decisive manner. There is no mass so heavy but that a given point is equal to it; for a
mass will not fall if a single pi>int in it is upheld, provided that this point be the center of
gravity." She added — and this was during the days of Nazi occupation in France — "brute force
is not sovereign in this world. . . . What is sovereign ... is limit. . . . Every visible and palpable force is subject to an invisible limit, which it shall never cross. In the sea a wave mounts
higher and higher, but at a certain point . . . it is arrested and forced to descend. . . . That is the
truth which bites at our hearts every time we are penetrated by the beauty of the world. That is
the truth which bursts forth in matchless accents of joy in the beautiful and pure parts of the
Old Testament, in Cirecce among the Pythagoreans and all the sages, in China, with LaoTzu,in
remains.""'
Egyptian
Hindu
the The
truthscriptures,
of these in
words
has been
one of the main inspirations of this book. These words
reveal the other, traditional meaning of the word grace: mercy and the divine gift of love,
springing frt)m the relatedness of all that exists.
The ballet dancer's visible grace is a symbol of the other, invisible grace: the potential of
harmony and beauty that exists within every human being, for indeed all of us, not only
accomplished dancers, have an inner center, a sacrum, both in a physical and a spiritual sense.
That there also exist disorder and disease is testimony to nature's tolerance of diversity and
freedom, which at times can be very generous. Alberti's statement holds true for the art of
living as well as for other arts: too much added can harm as surely as too much taken away. Too
much leisure and luxury can destroy our native beauty as much as too little of life's necessities.
Harmony and grace are born from the marriage of plenty and poverty as Plato told us in his
Symposium. A comparative study of classical Western and Far Eastern arts strengthens this
view.

Fig. 151). Deborah Hadley, solo
dancer ot Pacific Northwest Balli

