CHAPTER

of

Anatomy

Sharin

Shells, clams, crabs and fishes

The shapes of shells have been the suhject of many studies which show that their harmonious
A logashapes unfold in logarithmic spirals characterized by the golden section's proportions.
rithmic spiral typical of shell growth, figure 99. shows that each consecutive stage ot growth is
encompassed by a golden rectangle which is by a square larger than the previous one, a pattern
Hambidge called the pattern of "whirling squares."-*" One can trace this "whirl" by
which Jay the
following
table below:
golden rectangles
() 1 2 3
12

4 5

2

4

6 7

4

6

8 9

+ squares
+ () 3 4 5

= golden rectangles:
= 12
4 5

+ 1
+ 2
+4

=

2

4

6 7

=

4

6

8 9

=

6

8 10 11 etc.

5 6 7
7 8 9
9 10 11

The harmony of the Fibonacci series is present in this shell curvature, as the equidistant radii
in figure 100 illustrate.

THE ANATOMY OF SHARING / 53

That even widely differing shell shapes share the proportions ot golden dinergy can be seen
by comparing, for instance, the Atlantic sundial {Architectonica nohilis) (fig. 101) — which is
103) perfectly circular — with a delicate variety of abalone {Haliotis asinitia) (fig. 102) which is
almost
elongated like a donkey's ear; (asininus means "donkey" in Latin). Successive stages of growth
in the abalone — measured along neighbormg, equidistant radii — are Fibonacci numbers, (tig.

Fig. ini. Atlantic sumiial

Fig. 11)2. Abalone {Halioiis
iisiiuihi). The shape above
the (Jotted line is reconstructed inFig. 103.

Fig. 10.^ i:)inergic
reconsiriu tuMi o\ abalone
shell's outline

.S4 THE POWI R OF 1 IMITS

]

In the Atlantic sundial, bcc.iuse ot its nearly circular shape, it is easy to measure successive
increments ot growth projected along one of the radii, marked a to 1 in figure 104. The
reconstructions — by the same dinergic method ot combined radial and rotation.il grtnvth
increments as used earlier for the reconstructions of daisy, sunflower and leaf outlines — reveal
that the difference between the curvatures is only in the tempo, or rate of unfolding. The
sundial's spiral moves with relative slowness between consecutive circles. It crawls through not
less than 20 radii, or squares, before reaching from one circle to the next: a proportion of 20:1
between radial and rotational growth. The abalone takes only four to five radii or squares to
move from one circle to the next: a proportion of 4 or 5:1 . Constructions of the golden section
at the right of figure 104 prove that the proportions of neighboring whorl-widths are the
golden ones: all the shaded rectangles — width and length of which correspond to the width of
neighboring whorls — are golden rectangles. The harmony created by this relationship is illustrated also by the organ-pipe-like bars, indicating the cumulative length of successivelv widening whorls. This sharing of the same proportional limitations throughout the entire growth
process is also expressed by a series ot equations all equaling (f).

I HE ANATOMY OF SHARING / 55

Fig. IDS. Dil.itc'd whflk ipcuion diLi

Ot course, shells grow in all three dimensions ot space sinuiltaneously. In the abalone,
however, and in the sundial, development in
the third dunension ot depth is relatively
small. In shells that have greater depth, this
development also shares the proportions of
golden dinergy, as can be seen, for mstance, in
the dilated whelk of New Zealand {Penion dilatiitus), figure 105. The wave diagram at the
left indicates how all neighboring whorls
share the same golden relationships. The long
equation series at the bottom ot the drawing
T !

expresses the same thing. The right-hand diagram hirnishes constructions of the golden
section as in the previous example.
A side view ot the bear's paw clam (tig.
106) illustrates the marvelous precision of
dinergic sharing between the two opposite
valves interlocking and complementing each
other. Reconstructions ot the basic outlines
reveal that the harmony ot this lovely shape
shares the same golden dinergies as so many
earlier examples ot organic growth.

Fig. 106. Bear's p.nv clarn [Htppopuf
hippopm).
reconstruction
ot central nincrgic
spiral, upper
diagram,
And cross section, lower duii^niw% / THF. POWER OF Ll.MlTS

Fig. 107. Proportional harmonies ot Dungenes crab (Cancer maj^isier).

In crustaceans we again find golden dinergic relations shared by all neighboring parts ot the
anatomy. The carapace of a typical Dungeness crab, from the Northwest Pacific coast of the
U.S., fits into a golden rectangle as drawing A of figure 107 shows. The length of neighboring
parts of the pincers and legs (C) in relation to each other (table B) fluctuates between visual
equivalents ot the three musical root harmonies of 0.75, fourth-diatessaron; 0.618, fifthdiapente; and 0.5, octave-diapason (D). The wave diagrams of pincer and legs (E) show the
harmonious rhythm created between all these differently sized members by their shared proportional relationships.
THE ANATOMY OF SHARING / 57

U.235 = /J
'5 4/8

/.6;e

f-ig, I(»S. Sli.irc\l [H(>]>oriions ot fish.
SS

mi- l'(,n\ 1 K OV 1 IMI 1 s

« 6/e

<f> =1. 618

/.O

A study ot a variety ot tish shapes reveals
similar rhythniie harmonies resulting from
similarly shared proportional limits. The proportional analysis ot ten ditterent. randomly
chosen fish trom the Pacific waters ot Can.ida

III, rtri i^p^'

ZJ

Cr/Xco Svt/ifpe TofL

demonstrates that their basic outlines — and
frequently also the detailed articulations ot
their bcxlies — share in a variety ot ways both
the proportions ot the golden section and ot
the 3-4-5 triangle. The pictures ot each ot the
ten tish in figure 108 illustrate how the outlines fit into golden rectangles, their multiples
and reciprocals, at times combined with
squares. In many instances, the mouth is at the
golden section point c^t the body's height, as in
the Coho salmon (1), quillback rockfish (2),
calico surf perch (7), and opah (10). The lower
row of fish shows how a series of double 3-4-5
triangles can be fitted into the outlines trom
mouth to tail.

3^
O 6 '8

IHE ANA I t^MY OF SHARlNCi / 59

..V

(2)

7A loi - 0.7?,

f;:99 - a-?
i2:;q = 0.63

24.31; 0/7

3j:5o = 0.62 ,~

t.' 5/ = 0 77

S )

3-; «2= c.fj

1

^4

'7^'^

fJott:
c
Sef. i-i^i-i'ciU SCcJ.es (tlrtrt K —
40..
o.eo
0.15 -A) .72

osr

lO 7 7

0 6/

nfiK- kaperM(OGz

:7 w
60

THE POWER OV Ll.MlTS

,

^4)

(15.

(16

{17

(18) "D

67:96=
The combined three-unit length ot such 34-5 triangulation diagrams, representing vertical body height, constitute true harmonic
progressicws, shown in figure 109 tor the coho
salmon, curltin sole. Pacific pompano, calico
surfperch, and ribbon barracudina. The harmonies ofthese rhythms likewise approximate
the root harmonies of music, as wave diagrams and graphs show.

Ribbon

E>(vviOiCAAdjLria.

THE ANATOMY OF SHAHINC / M

Even in the third dimension (it thickness, tish tend to partake ot the golden section's proportions, asthree typical transverse sections in figure 110 illustrate.
I he s.uiie proportional limits prevail in the shapes ot skates and stingrays, as illustrated by
figure 111. ( he ni.un bodies ot the deep-sea sk.ite (1), black skate (2), longnose skate (3), and
starrv skate (4), are each encompassed by two golden rectangles, while the big skate's body (5)
tits into a single golden rectangle. The greatest width ot the bodies invariably tallies with the
g(.)lden sectu>n point ot the height.

ivYuVA c^doses file

of ih :.hApe ^

Ac Ut^'.'Jt of the pAyTth IS WjvkU.
i.htue Itnjt-i of-c ^ elite i\ K ct-«A\*)le-

f it;. 11(1 Proportions ot transverse sections ot hsh.
I Hh l>cn\ 1 H 0\ 1 IMlIs

(4 ;O
2 O

20

1.0

/o
h'^A^i Lpl.es L^f joldCit yictun (flfJ -BTAhxm
\ht shafej: of- skate:^ 0^io{.'^^. JuU widHt

<li iirr'rith. L' L/Hitined
I'eUvffn hvn (if.'IdrtA Irrl^imi. poi't^fJ:

I J Deep-sea Skdtt

I'll '>Ujri^<jf a ppvcJLP^ iu Ojrim/ eufcfdi »ij
7n ■ 6 0 C C^, 6<-P,

j^it

T

Y
y
A

]A-tB
Ll
'^uj Skcd-t

K St

Fig. 111. Proportums ot skates and stingrays.
THE ANATOMY OF SHARINC / 63

The length oi the tail shares the same proportional limits in a variety of ways outlined in the
drawings. In the deep-sea skate, the tail is as long as one oi the golden rectangles encompassing
the body plus a reciprt>c.il tin.iling . In the black skate, the length ot the tail and the height
ot the body are about equ<d. The tails ot the longnose skate and the starry skate correspond to
the sht)rter side ot a golden rectangle, the longer side ot which equals the width ot the body.
Two \^ rectangles encompass the entire shape ot the big skate, trom end ot tail to tip ot snout.
The two stingrays in figure 111 displ.iv a preference tc>r the 3-4-5 triangle's proportional
limits. The main body outlines ot the stingray (6) ,ire encompassed by two sets ot reciprocal
3-4-5 triangles: OCD, OCF, OED, OEF; the full width corresponds to the joint side ot these
two sets ot tri. ingles and the length ot the tail doubles the height ot the body. The pelagic
stingray's body (7) fits into .i rectangle composed ot two 3-4-5 triangles and its tail's length is
the same as the body's width.
Let us now move up the eviilutionary l.idder trom the denizens ot the deep to the vertebrates
of dry land, starting with .i prehistiiric giant reptile.

Dinosaur, frog and horse
The skeleton ot the gi.iiit reptile allosaurus, a tierce c.irniyorous dinosaur that lived about 140
million years ago, was unearthed m Ut.ih and recently was reassembled at the Thomas Burke
MenK>ri.il .Museum of the University ot Washington, .Seattle. Figure 112 shows the complete
skeleton, which the author had the privilege to measure. As in earlier examples, a wave
diagram illustrates the articulation ot this huge bt)dy along the vertebral column into skull,
neck, trunk, sacrum and tail corresponding to the musical root harmonies ot fifth-diapente and
tourth-di.itessaron. Point A, where the sacrum and the first tail vertebra meet, is the golden
section point along the full length ot the skeleton, relating the tail to the rest of the body
similarly .is the trunk relates to skull plus neck, and neck relates to skull, the latter's length and
height again sharing the same relationship. The tabulation shows how these relationships
fluctuate around the 0.75 ratio ot the Pythagorean triangle, and the golden section's 0.618 ratio.
The 1ength ot sacrum and trunk are in <i reciprocal golden relationship (within a fractional
difference, marked d), as the construction ot two reciprocal golden rectangles over dorsal and
sacral vertebrae indicates.
rut- t>o\\ 1 u o\ I iMi IS

100
ICQ
Z9j
cm 100 50 go 7(5 & 50 40 io 2b lO 0

50

^^0
4cc

Fig. 112. Dinergic reconstruction of allosaurus.
THH ANATOMY OF .SHARING 65

Every single vertebra shares the same proportumal rel.itionships that unite the whole body, and everv one does it in .1
different way, appropriate to its station within the whole body
and to its specific function, ,is shown by figure 113. Thus the
sacral vertebrae (3) are the strongest and most massive since thev
act as fulcrum, balancing the enormous weights of' trunk and
head on one side and the huge tail on the other. The caudal
vertebrae (4 and 5) are the most slender since thev support onlv
themselves. The laterally protruding process bones of the dorsal
vertebrae (2) are much heavier than those of the tail, since thev
help to carry the weight of the trunk and the head. The cervical
vertebrae (1) are the most complex ones: not only do thev carry
the weight of the huge head, but they also accommodate its
turning in every direction.
The wave diagrams reveal that the rhythmic unity of these
delicately sculptured shapes is based on a sharing of golden relations between many diverse neighboring parts. For instance, the
round hole of the nerve channel is always very near the golden
section point of the total height; the lateral protrusions of process
bones and the vertical extension of the spine tend to share this
relationship with the proportions of the bulky round bone at the
base, called the body. The tabulation shows again that, while none
of these relationships is mathematically perfect, the general tendency of approximations is unmistakable.

113. Proportions ot vertebrae ot ailosaurus.

THH ANATOMY OF SHARINc; / 67

Details oi hindleg and toot (Hg. 114), as
well as trontleg and loot (lig. 115), show the
same kind ot rhythmic sharing of the narrow
range ol proportional limitations between
small and large bones as we observed withm
the vertebrae and the major articulations ot
the whole body.

JO

All neighboring bones share proportional
Hmitations corresponding to the musical root
harmonies ot the tourth and the titth, as the
graphs and wave diagrams indicate. Even the
small coracoid bone at the shoulder shares
golden proportions between its width and
length. Furthermore, all joints — shoulder,
elbow, wrist, hip, knee, ankle, as well as the
minute joints ot the phalanges in hands and
teet — torm harmonious series which also
share these same proportional limitations.
toes fplxaianfiei\
X i^hu.r^h let not irionO-^
Fig. 114. I'rdporiioiis ot limdleg
aiu! toot ot .illosaurus.

68

I HE K>\\ i-.K Of- Ll.Vin S

The three pairs oi bt^nes which constitute the pelvic girdle ot the allosaurus (tig. 1 16) are ot
particular interest: each ot these pairs is totally ditterent troni the others, each serving a
different tunction, yet they too are shaped and related to each other by the same proportions
that shape and unite the rest ot the body. The illium tits into a single golden rectangle, the
ischium into two golden rectangles, and the pubic bone into two reciprocal golden rectangles.
As far as their relations to each other are concerned, the length ot both pubic bone and ischium
tend to torm with the width ot the illium turther golden, dinergic and reciprocal relations ot
neighbors.

ililwwv

-~ 'J

:0 -

10

30

Fo

SO

70 ,:n.

Hie ro-j. \ti\
0. 750

0150 ■
0GI8
the J^fti\
Fig. 116. Proportions ot pelvic
girdle ot allosaurus.

rv/cUtcms betw. fhc rkme baizes

iScJvuwn.
pidruL barie.

THE ANATO.MY OF SHARINC / 69

f-ri)in this extinct giant reptile, let us now turn to a small amphibian that is still with us: the
trog. When the skeleton oi a trog (Hg. 117) is straightened out and the length ot the bones are
projected upon the central axis of the body, as shown in figure 118, the length of the bones
show harmonically diminishing series as they move away from the pelvis. The top of the pelvis
is the center ot a series of circles which widen at .1 h.irmoniouslv diminishing rate and all joints
appe.ir to be located upon these circles.
The bar diagram at the right and the wave diagrams at the left show the harmonious nature
ot these series, giving a graphic image ot the pulsations ot growth, as they emanate from the
pelvic center, very much like light vibrations r.idiating from the center ot a lamp in the
isocmdle diagrams ot figure 97.
The gr.iph shows, m the familiar manner, hmv all shared proportit)n<il limitations approximate the three root h.irmi>nies oi music. The central wave diagram gives the relationships
between the extremities .md the trunk, while the diagram at the left reveals how these very
same proptirtional Hmit.itiiMis also exist between the length ot the skull, the spine, the pelvis,
and the greatly extended jumping legs and feet.

I-ig, 1 17, I-rog ski-li-ton.

skipping severed rungs on the evolutionary ladder, we will now examine the skeleton ot a
horse. (Hg. 119) Even in this reassembled state, the grace ot its gallop is delightful. Figure 120
reveals some ot the secrets ot this grace — the proportional harmony that unites the diversities
within the bone structure.
One aspect ot this proportional relationship is between the skull and vertebral column on one
side and the extremities on the other, (tig. 120) Lined up with their length-dimensions along
their longitudinal axes, the parts ot this anatomical structure show shared relationships
between: skull and phalanges; neck and metatarsal-metacarpal bones; trunk and shinboneforearm; and sacrum-tail and upper arm-thighbone.
The dimensioned wave diagrams turther illustrate how these diverse articulations approximate musical root harmonies, as the graph demonstrates.

Fig 1 1'^ f li^rsc -.kclctoii
IHh [>0\\ f\K 0\ 1 IMI I s

'

-./irf/:!,!
V itfinnt.

tot-

hole.

0.75"

Fig. 120. Proportions ot horse skeleton.
THl ANA rOMY Oi- SllAHINc; / 7}

Wc have seen several examples deimnistr.itmg the important role that shared proportional
rel.itionships play in the .matomy oi .inim.ils. We shall end this chapter by attempting to show
that such sharing is not limited lo the proportional relationships ot physical anatomy, but
extends also to the social relationships ot animals, thus supporting our view that sharing is
indeed one ot the basic pattern-torming processes ot nature.

Sharing: the nature of nature
Sh.iring <is ,1 pattern-tt)rming process is so basic in animal lite that it is hard to select a tew
examples — suited to the limited scope ot this presentation — without neglecting many more
ecjually signiticant ones. Perhaps one could start with the sharing ot parental care.
rhe Russian naturalist Peter Kropotkin, in his book Mutual Aid mentions that the lapwing
{I'aiu'llus i'ijh(7/h.s) "has well merited the name 'good mother' which the Greeks gave it, tor it
never tails to protect other aquatic birds trom the attacks ot their enemies."'" This brave bird is
known tor sharing the plight ot its tellows by teigning a wound, thereby luring attackers away
trom a threatened nest. It accomplishes this by crying and tlying with peculiarly flapping wings

ig 121 Htklv l.iiinu.ii;f lit .1 <.iog D.irwiii s illustr.itioii
t lu>slilit\ . .j/n'i'i-. .nil! JfV(itu>n, hfbif

(thus the name "lapwing").
The lapwing's ingenious body language matches countless other examples ot sharing by way
ot body language among animals. Darwin observed that dogs express their feelings ot hostility
or friendship through body movements, as illustrated in figure 121.
From the researches ot von Frisch and cithers we know that bees share detailed communications about food sources by using the body language ot dance, (fig. 122) A round dance is
performed to convey that food is ne.irby (A). If the tood is farther away, the dance is in a
figure-eight pattern (B), and vigorous tail-wagging is added (C). Such dancing not only shares
intc^rmation: the dancer also shares energy and excitement, which induces fellow bees to swarm
out and get the tood, upon which their life depends.
Mating dances ot cranes and other birds are well known. But birds have also been reported to
dance and sing in concert tor no other apparent reason than shared delight, as W. H. Hudson
observed in his book Wituralist on the La Plata, about his travels in South America, before the
turn ot the centur\'. He remarked that he occasionally "saw a whole plain covered with an
endless flock ot Chakars {Chaum chavama). . . . Suddenly the entire multitude of birds covering
the marsh tor miles burst forth in a tremendous evening song ... it was a concert well worth

^ //jA'ri". flrf.s fT»v.

,-...>v4 ^An^f 'f *a_Liv>.y4^^vx Ji^^t,

ig. 122 IXiiKc l.mguai^f nt bees, A. Riniiul J.iiuc;
llircc bees arc rci. c-ivinii iiK-ss.igc. B. I r.msitUMi trotii
roiiiul J.iiHc to t.nl-uMgging liancc. Schcin.itK': upper,
1,1 tigiirc eight (oriii: /,'iCiT, via sic kk'-sliapcil torni C.
ail wagging ilaiKf. tour bees arc receiving message.
4

I HI: i>i.n\ I K til 1 iMi I S

to hear."''^
milesshares
hundred
riding
The am.ile
cricket
his mating urge with distant temales whom he attracts with his
mating call. Birds too sing to attract mates, and they also share all kinds ot other information
with each other, tor instance warning other birds about approaching enemies, threatening
intruders upon their territtiry, or calling fellow birds to gather. Even whales are known to
communicate with each other by singing. The humpback whale {Me^aptera noi>aeanq_liae) in
particular has been reported to sing in eerie sounds beautiful even to the human ear. This song is
said to be verv loud and to cover a range trom deep basso to high soprano. What messages
whales share with each other by singing is not known, but scientists assume that it serves to
"identitv individuals, and to ht)ld small groups together during the long transoceanic
migrations.

Fig. 123. Dolphins rescuing dis.iblcd tfllovv Jolphin.
The migrations ot animals are immense shared enterprises. Kropotkin observed the gathering
ot thousands ot migratory birds on the steppes ot Siberia, and said that "they come together at a
given place tor several days in succession betore they start, and they evidently discuss the
particulars ot the journey. . . . All wait tor the tardy . . . and tinally they start in a certain
well-chosen directic^n — a truit of accumulated collective experience — the strongest tlying at
the head ot the band and relieving each other in that ditticult task. They cross the seas in large
bands consisting ot big and small birds."'''' One rarely appreciates the magnitude ot these shared
animal enterprises. The Arctic tern travels twice yearly trom one polar area ot the earth to the
other, spending the summers at the North Pole along the shores ot the Arctic Ocean and the
winters around the South Pole in Antarctica, a travel distance ot 11,000 miles each way. Such
gigantic enterprises could not take place without superb cooperation and mutual assistance.
Sharing in each others' distress and rescuing endangered tellow animals is reported among
many species. In 1969 it was observed in the Mediterranean how an electroharpooned dolphin
was supported and eventually rescued by tellow dolphins, (tig. 123) Similar reports have been
made about wild dogs, Atrican elephants, and baboons, among others.""' To quote Kropotkin
once more about triendship and loyalty among animals: "When a parrot has been killed by a
hunter, the others tly over the corpse ot their comrade with shrieks ot complaints and themselves tall victim ot their triendship, as Audubon said.""*^ Kropotkin was one ot the tirst to
THE ANATOMY OF SHARING / 75

f-|g. 124 Sli.ircJ sli.ipcs (it waves, hills, c loiuls .hk!
rotks ['.icitit (XcMii .11 l\>iiH Rcvcs, (".liitDrni.i, Icti.
•iinl rot k toriiLitloils ,it ( .Icli ( '.in\ oii. ( loiiir.idi), rn>/;r

collect a substantial volume ot scientific evidence ot these basic patterns of animal behavior. He
bec.ime convinced that sharing in the form ot "mutual aid and cooperation" was not only the
"prehuman origm" ot all mor.d behavior but was also a basic condition of survival and a
critical factor ot evolution.
In the nineteenth century this view was neglected in tavor ot popularized Darwinian
concepts such as natural selection, survival ot the tittest, struggle tor existence, and competition. The controversy is still on between those who hold that human beings are inherently
aggressive and competitive, and adherents ot the opposite view that we have equally strong
natural potentialities tor nonviolent cooperation.
The "innate aggressiveness" theory has been revived and made popular by the writings ot
Konrad Ltirenz, Robert Ardrey, Desmond Morris and William Golding, among others. On the
other side are those who hold that war and violence are learned behaviors, culturally tostered.
The anthropologist Ashley Montagu writes, "Human beings can learn virtually anything. ""''^
"War is not in our genes," says Sally C^arrighar in Miiii and Ai^iiression.^^ "While it is obvicius
that many men are killers, it i? equally true that many more are not. . . . Man's propensity for
violence is not a racial or a species attribute woven in his genetic tabric. It is culturally
ccinditioned bv history and the ways ot lite." So wrote Rene Dubos in 1971.''
To quote again Ashley Montagu, "At the present time the principle ot cooperation is in a fair
way to becoming established as an impc")rtant tactor in the survival of living groups. W. C.
Alice sums up the modern point ot view as tollows: "The balance between the cooperative . . .
and the egoistic is relatively close. Under many conditions the cc:)operative forces lose. In the
long run, however, the group-centered, more altruistic drives are slightly stronger. . . . Our
tendencies toward gocidness, such as they are, are as innate as our tendencies towards intelli-

TUl- l'C)\\ I K OF LI.VllTs

gence; we could do well with more of both. Another anthropologist, C'olin M. Turnhull adds
on the basis at his studies ot non-literate, tribal cultures, ". . . it man has a seemingK' limitless
capacity tor violence, tor aggression, he has an equally great potential tor nonvitilence, and
nonaggressivity.
In terms ot modern and practical economic policy — individual, national and international —
the economist Barbara Ward comes to this conclusion; "When men or governments work
intelligently and tarsightedly tor the good ot others, thev achieve their prosperity too . . .
Generosity is the best policy . . . Our morals and ouv interests — seen in true perspective — do
Sharing is creative. It we share what we have with our neighbors who have less, we gain
not pull apart. "^'^
more than it we had kept it all tor ourselves. This is the paradox ot sharing expressed bv the
words St. Paul attributed to Jesus: "It is more blessed to give than to receive."
We have seen that sharing as a basic pattern-torming process shapes harmonious rel.itionships in animal and human lite the same way it shapes proportional harmonies in .inimal
anatomy, in music and in the other arts. There is indeed a "mana ot sharing" throughout
nature. It one looks at a view ot the ocean shore, say in Calitornia, placing beside it a picture ot
rock tormations, tor instance in Colorado, (tig. 124) it is hard to tell where the rocks end and
clouds or ocean begin, because the tolds ot the rocks and the clouds share the wavelines
ot water.
Similarly, a peacock's untolding plumage shares the dinergic pattern at the center ot a daisv.
The dotted lines in tigure 125 connecting the eyes ot the peacock's plumage are identical with
the logarithmic spirals used to reconstruct the daisy's pattern. When circles are inserted
between the spiral lines (tig. 126), the peacock's p.ittern is transtormed into the central pattern
ot the daisy. This is not magic: it is the mana ot sharing, which is the verv nature ot n.iture.

lilt ANAICIMY Ol siiAliINC / 77

