CHAPTER

2:

Dinergy

in

the

Crafts

Orb-wcaving spiders construct their webs by starting with str.iight threads that come together
m a center. Then they spin spiral strands around the straight ones, rotating ni ever wider orbits.

l it; T' I )iiicr i;ii. coiisiruc tioii ot ^pl^k■r u cb
H'lniiii; r.nlKitiiii4, Ntr.nuht Iiik s \k\i\\ nn.itmi;
spiral ones.

(Hg. 19)
Basket weavers work in a similarly dinergic pattern. First, a number of firm strands — the
warp — are bound together at one pomt which shall become the center ot the basket, (tig. 20)
Then flexible strands — the wett — are passed over and under the warp strands in a rotating
fashion. In coil-binding, a firm but flexible coil takes the place ot the straight warp, and it is
sewn together along radiant lines with thin wett material, threaded through a needle, (fig. 21)
Because of the dinergic nature of the work process, one can easily reconstruct basket outlines
the same wav we reconstructed leaf outlines <ind the spirals oi the sunflower and daisv.
Two basketry hats (tig. 22) woven by American Indian people of the Pacific Northwest have
been reconstructed in figure 23. The shaded triangles show successive stages ot the dinergic
work process, as they indicated successive stages of growth m the plant. The centers of the two
spirals that make up the curved outline are not located ,it random. In shape A these centers
ccMucide with the center of the hat's crown. In shape B they are at golden section points within
tw(^ squares over the hat, identical with the two squares that enclose the hat itself. (See golden
section constructions and wave diagrams.)
One might be tempted to attribute such hidden order to chance, but the frequency of such
chance order is extraordinarv. Fourteen samples ot such h.its were measured in the Thomas
Burke Memorial Museum of the University of Washington, eight ot the concave type A and six
of the convex tvpe B, and all show, in varying degrees and in different ways, close approximations to the proportions ot the golden sectitMi and \.o the Pythagorean triangle's proportions,
corresponding to the musical harmonies ot titth-diapente and tourth-diatessaron, respectively.
The propcirtional pattern of the concave hats ( tvpe A) wm-en out ot cedar bark and beargrass
bv Makah Indian women, and common among other Nootka people, shows further variations
i>f golden dinergv. Figure 24 demonstrates four tit these relationships with constructions of the

Fill 2l». niiitTk^v of basket uoavmii [-irm straiijlit
str.iiuis ot Warp support tlcxiblc spiral strands ot
wctt
cod. NOPJp

tic. 21, ("oil biiKliiii:. m wIikH both wctt and
warp arc tlcxiblc The wctt binding is scvv ii along
radiating lines around the warp, which takes the
form o[ a spiral i oil
14

lHh 1'0\X1-.K Oh 1 l.MI I s

Fig. 22. A. CAincavc hat woven of cedar bark and
ticarcr.iss bv the Makah and other Nootka peoples.

B. Cxinvcx hat woven trom spruce roots,
popular with Tlingit, Haida and Kwakiutl peoples.

Fig. 24. Proportional aii.iKsiv
ot baskctr\- li.it sliapcs ot
the comavo t\ pf A.

/
i

/

)i ■■'II «)

>;

golden section .iround one of the tallest and one of the lowest of these hats. The
overall shape ot the taller hat tits neatly into a single golden rectangle (1-2-3-4)
while the short hat approximates two such rectangles (5-6-7-8 and 6-7-9-10).
For each of the eight type-A hats measured, the proportional relation of neighboring parts A and B was tabulated (see chart at bottom ot tig. 24). The closeness
of these proportions to those of the golden section is again demonstrated by
classical golden section constructions around the shapes. The differences between
actual and theoretically exact logarithmic ratios are so small they had to be
exaggerated to be visible.
Figure 25 shows two typical examples of the convex type-B hat, woven out of
spruce roots and popular with Tlingit, Haida, and Kwakiutl people. Three of each
type were measured. The shallow hats tend to approximate golden proportions,
and the tall ones tend to show the 3:4 proportions of the Pythagorean triangle.
This can be seen from the dash-dotted lines connecting opposite ends of the top
and bottom diameters. In the shallow types, these lines coincide with the diagonals of a golden rectangle, whde m the tall ones they are identical with the
longest side (hypotenuse) of the Pythagorean triangle. The accuracy of these
proportions can be appreciated from the tabulation and diagram, as well as from
the constructicMi oi the gc^lden section above the shallow hat.
To make the harmonies of these patterns more visible, these two shapes are also
shown in their correspondence to the pentagonal star, the taller shape fitting
ne.itly into the Py tli.igore.in triangles within the central pentagon, and the shal\ow shapes aligning with the triangles at the tips of the pentagram.
The lines of these hats suggest the sinuous energy of the drawn bow as well as
the graceful curves o{ flower and leaf outlines. These harmonious and dinergic
proportions emerge as naturally from the hands of these preliterate basket weavers as bows bend and phmts grow. And basket weaving is not the only craft for
which this holds true.

Warp and woof
The weaving of fabrics is as dinergic a process as the weaving of baskets, with the
difference that in f.ibric, both warp and woof move along straight lines, crossing each other, the threads ot the warp being held evenly within a frame, while
the threads of the woof are laced over and under them. (See diagram in fig. 26)
Weavers belonging to different cultures show the preference for simple harmonious proportions that basketmakers do. An East Prussian carpet reveals the
proportuMis of a golden rectangle in its overall shape (fig. 26) as does the Mexican
wtwen pattern in its repeated diamond shapes, (fig. 27)
Proportional
onvc-x
type B. analysis ot basketry hats

The niasrcrtully woven ceremonial hlanketsot Northwest Atnericaii Indian people show the
same preference in overall sh.ipe, as well ,is in the ,irtR ul.ition ot the (.lesiun. earned through
consistently even to minute details. Figure 2H shows golden section constructums drawn around
a Chilk.it blanket. These priiportions relate the short sides to halt the width, as well as to the
middle height, the latter two dimensions usu.illy being equal in these blankets. The minute
difference between exact (/) ratios and the .ictual ratios in this bl.mket are again marked with d.

> i

The blanket's short sides .illow it to be wrapped convenientK- around the bodv. but the
dimensions of the sides .ire never arbitr.iry. The seventeen s.imples ex.imined all .ipproximate
these same proportions.

I I/ 11

Fig. 26. Pe.is.int c.irpct irom E.istfrii l^r

The pictorial pattern of these bl.inkets i-.ften .irticul.ites .is a wider centr.d p.mel flanked bv
two narrower. Literal ones, <is in this s.imple. i he gtilden section construction .ibove the blanket
shows that the width of these unequal neighboring elements — D and E — are alsci in golden
relationship, containing the overall sh.ipe within twH> reciprocal golden rectangles (1-2-3-4 .md
\ \
3-4-5-6), jointly producing the familiar s/ 5 rectangle.

Fig. 2S. Woven c:hilk.it bl.uikct.

/

/

/

/

/

X /
/

/ /
/ /
/ /
/ /
/
/

1

\ \
\ \
\ \
\ \
\ \
\ \
\ \

/'

/

\ \

Fig. 27. Woven Mexicin p.ittcrii.

niNI IU;>' l\ I IIH CR.M-l s 1"

1.618

_ 1 6ie

l ii; 2'^ Proportions ot ovoids iii Nortliwcst liuli.m .irt ot I'.S.
Siiiiilar proportu>ns cxtciul lo details, such as the eyes and eye-like ovoids, which are
characteristic features ot Northwest American Indian art. Exceptions to these proportions
occur when designs are adjusted to till the space available.''
In tigure 29, a "salmontrout's head" design (A) is shown to be contained within a \/5'
rectangle (corresponding to the music.d h.irinony ot octave or diapason) and consisting of two
reciprocal golden rectangles, the larger one ot which contains the eye. The typical eye design
(B) .dso shares the same relationships both in the shape ot the inner ovoid, which represents the
white ot the eye, and in the size ot the ins. Variations ot inner ovoid elaborations also reveal a
preterence tor the golden relations ot neighbors, as in details C, E, F, G, J, and K. Two
variations — D and H — combine a squ.ire with two Pythagorean 3:4 triangles.
Hands

and wheels

A potter "s hands press the clay toward the center ot the wheel upc>n which the clay is placed,
while the wheel is turning around, thus providing the dinergy that shapes the vessel. Figure 30
IH

IHh I'OWHU Ol 1 IMlls

Tig. M). 1 utig C lui.ui Li-LnKui V
(Sung ilyii.is'tv, %l)-127';).
shows ,1 C^hiiK-sc Lunii C'lni.in ccLiclon vase
trom the time oi the Sung clvnastv (96(1-1279
A.D.)- Ill figure 31, the (Uithncs ot this graceful shape h.ive been derived with the dinergie
method used e.irher tor the reconstruction of
plant shapes. This deriv.ition shows th.it the
centers ot the tour log.irithmic spirals that
make up the initlines are located at the ci'>rners
ot two rect.ingles closely approximating golden prtiportions, (7.1:1 1 .5 = ().617r = ().61H...).
Even withcHit knowing these numerical relationships, the similaritv ot these contours to
leat outlines would suggest the relatedness ot
this sh.ipe to p.itterns eit iirganic growth. This
suggestion is verified hv the wave di.igrams
and the graph, which record how the propiirtional rel.itionships between the main features
appro.xim.ite musical root h.irmonies.
The entire shape is contained in a rect.ingle
consisting ot a square — which encomp.isses
bulk and base — and two gcilden rect.ingles.
the heights ot which correspond to the height
of the slender neck. These proportional h.irmonies .ire shared alsii between the height ot
the upper p.irt ot the v.ise (G) and the height
and girth ot the bulky body (D); between the
latter and the height (E); .md between the
diameters ot brim (B) and b.ise (C). (See diagrams 1,2, ^.) The ciMitr.ist between slender
neck and broad base, between narrow top .md
wide girth, could hardlv be greater. Yet these
contr.istmg elements .ire united in gr.icetul
harmonv. bv sh.iring the dmergic relations ot
neighbcMs.
DINFRC.V IN THF CR.^Frs m

:r.sh'-\ch<Tn} ;*t/iir '-(rlit^ Ser^n (/^^(^ )s>it?iv Hint
Yt^cuiA\ /rir<pniiimis - both CAffvtg -'ec^W i wtd-fk^Jr-^e<-y. i\(aJ i*/rj- bcil,tj. j^^ifhi MweJl
Intyutt^i cia-mt'S>li^ oj ntA^fi bet!. ■

Fig. 32. l^incrgn Jcnvation and proportions of Attic .imphor.i (f)tli (.cntury B.C.

20

THE POWER Of 1 I.MI I S

It we move from the China oi Sung times to CIreece in the sixth century B.C., we tind the
same dinergic work processes creating dinergic proportional relationships in the masterpieces
of classical Greek pottery. An Attic amphora depicting the legend of Hercules and Pholus
is outlined in figure 32. The dinergic derivations of the shape show that two centers of the
logarithmic spirals are in the upper corners of the golden rectangle which contains the whole
shape, while the lower spirals' centers are at golden section points along the diagonals within
the two halves of this rectangle. Furthermore, these two lower centers are at the very tips of
a pentagonal star which touches the two sides and the base of the enveloping golden rectangle.
The golden section's constructions show how closely the main neighboring elements of this
design approximate reciprocally shared golden proportions. In diagram 1, this relationship is
shown to exist between height of head (A), height of central picture-band (B), and total height
of the vessel (E). Diagram 2 and wave diagram 4 show the same relationship shared between
shoulder width (G) and diameters of neck (H) and girth (D). (Differences between actual and
theoretical 4> ratios are indicated with d.)
Wave diagram 3 illustrates yet further harmonious proportions in this amphora. Golden
relations approximating the musical harmony of fifth-diapente exist also between diameter of
brim (F), height of head (A), and height of bulk (C). The octave-diapason relation shows up in
the location of girth (K) at half the total height (E); it is also approximately by the diameter of
the base (J) being half the diameter of the girth (D).
Such consistency of proportional relations in classical Greek pottery was demonstrated in
great detail by the American scholar Jay Hambidge in the early 1920s.* This book is very much
indebted to Hambidge 's pioneering work. Since the 1920s, however, much archeological and
ethnographic research has shown that such proportions were not restricted to the classical
Greeks and their Egyptian teachers, as Hambidge thought, believing their advanced arithmetic
and geometrical knowledge to be the source of these proportions. To our earlier examples from
other cultures, let us now add some pottery unearthed from graves and other excavations
dating back to the Cretan and Mycenaean cultures of the late Bronze age, which preceded the
flourishing of classical Greek arithmetic and geometry by about a thousand years.
Figure 33 is a Cretan krater which is contained in two sets of reciprcical golden rectangles,
totaling
a length
\/~5 smaller
, as if these
rectangles
had been jointly
aroundhead,
the and
longitudinal
axis
of the
vessel. ofThe
of the
golden rectangles
containsrotated
shoulders,
handles,
while the larger ones correspond to the bulk of the body. In addition, the width of the opening
(A) and the total height (B) share the same golden relation of neighbors.
The Cretan amphora in figure 34, unearthed from a grave, is contained in a golden rectangle
(Q X R), within which shoulders, head, and handles fit into reciprocal golden rectangle Q x S.
The proportions of two reciprocal golden rectangles exist in the relation of brim (W) to shoulders (V) to girth (Q); it also exists in the relation of base (U) to its recesses (T) to girth (G).
Figure 35 shows a Minoan kantharos contained in a single golden rectangle, F x G. The
width of the handles (M) relates to the distance between them (N) as the sides of two reciprocal
golden rectangles do: 0.618 and 1.618. Golden dinergic relations are also shared between the
width of base (R) and its distance from edge (P); between the height of handles (H) and the
height of body (J); between body height (J) and the total height including handles (F); between
the upper and lower parts of the body (K and L); and between the lower part's height (L) and
the height of the entire vessel (F).
DINERGY IN THE CRAFTS / 21

Figure 36 is an exquisite earthenware pot from Aconia Pueblo. The shape is a popular one
with Zuni <uk1 Pueblo people and is made m ditterent sizes and proportions. The outlines of
three ot these — number 3 being the vessel pictured — are .shown superimposed over each other
m figure 37. Dotted lines indicate the two golden rectangles (ot various sizes) into which all ot
these shapes tend to tit, as it such rectangles had been rotated along the axis of each vessel, as in
the C'retan krater in tigure 33. This supports the beliet ot psychologists John Benjatield and
(".itherine Davis that "the (iolden Section is <in important regulating principle at least in some
ot folk art."''
tt)rms
r.ibulation
and graph demonstrate that here too, as in the inher vessels we examined,
harmony is created by a conscious or unconscious tendency to unite the diverse elements ot the

f ig. .V). I-.artlifiiw.irc pot trom Acoill.i I'ucbk

shape, through shared proportions, ranging trom the 0.5 and 0.75 rates and gravitating — scissor
tashiiMi — around 0.618, these three proportions corresponding to basic musical root harmonies.
In tigure 38 the AccMiia pot number 3 has been rendered in more detail by dinergic derivation
ot its outline (lett). The centers ot the logarithmic spirals constituting the outline tall along the
diagonals ot the golden rectangles which contain this outline. The triangular diagram, which
includes the rhythmic wave diagrams ot some ot the proportions investigated, reveals at a
glance the harmony created by the unity ot minor and major parts, .ichieved by their shared
proportional limitations.
These curved diagrams are like graphic images ot a reciprocal echo in which the whole
reverberates the call ot every part and every part resptinds to the call ot the whole. In another
sense, this di.igram expresses the dance-like rhythm ot the whole design, which is set swinging
by the h.irmonious dinergy ot the work process as well as by the golden dinergy ot its
proportuMis.

22

IHt I'OW 1 U 0\ 1 1,\U 1 s

\,

This exquisite vessel is created by diiieriiiL pattemjormin^ processes unfolding upon three difjerent U'vels.
The first level is the dinergic work process itself, demonstrated below as a union of rotating and radiatim> ii'orh
components, i^eneratuii,^ the spiral outline. The second
level oj dinergy is in the j^olden proportional ''relations
of neiifhhors" lined up in the triani^ular diai^ram at the
ri^ht. The arcs have been added to emphasize the
rhythmic harmony which unites all small and lari^e elements ofthe desi^in in dance-like dmerciy. Two nearperject "relations of neii^hbors" are shown above and
below the vessel. The third level of diner^iy is the
painted pattern; a remarkable combination ofrectangular spirals,
moving in opposite directiotis, in ^-.^
and out, up and down, ric^ht
and left.

\\ \ \

\\ \ \
\\ ^\\
\
\

"d' 0-12.

\

\

\
\

\
\
\
\

\ \
\ \

Fig. 38. Dinergic derivation and proportions of
earthenware pot number 3 (in fig. 37). Rectangular
spiral decoration (A) unites movements in opposite
directions: right and leh, up and down, in and out.
Simplified version (B) is similar to "meander" motif
found m many cultures.

\ \
\

\
\ \
\
DINERGY IN THE CRAFTS / 2,^

When one looks closer at the t.iscinating painted pattern of this vessel, one becomes aware ot
yet another level ot dmergic pattern ttirination. The nitricatelv woven zig-zag lines, which all
move m different directions — in and out, up and down, right and left — are all parts of one
single line, like vines growing from one stem. One element of this pattern is shown at the left in
simplified detail (A and B). Similar meandering patterns symbolizing dinergic unity occur in
the art of manv cultures, in countless varieties, a simple version of which (C) can be seen at the
base of the Attic amphora, figure 32.
This threefold dinergv ot painted pattern, proportions, and work process convevs a strong
sense oi oneness between the Indians and all that exists around them, expressed by the Oglala
Sioux sage Black Elk in the following way: "We know that we are related and one with all
things of the heaven and the earth . . . the morningstar and the dawn which comes with it, the
moon of the night and the stars ot the heavens. . . . Onlv the ignorant person . . . sees many
is re.illv one.""'
where
This there
basic belief throws light upon the dignity which a work ot pottery such as this c^ne
radiates. In the eyes ot the people who make and use such earthenware pots, these are not
merely dispensable utensils, leather, each ot these pots is felt to have a lite and a spirit ot its
own, similar to its maker's, and consequently these pots are made and used with the respect
accorded to a living being. Anthropological research since the end of the last century refers to
this belief as animism. According to anthropologist F. H. Crushing: "The noise made by a pot
when struck or when simmering on the fire is supposed to be the voice of an as.sociated being
That [the being departs when the pot is broken] is argued from the fact that vessel when
cracked or fragmentary never resounds as it did when whole.""
We may smile at such beliefs, thinking them to be antiquated, naive, and unscientific.
Nevertheless, there is an element of truth here. There is a wholeness in which everybody and
everything is related, just as the diversities of these patterns are related. All people and all
things are indeed neighbors.

24

THE POW ER OF LIMI I s

