CHAPTER

3:

Dinergy

in

the

Arts

of

Livin!

Tangible and intangible patterns
The dinergic nature ot symbols, bridging the gap between tangible and intangible patterns, was
brietly touched upon earlier. Here it may be pointed out that the word syinhol reve.ds its own

Fig. 39. I'olytK'siati spir.il tattoo.
New Zealand.

dinergic origin, since it comes from the union ot two Greek words: sun, "together," and hallcin,
"to throw," like hall which also comes trom the latter root.
The first symbol we examined was the pentagram, a tangible pattern that helped the
Pythagoreans grasp the intangible realities ot harmony and health. The tact that the pentagram
is still used as a symbol of good portent shows that the dinergy of certain symbols is both
timeless and universal. C. G. Jung called such symbols archetypal, and he devoted a lifetime to
the study of their central importance in shaping patterns of human behavior.
Because harmonious patterns created out of tangible materials are readily completed, whereas the intangible patterns of the arts ot living are constantly in the making, one could perhaps
look upon the harmonious patterns of the arts and crafts as symbols, metaphors and models of
similarly harmonious behavior patterns yet to be created in the arts ot living.
It was suggested earlier how the interrelatednes ot diverse elements in a Pueblo pot expresses
the Indians' unity with nature. The same unity is expressed by the Mai>ris e>f Polynesia in their
concepts of )}ia)ia and tapu, the latter being a variant ot tahoo. The noted Danish anthropologist

)C=i
m

40. Hopi niothcr-earth symbol.

Kaj Birket-Smith describes the experience of mana as a strong feeling that "life is unity, in
which not only gods, but also things, which to us are lifeless have a part." Mana is thus a direct
experience ot "the sacred force that permeates existence." Tapu is the Maoris' word for their
sacred responsibility to comply with mana; a supreme law.''
Mana and tapu are expressions of the Maoris' sense of relatedness and oneness with the
universe around them, and just as the American Indians express this feeling with spiral patterns,
so do the Maoris. Everywhere in Maori art spirals abound. They <ire carved into wood and
stone, painted, and even tattooed on the body in the hope that the mana power attributed to
these symbols will save their wearers trom trouble and untimely death, (fig. 39)
Among American Indians, it is not only the Pueblo people who use spiral patterns. Thev can
also be found engraved into the rocks in seme ot the oldest continuous human habitations in
America, the villages of Oraibi and Shipaluovi, as well as in the ruins ot Casa Grande, near
Florence, Arizona, (fig. 40) The Hopi Indians refer to these patterns as Mother Earth symbols,
as I'apu'at (mother and child), or as symbols of emergence and rebirth. Anthropologists report
that similar symbolic meaning is attached to the same symbols by many other Indian people all
over the Americas.'-*
Identical spiral patterns have been discovered in many other parts of the world, dating from
prehistoric times. On the Mediterranean island of Crete, a 300()-year-old coin (fig. 41) shows

Fig. 41. Coin trom Knossos, Crete.

exactly the same spiral as the American Tapu 'at, but in Crete this pattern represented the
famous palace of the Minoan kings, the Labyrinth. Legend says that the Labyrinth was once the
lair ot the Minotaur, a mythical beast, halt bull and half man, which was a symbol of fertility.
PINEIU.Y IN THE ARTS OF LIVING / 25

Hii; 44 R.im ccrcmoiiv or "Free ot
Lite"
p.uiimig bv W'.iluingvvctnb.il .ihcr
.irtisc.rock
/inib.ilnvc
2(1

I llt^ I'OW lrK Ot 1 IMI I S

An apparently universal symbol of tcrtilitv is the snake, whose coiled body may very well
have contributed to the creation of archaic spiral patterns. The snake lends itselt to this
symbolic role alsc^ because it strikes erect— a reminder of phallic power. The Great Mother
goddess of Crete and her priestesses are frequently represented holding snakes. (tig. 42)
Hermes or Mercurv, messenger of the Greek and Roman gods, had two snakes winding
arenmd his magic wand, the caduceus, tool of his he.iling power, and even today professions
connected with healing use this dinergic symbol as their emblem, (fig. 43) Hermes was also the
guide t)f the departed to the afterworld. and the intertwined spiraling snakes ot his magic wand
may also symbolize the intertwined mystery ot lite and death.
The intangible dinergy of lite and death— interwoven with fertility— also appears in the
tribal art of the Wahungwe people of Zimbabwe. Figure 44 is a drawing made from a tribal
artist's painting, showing a tree rising from the dead body of a woman into the sky, where a
goddess and a giant snake cause fertilizing ram to gush torth om of the roots of the tree. In the
a
biblical creation story, woman, tree, serpent, and fertility are likewise intertwined, but here
evil.
and
good
tiirther intangible dinergy enters: the knowledge ot

Fig. 4.S. IVchisturic spir.il mazes at New (ir.inge, Ireland.
Threshold stone, /c//, has reliet c.irved into vv.ill. rii;/;f.
Intertwined spiral mazes from Neolithic times, identical with the Cretan Labyrinth, the
Maori tattoo and the American Indian Tapu'at, are carved into the rocks ot barrow tombs in
New Grange, Ireland, (tig. 45) These double spirals have been interpreted as symbols ot death
and rebirth, because as one tollows the line coiling inward, one tinds another line coming out in
the opposite direction, suggesting both burial in the tomb and emergence trom the womb: the
and death.'"*
ot litedouble
dinergy
The same
spiral design .shows up with remarkable clarity carved into stone balls
which have been unearthed near prehistoric passage graves at Glas Towie, Scotland, (tig. 46)
As anthropologist Loren Eisley has written, "Neanderthal man had, we now know atter long
digging, his own srnall dreams and kindnesses. He had buried his dead with otterings — there
were evidences that they had been laid, in some instances, upon beds ot wild tlowers."'''
The double spirals ot prehistoric graves are witness to the kindness as well as to the creative
concerns ot our prehistoric ancestors. These patterns reveal the energy-creating power ot
symbols suggested by the word dinergy. The tangible unity ot the dinergic spiral lines brings
home the realization that death and lite are in some mysterious and untathomable way interlocked. The sense ot awe that tollows this realization sparks new energy trom the embers ot

Our
grief.dinergic endowment
One can tind dinergic spirals much closer at hand than in prehistoric tombs — tor instance, in
the minute whorls ot our tingertips. (tig. 47) Dinergy is also evident in many other patterns o{
our physical and mental constitution.
We have two eyes and we see two images, which are united in the brain into a single,
three-dimensional sterec^scopic vision. We have two ears, receiving signals trom two opposite
directions, which are transmitted through the spiral-shaped cochlea ot the inner ear to unite in
the brain as stereophonic sound, (tig. 48)
The entire nervous system is a dinergic double structure, consisting of peripheral and central
component systems, again united by the brain. The brain itselt consists ot two hemispheres,
their integration being pertormed by centrally located organs within the brain. The bold and
extraordinary theory ot Julian Jaynes traces the origin as well as the present-day problems of
consciousness to a breakdown in the double structure of our minds.
Is It pure coincidence that on the molecular level the joint three-dimensional spiral pattern of
the double helix — matching the double snakes ot Hermes' magic wand — was tound a few years
i)inerc;y in the arts of livinc; / 27

ago to be the true shape ot the DNA molecule, which contains within its miniature coded
pattern the master plan of the entire future development of livmg organisms? (fig. 49) It was
discovered even more recently that some of the most mmute and important elements within
living cell structures (such as red and white blood corpuscles) group themselves in double spiral
patterns. The cores of these microtubules, referred to as axonemes and seen here enlarged in the
electron micrograph, figure 50, are a faithful match to the double spirals of prehistoric tombs,
the tattoos of the Maoris, and the Mother Earth patterns of the American Indians.
Whatever else there may be behnid such "coincidences," it is hard to avoid the conclusion
that we are lookmg at one of nature's most basic pattern-forming processes, here referred to as
dmergy. Seeing the hidden and harmonious order built into body and mind, as it is built into
every flower and leaf, mirrored by the crafts, and echoed by music, one wonders at the origin
of the disharmony and disorder that mars our civilization.
Indeed, our fascination with so-called "primitive" cultures appears to spring from our
longing for the lost dinergic relatedness which was once ours, when we ourselves were still
"primitives." Of course, we very much need science and technology, but we do not need the
fragmentation and separation that have come with the differentiations of our civilization.
Perhaps the disharmonies and disorders are with us not because our culture has grown up, but
because we have not yet grown up. Western civilization is still in its adolescence. Our violences
and worries may be but growing pains.
We do not have to go back to preliterate tribal cultures to find true dinergic relatedness to
nature and the universe. St. Francis of Assisi, in one of his famous canticles, addresses the Sun,
Air, Fire, Wind, and Water as his brothers; he sings about .Moon and Stars as his sisters and he
praises the Earth as his mother.'^
A sense of our dinergic relatedness to the mysteries of this universe and our participation in
its mana has inspired many scientists. Albert Einstein wrote: "Enough for me the mystery of
the eternity of life and the inkling of the marvelous structure of reality, together with the
single-hearted endeavor to comprehend a portion, be it ever so tiny, of the reason that manifests itself in nature."'*
The psychologist William James saw the essence of true religion as "the belief that there is
an unseen order, and that our supreme good lies in harmoniously adjusting thereto."'' Another
psychologist, Abraham H. Maslow, refers to the "peak experience" as "a clear perception that
the universe is all of a piece and that . . . one is part of it, one belongs in it. " From this follows a
sense that "the sacred is in the ordinary . . . that it is to be found in one's daily life, in one's
neighbors, friends and family, in one's backyard. . . . To be looking elsewhere for miracles is to
me a sure sign of ignorance that cvcrythtmi is miraculous. "-'^

Fig. 50. Axonciiie, the core ot a single
axopoJ, ^lK>\vn in cros.s-section. Enlarged 90,(XX) diameters.

J
28

rut: I'cnx KK ^

i :mi > ^

