CHAPTER
Man

7:

Helks

and

Haiku

the measure

1 he <irt tornis nt the Hast and U'est arc vastlv ditterent: compare a dreek Apollo and a Tibetan
Buddha, the Parthenon and a pagoda, or the epic poetry ot Virgil and the haiku poetry ot Japan.
Bui the ponits where the arts ot East >uul West do meet reveal an underlying human unity
he\ond the surface diversities.

l ii; 1^1

\«A

I )iir\ phoniv. tile spu.ir bciriT.

nih i\n\ 1 R oi 1 iMi 1 s

".Man IS the measure ot all things." .iccording to Protagoras, the Greek philosopher ot the
titth centurv B.C.. This epigram becomes palpable when one looks at great Greek sculpture.
The spearbearer or Dor\phoros (tig. 151) is also trom the titth centurv B.C., created by
I'ciKcleitos. who IS credited with having written a celebrated treatise, now lost, about the

pnijuM tioiis oi the luinian IkhIv. (iokicii scctuui ccinstriK tidiis oi this sc ulpture show t\V(^ sets of
reciproc.il golden reetangles, each set s/ 5 long: the larger set eneonipasses the whole hodv,
with knees <nul breasts at golden section points; the smaller set reac hes trom the top ot the head
to the genitals. The navel is at the golden section point ot the kill height, the genitals at the 3/4
Fig. LS2. Aphnxlite of Cyrcnc.

point ot the height to the chin. In the Aphrodite iit' C A'rene (tig. 152), one can recognize
similarly harmonious length relationships, though the he.ul is untortunatelv missing.

HMJ AS AND MAIKU 10=.

The heads of Hypnos, goddess oi sleep (tig. 153-A) and of Hygeia, goddess of health and
patroness ot the Pythagoreans, (tig. 1.S3-B) both trom the fourth century B.C., share in
miniature the same proportional limitations which articulate the bodies ot the Cyrenian Aphrodite and the Doryphoros. Scales and wave diagrams beside these heads reveal how the vertical distances between the main teatures trom top ot head to chin share the same simple numeric
relationships tound earlier in all living shapes. The Greeks thought that humans, with all their
limitations, had the capacity to retlect limitless harmony and beauty, conceived as divine. Thus
man was said to be the measure ot all things.
In tact, we are told by Vitruvms, the Roman architect mentioned in the previous chapter,
that the ancient Greeks even laid out their temples according to human proportions. On this
basis Vitruvius rect>mmends that the length ot a temple should be twice its width, and the
proportions ot the open entrance hall (prcmaos) and the enclosed inner room (cella) should be in
.3-4-5 relation (3 being the depth ot the pronaos, 4 the width, and 5 the depth of the cella).
Figure 154 shows these proportional relationships as they correspond to musical harmonies.
Vitruvius also turnished many other recommended temple proportions, all based upon Greek
nnxlels, tor instance regarding the distances between columns and their proper height, both
expressed in terms ot column diameter. Such an element, chosen in order to express the
proportions ot an entire structure (as the proportions ot the human body are expressed in feet)
IS called a module, a concept that was to play an important role throughout the history of
architecture.
I HE I'cnX hH Ol 1 IMI 1 s

-

•

4
/
y

•

1
• .

•

•

•

•

1I
•
*

i
.

•
U'7

•

at Lodrujtm3ou

cUdttssm/m

jmnJth

liiffmeMces beh\)een. l/itiM^nus

ipm^ple of- HmxAAis
Fig. 154. (ircck temple propoi tmns .in iirJing to
Vitriivius, (. omp.ircd with .iLtii.iI c x.imiilcN

{&mfLe.
oj- Them^^
at RM/i(yin/tuiS

HI I I .AS ANP HAIKT / III"

-^A

ScjUi' fin- frrmt eitvaxum ■

p-. ;o.62/;.
f-- '.9.69

Fig. 155. Parthenon, Athens.
[ fll- POWEK Ol 1 I.MI I S

Fig. 15(1. Athcn.i temple, Pricnc.

The rccomnieiKk-J temple proportums can he seen m rwo examples, helongmg ro two
different styles: the ParthentMi cit Athens (tifth century B.C\), (tig, 155) representmg the Done
order, and the Athena temple oi Priene (fourth century B.(].), embodymg the Ionic style (tig.
156), The ditterence between the two styles is exeniplitied by the ceilumns: the Doric being
more sturdy, the Ionic more slender. The height ot the Parthenon's columns is tiye .ind .i halt
times the width ot the column base. The capitals consist ot simple square slabs (ab.ici) resting
upon shapes, the contours ot \yhich h.iye been likened tci two outstretched hands (echini). The
height ot the Athena temple s columns is nine times the width ot the column base, and the Ionic
capital IS gr.iced by two shell-shaped yolutes.
The Parthenon's main facade tits into a single reclining golden rectangle, while the t.ic.ide oi
the Athena temple rises within twc^ upright ones. Rel.itioiis ot superstructure to supporting
columns plus steps echoes the same proportions in two variations. In the Parthenon, the top ot
the colunm c.ipitais appriixim.ites the golden section pomt oi the tot.il height, while m the
Athena temple this point corresponds to the meeting line betvyeen two reciprocal golden
rectangles. In the Parthenon, the centerlines ot the two corner columns and the lines oi the
tloor and entablature-top torm a v' 5 rectangle, consisting ot two reciprocal golden rectangles,
while in the Athena temple, three neighboring column-centerlines encompass .i single golden
rect.ingle. (See dotted diagonals m eley.itiiMis.)
ni l I .■\s AND H./\IKli liw

The series oi columns m themselves contain proportional rhythms, the columns and the
spaces between them representing a "recurrence ot strong and weak elements, " a standard
definition ot rhythm. The front coKunns ot the Parthenon with their seven spaces embody the
3:4 ratio ot the Pythagorean triangle and the corresponding musical harmony ot tourthdiatessaron, as well as approximations ot golden priipt^rtions or titth-diapente harmonies. In the
Athena temple, 2:3 and 3:.S relations ot columns approximate the root harmony ot diapente.
The rhythmic diagrams below the columns express some o{ these latent equivalents ot
musical root harmonies also along the long sides ot the buildings. The Athena temple is about
twice as long as it is wide, bearing out Vitruvius and embodying the 1:2 harmony ot octave-

^

diapason. 7 he Parthenon's plan corresponds to two reciprtical golden rectangles, thus echoing
diapente harmony. The interior structures ot both temples also contirm Vitruvius, at least
partially. The pronaos ot the Athena temple is in 3:4 proportit)n, while the naos or cella in both
temples, and the treasury or virgin's chamber in che ParthentMl are in golden proportittn.
It is fascinating to discover the unity ot proportional limitations — corresponding to patterns
ot organic growth as well as to root h.irmonies ot music — in the diversities ot these temples,
both m plan and m elevation. Diagrams A and B in tigs. 155 and 156 illustrate this by showing
that characteristic dimensions ot both plans and elevations can be represented by the same
diagrams that were used earlier tor patterns ot organic growth. Org<ui-pipe-like bar diagrams,
representing the same dimensions, further illustrate this proportional unity, by the tact that all
of these main articulations converge m a single point, as seen earlier in the anatomv ot the
horse.
The goddess Athena, to whom the Parthentin was also dedic.ited, united in her perstin both
"masculine" .uid "feminine" virtues. She was the patroness of wisdom and of the arts and crafts
and she was an example of v.ilor in battle. The grace ot her Priene temple and the strength of
the Parthenon express the unity of these diverse human qualities in her, a divine model of
human wholeness.
The diversity between the Romans and the (Ireeks becomes apparent from the kind of
buildings in which thev excelletl. Whereas the (Ireeks built temples and theaters ot unsurpassed
beauts', the Riimans built roads, aqueducts, palaces, public bath-houses, triumphal arches and
circuses, coupling the beautv ot the (Greeks with a m.istery of engineering techniques. They
added arches, vaults and domes to the columiial orders inherited from the Greeks, and they
increased everything to a colossal scale, making the Cireek temples look modest.
In spite oi these differences, (ireek ,ind Roman architecture are united bv identically shared
proportu)nal limitatuins. fwo examples mav illustr.ite this: the Triumph.il Arch of Constantiiie. (tig. 157) and the (\>losseum (fig. 15H) both in Rome.
The Triumphal Arch of ("onstantine is a veritable treasury of golden relationships. The
overall shape of this structure approxim.ites two giilden rectangles (d:e). Half the width
projected upcni the height establishes the springline of the central vault (A) as well as the
bottom line of the architrave (B), (see diagrams and golden section constructions at right).
The top ot the main cornice (C) as well <is the springline of the small archways (D) coincide
with the sides ot two giilden rectangles flanking a square in a semicircle, the classical construction of the golden section. A diagram (lower left) shows that the heights of the major archway
and of the minor ones (o and p) as well their difference (n) and two articulations of the
architrave (m and 1) form a series ot golden relationships which again coincide with the pattern

no

1 Mh i'(,n\ hR o\ 1 iMi I s

Fig. 157. Triumphal Arch of Constantine, Rome.

ot organic growth. Diagrams above and below the elevation indicate how the golden section
relates to each other all major articulations also in horizontal direction.
Proportional study ot the Colosseum shows that the plan tits into two golden rectangles
(b:a) and that the width of the giant ellipse which forms the outside wall relates to the width
ot the central arena in the proportion ot two reciprocal golden rectangles (see diagram and
construction above plan). Similar relationships exist along the shorter axis ot the plan (see
diagrams and constructions at the right ot the plan).
The same relationships reappear in elevation between the heights ot the three lower stories
(n:o:p) and also between these latter combined and the crowning tourth story (r:s:t) (see
diagrams and construction at right ot elevation). All these proportions approximate the musical
root harmony ot the fitth-diapente, while the central location of the cornice over the second
floor corresponds to octave-diapason .
HELLAS AND HAIKU / 111

Rhvthinic vv.ivc (Ji.igr.inis A, B, and C illuMr.iting basic proportions of plan and elevation
reveal that these again correspond to organic growth p.itterns. H.irmonic unity achieved
between the diversities ot plan and elevation, through shared proportional limitations is again
demonstrated bv bar di.igrams. all articulations ot" which converge to the very same point.
Rom.in poets apparentlv shared the Rom.ui architect's devtnion to the proportions of the
golden section. According to Priitessor G. H. Duckworth of Princeton University, these proportional relations can be hnind m the poetrv of Catullus, Lucretius, Horace, and Virgil.'^ For
instance, in Virgil's celebr.ited epic. Tlu- Aciwui. the number of lines of the various parts of the
narrative are never arbitrarv. but alw.iys approximate golden relationships,
often corresponding to Fibon.icci numbers.
ii:

mi- I'ow 1 K Of I iMi i s

'■f0.6/Si ; M

.0618 \

d^- 10-') 89-0 II a/K^iiJjy. '^m smuJI 'n fx .haujK. inaft-u-uUiu.)
12

S g

10

lZ[i tvji^l^ = ItK&JPm-

^0

30

40

50

^0

Prn-pmJj^vynL fh^-nxt/yiAtc^ (ai ( \
OS
0GI8 OJSO
Measuring the immeasurable
The dittcrcnces between Greek and Rmnan
art tlwmdle when we compare these classical
terms to the arts ot the East. The Hve examples we will look at were chosen tor their
diversity as well as tor their miportance
within their cultures. As we will see, the proportions we have tound in the West also
appear in the arts ot the East.
The Tibetan canon tor the construction ot
Buddha figures, published in Benjamin Rowl.ind Ir.'s book. The F.i'oliition oj the Buddha
IiiicK^c in 1976, shows how the tigure tits into

:4k 0 &ia- 4 83
ci,= /4.83-/4 = 0 83 AngUa.

Fit;, l^'-). Tibc-t.in Lanoti tot BudJlia hi;urcs.

0-750

three golden rectangles within each other.''"'
(tig. 159) The largest rectangle encloses the
whole tigure trom top knot to base, encompassing the knees; a smaller one reaches trom
top ot head to legs, touching right hand and
elbow; and the smallest trames the head.
Wave di.igrams and constructions ot the
golden section above and below the tigure
reveal reciprocities that unite the upper and
K>wer portions c>t the body, suggesting the
compassion ot the supreme Buddha toward
even the lowest living things. Corresponding
musical root harmonies are shown by the vertical wave diagram and the graph.
The two triangles which appear in the original Tibetan canon, reaching trom chin to
legs, are shown to correspond with diagonals
ot halt the enclosing golden rectangles, delineating a central pentagon and pentagram
pointing to chin, waist, and armpits.
The Korean brtmze tigure ot Maitre\a, the
tuture Buddha (tig. 160), can be enclosed in .i
golden rectangle resting upon a square ot
equal width, the latter containing the seat, the
HELLAS ANP HAIKLI

1 1,^

lis ^

3

^, a

F it;. I'lii f-igurc ot Maitrcva.

tonncr tr.inung the bulk ot the tigurc itsclt. Wave diagrams and graph show that the critical
point, where the right elbmv rests upon the right knee, is exactly at the center ot the whole
height, corresponding tc^ diapason musical harmonv. Other important relationships, such as
shiiulder height between top ot head and seat, and forehead height between top of head and
shoulder, apprc)ximate golden proportions ,ind thus the harmony ot diapente.
The similarity is striking between these proportional relationships and those prevailing in
(ireek art. It is well known that historic cont.icts existed between classical Western art and
Buddhist .irt, through trade and the conquests ot Alexander the Great in the tourth century
l^.C]. rhis expLiins the physical means by which intormation may have been transmitted, but
the univers.il appeal ot these particular proportions surely springs from other sources. This
uiiivers<ilit\- IS turther demonstrated by a look at Buddhist architecture.
lioriibudur, the world's largest Buddhist stupa (tig. 161), was built at the end ot the eighth
centurv on the island ot [ava, Indonesia. It consists ot eight stupa-covered terraces arising trom
a raised base that covers abt)ut one and a halt city blocks (115 meters). The tive lower terraces
.ire square, the three upper ones are circular: .^-3-8 are, itt course, Fibonacci numbers.
Buddha tigures are enshrined m niches ot the b.is-reliet-covered balustrades that surround
the square terraces. Larger bell-shaped stupas on the circular terraces house larger Buddha
ticures. all representing various stages ot enlightenment. Even the numbers ot these stupas — 3224-16 — apprciximate musical root harmonies in their relationship to each other, as the graph
indicates. At the center ot the tcip terrace is the greatest stupa containing the largest Buddha,
representing the highest attainment.
114

WW i>o\\ FR o\ I IMl i s

AW Jime-niid>'^ i*t/n6^^i. ^.-iTan^iT'''^ >t_>ii^i*^i
'.A/ii^ri) :jhM./Jws h(TiA,-.'Aif^ l^iiMl^n ji'^n
1

'y,.

|0

r'<^ liD/;

Fig. 161. Borobudur Buddhist stup.i, [.iv.i.
The diameter of the largest circuhir terrace and tlie width ot the square base are again in golden
relationship with each other, indicated by points A and B in the wave diagram at the right, and
by the golden section's classical construction, containing two reciprocal golden rectangles
(dash-dotted lines). The section of the Borobudur stupa shows hciw the height of the supreme
stupa and the base line form two 3-4-5 triangles, similar to the Mexican Pyramid of the Sun and
the Great Pyramid of Egypt, though in the latter the two triangles stand on their short sides.
Wave diagrams and gr.iph indicate further harmonious proportions, approximating musical
root harmonies.
HtLLAS ANP HAIKU 11^

In lap.iii. one tiiuls cntirclv dittcrcnr tonus ot Buddhist architecture,
exeniplitied b\- the Paeoda ol the Yakushiji temple, known tor its soaring grace .is well .is iov its mgenumslv contrived structural strength,
(tig. 162). It is built ot wood .md consists ot six ro(^ts, all ot ditterent
sizes, rising one above the other, culminating in a tall steeple. Above the
ground tloor there are two balconied tloor levels, and each of the floors
has two roots. The entire structure articulates into eight equal heights.
Ot these, two contain the ground tloi^r. two the steeple, and the remaining tour Ciinrain the two upper floors m between. The heights ot the
three lowest and the three highest levels relate to the heights of the two
central ones in proportums approximating golden ones, as do the tive
lowest to the three highest and vice versa.
I he prev.dence ot these reciprocal proportions in the entire structure
IS also shtnvn bv the t.ict that its overall outline tits neatly into one ot
the pent.igon.il st.ir s tri.uigles. and it mav be recalled that all relationships m this star pattern are golden ones. A netwtirk ot minor pentagram
triangles interrelates manv salient points ot this structure, such as the
ndgelines ot the second and third roots; the length ot the tirst, second,
and fourth; the baseline of the steeple and the eavelines cit the highest
.ind the lowest roots.
The w.ive diagrams reveal how waves of pri^porti(.inal relationships
pulsate through the entire bod\- of the building, as if it were a living
c^rganism. \otations of these relations are shown in the wave di.i^rams:
"ni st.mds tor minor. "M" for major members ot a golden relation.
"M designating the combiiuitum oi the two, and "M" referring to a
still further c(Mnbinatioii. such .is the \ 5 rectangle, containing two
recipriKal golden relationships. This notation shows at a glance how
mincir elements in one rel.itionship become major ones within the next,
as in processes ot organic growth. The letters "t" and "T" (for tessaron ) indicate proportions close to the n.7.S rate of diatessaron and also
to the Pvthagore.in tri.mgle's .■^:4 rel.itions. while "o" and "O" stand tor
the
or 1 ;2 rel.ition of ix'tave or diapason.
The h e.ivier wax'elmes oi tlie vertical wave diagram show two golden
sectum points oi the total height — one at the ridge ot the third roof A,
the other .it the eave of the sixth root B. Lighter wave lines indicate
some ot the m.in\- smiil.ir relationships among diverse other heights.
It is interesting to observe how vertical proportions are shared bv
horizontal ones. The floor and root structures share these relationships
in p.iirs; 1 with 6 (the highest and lowest), 2 with 3, and 4 with 5.
W'uhm e.icli ot these parts cit the structure one again finds
correspondences to all three musical root harmonies, both in the overall
shapes and in more minute details, including height to width, length ot
overhang to supporting structure, steeple height to height and width ot
top roof, and so on.
1 1'. 1111 i'(n\ 1-K ^ 11 1 i\ii I s

UhLl AS ANI) HAIKU 117

In entirely tlittcrent ways, the same proportional harmonies can be discovered in the Ryoanji Zen temple's garden, near Kyoto, which dates from the begmning of the fifteenth century,
(tig. 16.3) This garden is designed to be seen from the veranda of the monastery and frorn the
p.ived walkways around it. The rectangle ot coarse, raked white sand is never walked on.
There .ire five groups ot rocks on the sand apparently at random, like rocks along the shoreline
ot the sea. The rocks are placed on the sand apparently at random, yet they seem to belong
together as naturally as the land and the sea. One secret of this relatedness is revealed by the
subtle proportions that unite the overall shape i)f the garden with the distances between rocks
and enclosure.
I he tield ot sand has proportions correspiinding to two reciprocal golden rectangles, as
shown by dash-dotted diagonals which are identical with those ot the construction of two
reciprocal golden rectangles, below the plan. Lines A and B connect the rocks. Line B is
identical with the diagonal ot one ot the reciprocal golden rectangles constituting the sand
tield. Line A connects the three-quarters point ot the tield 's eastern side with point C along the
opposite side, this latter point corresponding to the meeting of two reciprocal golden rectangles, asthe ccMistruction demonstrates. Wave diagrams and multiple constructions of the golden
section above lines A and B show how the distances between the rocks within the field share
proportional relationships corresponding to the root harmonies of music. Thus rocks and field
become one.

11«

nil 1>0\\ hK Ol I IMi I s

IIKM.AS ANO HAIKU / 11')

W'f in)\v conic to I.ipan's oldest, dud at the s.unc tunc newest, architectural gem, the Isc
shrine's East I'reasure 1 louse, dedicated tti the goddess of iood, Toyo-uke-bime-no-kami. (fig.
164) It is the oldest because it dates back to the tourth century, built according to prototypes ot
raised prehistoric dwellings. It is alsii the newest because it is torn down and rebuilt every
tweiUN' years, in order xo preserve its origin<il mtegritw .ilways taithtully constructed following
the same design, one unsurpassed m its cLirity. All parts retain their natural shapes and
t inishes: round posts are of white cedar, grown near the site, the bark ot the same trees is used
ior the root: and the beams, ratters, and wall planks are unpainted, revealing the natural beauty
ot the wood grain.
The plan ot the building is a single golden rectangle. The gable elevation, trom ground to
ndgeline and trtnii eave to eave, corresponds to two golden rectangles. The side elevation.

Side ^k/v(AJr^(ni
OhlS

" 5" i. (815 =0=0 6?5
6J5

15 -M

(SC
t

10 -.16 ^of,?r.

L

15
.

:

23:36 =(1^39

i

'6.36 - .T
3: 5" ciVi^

i
i

5:8 (1.6:3
8:'i i )67.T

)

... .
30

t i 7 nnf- h/ifimr

Fii;. I(i4. Isc- Shinto slinnc\ E.ist Trc.isury House.

between ground and c.iveHne and between the edges of the roof, Hts .igani twi^ golden rectangles, topped by two larger ones that cover the roof it.self. Nothnig is arbitrary; these same
proper, as well as beproportional limitations exist between roof overhangs and the building
tween the windmill-like extensions of the rafters and the roof itself, shown at a glance by the
wave diagrams around the gable elevation.
Ill 1 1 AS AND HAIKU / 121

for ^lisploAj of OAtMOlk ,flo-i^trs ,ttc.

t ic W>^ l'rv>pi>t tnMl^ i>t l.ip.mc^r tr.i rooms
A, B: HoM ii tin.il .iti.imnK-m ) ti-.i ri>i>ms
D: IspK.il if.i room pi.ins.
C ) pLoAt ~ 3 tcita/mL yna:ts
Ml

nil I'OW 1-K 0\ 1 l.Nll 1 s

The greatness of little things
o.e/8
/

,

/.6/8

The l.ipancsc tea c crcnicinv is the celebration ot the simple jeiysot lite. This ritii.il evolved troin
traditions ot Zen Buddhism, which te.iches the v.due ot limits bv the discoverv of "greatness ot
little things."'^ All the te.ihouses and te.i g.irdens in |.ipan were l.ud out by revered te.i m.isters.
They were often painters, piiets, architects, and g.irdeners as well, like Koburi Enshu. who
built the Hosen (hn.il <itt,iinment) tearoom m the seventeenth centurv. (Hg. 163) It is one ot the
earliest examples oi the unu)n ot inside and outside, a teature which became important in the
modern architecture ot the west. Here it is accomplished by means ot suspended shoji screens,
made ot ric<- paper pasted on a light wnioden Littice. As the dr.iwmg shows, the proportions o{
this sho]i and its opening towards the veranda correspond to reciprocal gcilden relations — a
tangible reciprocity th.it unites the intangible diversities separ.iting m<in troni nature.
As in most h'panese luuises, the floor is spre.id with tatami mats, made ot straw and ciivered
with woven rush, usually three teet wide and si.x teet long, thus incorporating the 1 :2 harmon\-.
The floor pLin B reflects golden proportional h.irmonies. fhe mam room and veranda lointiv
correspond to a golden rectangle (see dash-dotted diagonal marked 2:3), .md the extension ot"
the room, three t.itann mats, share the same proportions. Figures C .md D show how the
equiv.ilents oi the music.il root harmonies 2:3 .ind .^:4 .ire embodied in the pl.ms of two tvpic.il
smaller te.ircHims. It is mneworthy th.it the pent.itonic music of the East (.md muc h folk music
in the West) is limiteil to five tones, thus rem.unmg .ilwavs close to the root h.irmonv ot"
titth-diapente.
The use ot t.tt.imi m.its ensures th.it in j.ip.mese .irchitecture room sizes .md .ilsc^ the grouping
ot rcH')ms into entire buildings will .ilw.ivs be m harmonious proportions. The t.it.imi m.its thus
.ict .is modules iov .ill tliHir l.ivouts, just ,is the slu^p screens .ict as moilules for the vertical

0750

I-ig. 166. PLm ot Katsur.i Iiiipcri.il Vill.i

i:-4

I ill I'OW i l( CM I IMI 1 s

articulation (.it the walls. The plan ot the Katsura Inipcnal Villa m Kyoto (tig. 166), which is a
tree combination ot diversely shaped and sized rooms, shows how the use ot the modular tatami
mats creates a rhythmic and harmonious unity and wholeness, without becoming monotonous
or forced. Thus the disciplined order of shared proportional limitations achieves treedom and
grace. The proportions ot each room correspond to the n.>ot harmonies ot music, as the wave
diagrams and the graph demonstrate. Music played an important part in the conception ot this
plan: music being played on the veranda ot the Middle Shoin could be enjoyed trom the veranda
ot the Old Shoin while watching the rising ot the moon.
The exterior ot the Katsura Villa (tig. 167) harmonizes with the plan through its own golden
proportions, as can be seen trom drawing A, which reveals that one ot the main openings
relates to its two tlanking shoji panels as the square relates to its two tlanking golden rectangles
in the classical construction ot the golden section. Similarly, construction B shows how the
proportions ot the openings and shoji screens are shared by the spacing ot the structural
columns, integrating thereby the rhythmic harmony and wholeness ot the entire building.
The shared proportional limitations ot architecture reflect a basic pattern-terming principle
permeating all Japanese lite and art. For instance, haiku poems are limited to seventeen syllables in three lines of tive, seven, and tive syllables. These narrow limits allow powertul
expression through suggestion by detail, a torm ot power ot limits.

The picn imi chill I \vcl:
my dead wijc'i coinh, in our hcdrooiii,
under my heel.
— I3u.son, 18th century
A iHouuldui I'ilhii^e:
I 'iider the piled-up siiow
the found of water.
— Shiki, 19th century
. : 0,618 ; . / . ; O.fS
/.S8Z--2.2Z&= o.€;8

Fig. 167. K.itsur.i Inipcri.il
Villa, MHuhc.ist elcv.itUMi.

Vallen petah rise
Ihhh to the hraneh — / watch:
oh. . .butterjlies!
— Moritake, l.Sth century
/ liai'e just come froni a place
at the lake hottoni! That is the look
on the httle duck face.
— |oso, 17th- 18th century'''

/.6/8
ULLLAS AND HAIKLI / 125

1 m I'ow 1 u o\ i imi i s

