CHAPTER

4: Timeless

Patterns

of

Sharim

Basic arts of sharing
Sharing is not only a basic pattern-torming process and an art; it is also a condition ot lite. With
every breath ot air, with every sip ot water or bite ot nourishment, we share the resources ot
the earth. In The World As I See It, Albert Einstein says: "A hundred times every day I remind
myselt that my inner and outer lite depend on the labours ot other men, living and dead, and
that 1 must exert myselt in order to give in the same measure as I have received and am still
receiving."-^' This is the reciprocal sharing ot the Golden Rule and ot the golden section.
Betore we share in the labors ot others we share communications with them. Speech is one ot
our oldest means ot communication, a basic art through which we share our teelings, our needs,
and our thoughts with others. The development ot speech goes back perhaps a million vears, so
we don't know much about its beginnings. But the discovery that many languages have a
common origin (such as the Indo-European rc^ot language, now lost, atter having given birth to
many modern languages) gives us a glimpse ot the beginnings ot the art ot sharing through
speech. The word mother, which is similar in many languages, has been traced back to the >}ia
sound uttered by all babies.
Even the art ot thinking originates in sharing through talk. As Don Miguel de Unamuno says:
"To think is to talk to oneselt and each one ot us talks with himselt thanks to our having had to
talk with one another. Thought is inward language and the inward language originates in the
outward. Hence it results that reason is social and common."-We share communication also without words, using the silent speech ot body language. We
all know that a triendly smile, a trown, a shaking ot the head or a handshake at times tells more
than many words can.
The philosopher Susan Langcr speaks movingly about the ettect ot sharing the experience ot
touch and discovering thereby the shared meaning ot words, quoting a tamous passage trom
Helen Keller's autobiography, where she describes how her teacher took her to a well. "Someone was drawing water and my teacher placed my hand under the spout. As the cool stre.mi
gushed over my hand she spelled into the other the word water, tirst slowly, than rapidly. I stood
still, my whc^le attention tixed upon the motion ot her tingers. Suddenly I telt a misty consciou.sness as ot something torgotten . . . and somehow the mystery ot language was revealed to
me. I knew then that w-a-t-e-r meant the wondertul, cool something that was tlowing over my
hand. That living word awakened my soul, gave it light, hope, joy, set it tree!"'^
Both teaching and learning are essentially experiences ot sharing. Good teachers have the
Fig. 51. Marching hunters or w.irriors. Atter
prehistoric cave painting at C^asulla Ciorge,
Spanish Levant.

magic capacity to share themselves and their devotion to their subject with their students. "The
greatness ot teachers is not measured by how much they know, but bv how much they share,"
said the Reverend Jesse Jackson at a conterence dealing with violence in our cities.
Children learn what they see around them. It they see mostly egoism, thev learn to be
egoists. It they see sharing, they learn how to share, and — since learning is sharing — they learn
to read, write and count in the bargain.
Shared human enterprises have always tound expression m shared bodv movements, as tigure
51, a drawing atter a prehistoric painting, illustrates. Here early hunters ox warriors are seen
riMF.I.F.SS I'ATTEKNS OF SHARINC. - 24

V)

1 HF I'OW I-K Oi 1 iMI 1 s

Fig. S3. D.incing aps.iras (hcivciilv nvmplis) frimi Incli.m tcmpk- triczc (I2th-I3tli cc-nturics A.D.).
raising their bows and arrows as they stride in danee-like gestures toward their shared enterprise. Even thousands ot years hiter, just by looking .it them one can teel the ni.m.i-like energy
emanating from their shared movements.
In a Greek cup pamting from the si.xth century B.C., we see dancers all enthusiasticallv
dancing the same dance as they circle around the hero Hercules, who struggles with a sea
monster, (fig. 52) Hnthusiiisni is a word that means literally "god within," (in Greek, cn, "in"
and theos, "god"). Enthusiasm is sharing in an energy that is conceived ot as divine, as mana.
We Hnd movements expressing similarly shared religious emotions in countless other sacred
dances, such as the dance of apsaras (semi-divine beings) in an Indian temple carving, (tig. .S3)
We all become enthusiastic when we dance. With or without beliet in divine beings, the
mana ot shared rhythms carries us in the waves ot the dance, (tig. ,S4)

Fig. 54. Bulgarian folk dancers
TIMELESS PAITERNS OF SIIARINC, / M

One kind of body language leaves visible traces: writing. The art of writing is a form ot
communication that developed from patterns to which shared meanings were attributed. For
instance, zig-zag lines found side bv side with spiral patterns engraved in the walls of the
prehistoric passage graves of New Cirange, Ireland are looked upon by scholars as the first
representations oi water, believed to signify the earliest form of the letter M.^^ (figs. 55, 61)
In tribal cultures where writing has not yet developed, simple geometric patterns are used to
share ideas. The anthropologist Franz Boas writes: "It is remarkable that in the art of many
tribes the world over, ornament that appears to us purely formal is associated with meanings
Cieometrical patterns of the Brazilian Indians represent fish, bats, bees and other animals,
although the triangles and diamonds of which they consist bear no apparent relation to these
animal forms. -'^ (fig. 56)
Even highly complex geographic information is at times passed along within tribal cultures
bv such pattern-images. The p.itterns on <i rawiiide bag made by North American Arapaho
Indians (fig. 57) are said to represent a village surrounded by mountains (double frame), dotted
with lakes (squares in frame), tents (dark triangles) and a buffalo path running right through
the center (dotted line).
Sometimes long stories are shared by members ot a tribe, with the help of a single pattern.
For instance, the painted Zuni bowl in figure 58 narrates the story of "Cloud Alone": "When a
person does not go to the dances, when they dance for rain, after her death she goes to the
Sacred Lake and when all the spirits of the other dead people come back to Zuni to make rain,
she cannot go but must wait alone, like a single little cloud left in the sky after the storm clouds
have blown over. She just sits and waits all alone, always looking and looking in all directions,
waiting for somebody to come. That is why we put eyes looking out in all directions."-'

Fig. 56. (leonu-trR patterns
ni.ulc bv Br.i7ili,iii liuli.ins. Top
design represents b.its. bottom
Jesipn respresents bees.

when in the course ot historical development large urban population centers .irose, as in
Mesopotamia, Egypt and Chma, such commonly used patterns gradually developed nito writing. The cuneiform writing of the Sumerians was impressed intt) clay tablets with wedgeshaped tools, (tig 59) The Egyptians' written signs, called hieroiilyphs (tig. 60), were carved mto
stone or written on papyrus rolls. To the ancients, writing was a sacred art guarded bv priests
and scribes.

Fig. 59. Sumerian cuneiform mcdicdl text.

Fig. 6(1. Egyptian hieroglyphs from 12th dynasty (1991-17S6 B.C:.).
TIMFI-ESS PATTERNS OF SHARINCi / .y

For us, writing has bcccmif so coninionpl.icc th.it It has lost its sacred character, as
with dancing. Wc tind it hard to imagine
what owx ancestors might have felt when they
tirst experienced the pt)wer ot writmg. The

a
Utbreu)

1

M
7

V

<

surcK' magical that a man long vanished from
the land ot the living could still speak from a
clav t.iblet or a papyrus roll. Words thus
H

A
cdpha.

V
J

A

S

A

X

6

/

M

ynouJM.

&

o

anthropologist
Childein has
said: "The
immortalizationClordon
ot a word
writing
must
have seemed a supernatural process; it was

N

N

n

T

T

n

E

E

n

P

o

0

Owx own
traced back to
ot mana."-*
a kmdbeen
possess have
must letters
spoken
Rom.m and CJreek prototypes, which in turn
originated trom still earlier proto-semitic
images representing simil.ir sounds, as figure
61 illustrates.

Fig. 61. Origin ot sumc letter patterns.

V)

I 111 l'l>\\ I R C11 LIMll^

(?)

X

f

hn£

~i

1

'-1

Ill C^hiii.t the patterns ot writing never
turnetJ inti) signs scninds as thev did in the
West. Instead, the signs ot Cdimese writing
retain to this day the rudiments cit the basic
patterns trmn which they originated, with <ui
ide.i attached Xvi each, which is why thev are
called idcoi^nuHs. In figure 62 <i tew Chinese
ideograms .ire shown (in scjuare frames),
together with the basic image-patterns from
which they originated (in round frames).
Even it one does not understand the meaning ot a foreign written language, one can
still share its rhythms, which reveal its unique
character. The rhythm ot Chinese writing —
archaic as well as modern — moves with seemingly effortless grace (tigs. 63, 64). The

t
tf
' rtHSu It,

Fig. 62. Devclo

pnicnt ot C'hincst

' idcogr.ims. Ear ly tonus arc- iii Lin.1 CN, current torn IS arc in squares

Fig. 63. Chinese writing trom bronze
casting (1 1 th century B.C.).

Fig. 64. Poem by Emperor Hui-tsung.
TIMELESS PATTERNS OF SHARINCi / ,VS

viun^

iiw^'^?^ •n^J'AJ^ni r^v^ivl

Fig. 63 Hc'hri vv writing triMii Dc.iJ So Scrolls.

hit;, (if). Rom.ui izr.ittitii troni I'onipcn
Hebrew writing ot the Dead Sea st rolls (tig. 65) proceeds in a steadfast walk, as it it contirmed
the firophet's words, "What doth the Lord require ot thee but to do justly and ... to walk
humbly with thy CJod?"-'' In the Roman grattlto scratched into a Poinpeian wall (tig. 66) we
recognize a tamiliar nervousness that reminds us ot our own hurried longhand. The rhythm of
Arabic dances with dignity (tig. 67), while the rhythm ot one ot the first Gutenberg bibles
storms heavenward like the steeples ot the Gothic town where it was printed (fig. 68).

Fig. 67. Ar-ibk writing.

The rhythms ot writing are created by the same pattern-torming process of sharing that
creates rhythms ot dance, music and speech. Movements shared make dance, patterns shared
make writing, and sounds shared make music and speech. It is also through a sharing process
that we comprehend numbers. The tact that we all have ten tingers allows us to count the tirst
ten numbers on our two h.mds. From ten, numbering becomes a rhythmically recurrent process:
the tens make hundreds, the hundreds make thousands, and so on.
The ancients used the proportions ot the human body tor measuring short distances. For
instance, the length ot a man's forearm with the hand outstretched was called a cuhit, which had

.Vi HIE Ptnx HK (.^F LIMIIS

Cocllm

several variants. The Egyptians had a smaller cubit, which consisted ot six "handbreadths" and
a larger one, the Royal Cubit, which was seven handbreadths. (Hg. 69) The Egyptian "hand"
was made up ot the dimensions of tour "fingers" or "digits." A further measure, the "fist,"
equaling one and a third handbreadths, was used by the Egyptian master-budders and craftsmen
to establish the square grids used for the proportioning of their royal statuary. Many unfinished
Egyptian sculptures have been found which have such grids, used by the artists and workmen.
The rhythmic wave diagram in figure 69 reveals how the main proportions of this figure share
the harmonious proportions approximating the root harmonies of music.
The Roman cubit consisted of two feet, each foot measuring twelve uhcuu'; this is the word

obrulirliolqrauftafujialrare.flDu^
ramfq; tft
otnre fuauitati^:^ ait

from which our word ituli comes. Six feet made up the jatlioni, which corresponded to a man's
outstretched arms, from fingertip to fingertip, (fig. 70)

aU £u.|)lcquarn ultra malfDiram

fit

propttr Ipi'eo. ^)nifui< ml cr rogitaro
liunmni tt]2Dio m aialii proiui runt
ah aDolfftma Fua. Ifloii igimr ultra
nrrcuria onumu amumm
uiunitrm
uait fm ruutho Difto- ttrrt fnunitio-i
mriTm-FaguD i rftuo-cftao i l]imip^tDirononrequitrrmt.vl ? 8
enfDijrirq^, truo iioc
nuo^ Di^t aD £oa.l£ ctfntt i niftipli
mmiui

i replrtt ttrra-^i ttrro2 utflxr ar

tmuo2 fit Fuji diM ni'alia tmt-i fupcr
nmnro uoluaco di nli uuiunfio que
moimu

fug terra. ftuanropirrto ma

nonuanui

16

utftrt traD iti lut-tr onme

Fig. 68.
Lines t'roiii
Clutcnbcrg IJiblc (14.S2-1456) .md
view
ot Cokigne
in 141)0.

ifz^of- = % SnctM. CiUtdt - 3 so tun es ■'
ingCi/M.c c^myMl-. Xi\A run* 2:j= o-iee
0.6
Fig. 70. Greek metmlogical relief. Distance from
fingertip to fingertip is a \athom; tontprint above
figure indicates basic measure.

5:9=0.625
8:|3'0.&15
g-.lk"

\

Fig. 69. Egyptian measures and proportions. Each squ.ire
oi grid is a list, corresponding to one-third of a foot.

i.b/8 = iiui(>eM.i( =
TIMELESS PATTERNS OF SHARINC, / M

Fig. 72. Swedish rock engravings ot ships and swords
(ca. B.c:.).
As rhc nicasuriDg ot length was liiikcil to the proportions ot the human body, so the
measuring ot tunc became based upon the durations observed in the rhymically occurring
movements ot the heavenlv bodies. These observations led to the realization that there exists a
heavenlv or cosmic t>rder, to which human lite is related, and upon which it depends, this order
m.initesting itselt in the movements iit the stars and in the recurring patterns of the calendar.

Cosmic order and calendric structures
There are manv indications that prehistoric people caretully observed the nK^vements ot heavenlv bodies. In Scandinavian rock engravings trom prehistoric times we see boats and sunwheels, with the spokes pointing in the directions ot the compass, (fig. 71) There are also
c\)ncentric circular skv patterns, one with a sword pointing towards it, apparently referring to
a constellation which the early Vikings might have used as a navigational guide, (tig. 72) In
another Swedish rock engraving, something like a giant's or a god's tootprint is seen over the
sunwheel, and below it is a tigure with crescent-shaped headgear, perhaps a shaman, imperson.iting the "man in the nKHMi," dancing in the tlaming tootsteps ot the sun. (tig. 7.3)
Whatever the interpretation ot such mythological patterns might be, they testity to early
observations ot the skv, which brought along better orientation in time and space.
Archeological and astn-)nomical research has established that the large stone monuments
which were built acrt>ss Northern Europe about 3500 years ago served as giant compasses,

['ig- 73. Swedish ruck engravings o[ .i
deitv or sh.im.iii, with toinprint and
sunwheel (ea i;>n(i 1V( ' i

3s

1 HH POW 1-H Ot 1

1s

calendars, and computers ot seasonal patterns, as well as sacred precincts for religious rituals.^''
The most tamous ot these megaliths is Stonehenge. on the Salisbury Plain in England, built in
stages trom the twentieth to the si.xteenth centuries B.C^ (tig. 74)
A pl.ui of Stonehenge III indicates how the exact time ot midsummer sunrise was established
(tig. 7.5), by sighting the disk ot the rising sun between adjacent tall stone markers, called Sarsen
Stoiu'<. directlv on top of what is referred to as the Ht-ehfom. (fig. 76) The horizontal projections
(azimuthal directions) oi the midwinter and midsummer risings and settings of the sun and the
moon established with modern scientitic instruments corroborate the astronomical accuracy of
Stonehenge. (tig. 77)

\^

■<•
[0.GI8)

(1.0)

■ >-"

\
\
\

:
:
;
■\
\
::
- '
X
' \.

\\
/

.
Stonehenge.
Fig. 74.

\:

stunts—^
K&plaxe^ simi:

SM/ns&t
■yyiiSiu/ywwiMi.
yvimviAAAe.

Heelstone
Fig. 76.
framed in
archway at
Stonehenge.

^6 55
midwinter

CP

MOONStT^
SUNSE T
^
MIOWiNMidsummer
TER

Minr.uMMrR
SUNfll Of
MIDW NT ER
MOONRISE

Fig. 75. Ahgnments tor
Stonehenge III. Sarsen
Circle's diameter and width
ot Bluestone Trihthon
Horseshoe are in golden
section relationship.
MIDSUMMER
MOOnsET
Fig. 77. Horizontal projections ofsightlmes (azimuthal
directions) ot rising and setting ot sun and moon at
solstice and ecjuinox tor the latitude ot Stonehenge.

. MIDSUMMER
MiDWIN
SUNRISEfER
\
\MIDSUMMER
\
MOONRlse
\
MOONRISe
TIMELESS PATTERNS OF SHARINC; / ,W

lu--d, s tunc

It seems to have escaped notice sc^ tar that the architecture ot Stonehenge shares the proportions ot the golden section and ot the FVthagorean triangle. The classical construction of the
golden section applied to plan 111 ot Stonehenge (tig. 75) reveals that a golden relationship
exists between the width ot the Bluestone Trilithon Horseshoe and the diameter ot the Sarsen
C'ircle, (1:0.618 = 1.618). The same proportional construction applied to the plan ot stage I
sht)ws that the rectangle tormed by the Statuin Stones approximates the \/ 5 rectangle, made up
ot two reciprcK'al golden rectangles, (tig. 78) The astronomer Clerald S. Hawkins, upon whose
investigations the present analysis is based, believes that the Station Stone Rectangle was
Ira/nit.

"immensely significant . . . historically, geometrically, ritualistically and astronomically.""
Geometric analysis with the help ot center lines ct piers and diagonals also shows that the
proportions of the Sarsen archways come as close to the relationships ot the 3-4-5 triangle as
figure 79 indicates. Recalling that the 3:4 proportion corresponds to the musical harmony ot
diatessaron, the golden section ccirrespimds to the diapente, and the corresponds to the
diap.ison, the phr.ise "music ot the spheres" t.ikes on new meaning.

i'2,236 - m

94
(10)

(1.0)

^ (o.&jsi^ PiofoxiuyyuAl
[1. 61%)

Fig. 78, Plan ot StiHiclR-tigc I. ahovf. with propurtions o\
Station Slum.- Kci. taiigic- pr<>|ct tc-d, hfL'ic, show ing its
approximation ot the v B rectangle.

3

4(1 TUt POW ! K Ol LIMITS

Some ot the same harmonious proportions can be hnunl ui a structure built about KKHI ve.irs
before Stonehenge — the Great Pyramid ot Egypt. Figure 80 shows that the central height
(apothem) ot any side triangle rehites to halt the base in the proportUMi.il ratio ot the golden
section. In cubits: Vi base = 220; apothem = 356; 356:220 = 1.618.'>As may be recalled, the 3-4-5-triangle also approximates the golden ratio between its 5-unit
side and the 3-unit base. (5:3 = 1.666...). For the Egyptians, the 3-4-5 triangle was ot vital
importance. Their tields h.id to be surveyed yearly, because ot inundations by the Nile, and this
triangle served as their surveying tool. A rope with knots at twelve equal distances, held <it the
third and eighth knots with the ends brought together, pri)duced the angle needed tor surveving. This is why the 3-4-5 triangle is also reterred to as the ropeflrctclicr's truvii^lf or the }:<^Ypthi)i
triiiiK^Ic. The close relationship between the ropestretcher's triangle and the golden rectangle is
illustrated in figure 81.

Fig. 81. Relationship between .'^-4-5 triangle
(ropestretcher's triangle) and golden rectangle.

half baif : ka^'nt - diMt<s[>juni- jov-ityi
iM. uUnJa: 220 ■ 280 * 0,736
i/nfeet: 380- 492 - (3.786
tiaij base : Ofotkevn- - dicip€/nte -ft-ffn

kaLj bast. : fvUl bast = dta^cwcm - octavf
lA^eet . 390 74« =i ^ '^

Fig. 80. (Ire. It Pyranikl ot ( "lieops .it (lizeh. Ooss sec tion shows
th.it .ipothem .lud halt the h.ise are in golden section rel.itionship.
TIMELfcSS I'A I TERNS c)F SHARINc; / 41

Explorations h.ivc demonstrated that the Great
Pyramid was not only a royal tomb, but was also a
giant almanac "by means of which the length of the
year, including its awkward 0.2422 fraction of a day
could be measured as accurately as with a modern
telesctipe ... It also has been shown to be a theodolite,
an instrument ior surveying, that is precise, simple,
and virtually indestructible."" As a compass, it is so
finely oriented that modern compasses are adjusted to
it, not vice versa. The astronomer Richard A. Proctor

hii; Hi. I'ass.ims in tin- (lrc.it I'yr.iiiud, perhaps used .is
nbscrs .itioii slots t(i miMsiirc the suh's lu iglit on tlu- shortest
,inJ loiim-si il.u s ot till- \ cMr.

estim.ited, at the turn ot the century, that the sun's
height at its equinoxes as well as certain key stars and
constellatu)ns could be sighted and aligned very accurately through the huge, graduated slots which were
built into the bculy ot the pyramid. Proctor speculates
that the truncated top surface of the pyramid before
its completiiMi ct)uld have been u.sed as an astrononucal and .istrological observation platform high over
the (iizeh plateau, with a view commanding the entire
compass. (tig. 82)

In Mexico around 300 A.I)., similar huge pyramidal
structures were built to serve both religious and astrontimical purposes, and they display basic proportional
patterns similar to the Clreat Pyranud of Egypt and
Stonehenge.
The Pv ramids ot the Sun and the Moon in Teotihuacan ne.ir Mexico C]ity once tormed the heart of a splendid metropolitan civilization, (fig. 83) Figure 84 shows
how the t>utlines ot the Pyramid of the Sun are contained within two sets of 5:8 and 3:4 triangles. Other

t ig, S.V I'M.iniul ot tin- .Moon, iilnnr.
.mJ tlu- l'\ r.iniiJ ot tin.- Sun, heloii'.
I cotiluMi. .m. .Mc xK o
— ■:= '-i-^U,
o.ejg -L
III-. l i
II?'.
■ fl

f'lg S4 J l(.\.itioii ,inJ
[Toportioii.il .m.iK sis of the
I'vr.mikl ot tl)f Sun.
111 l\>\\ hR 111 1 I.\11 1 s

75

2 25

Mexican pyramids also fit into the 3:4 triangle's outlines, as can be seen from drawings
representing elevations ot two at them: the Pyramid oi Niches in El Tajin, and Castillo in
Chichen Itza. (Hgs. 85, 86) In addition, in El Tajin the golden section's proportions are approximated bya progressive series of relationships between cardinal dimensions, as indicated by the
golden section constructions and wave diagram. In the Castillo, the main elements of the

Fig. 86. Chichen Itza: Castillo. Section and plan.

structure fit into a series of \/~5 rectangles (composed of two reciprocal golden rectangles) as
the constructions superimposed over the elevation demonstrate. All these proportional relationships echo the root harmonies of music. The architect Manuel Amabilis Dominguez in 1930
discovered a prevalence of pentagonal proportions, and thus of the golden section, in many
Mexican monuments.
Volumes have been written about the calcndric significance of these
pyramids. Apparently, in certain cases, even the number of structural or decorative elements
correspond to the number of days in certain important cycles of time, and each stone had
calendrical importance: in the Castillo the number of steps, and in the Tajin the number of
niches, is 365, the number of days in the solar year.
TIMELESS PATTERNS OF SHARING / 43

44

THF POW tR Of- LIMITS

Fig. 90. Ziggur.it of Babylon. Reconstruction by L.C. Stecchini.
Observation of the heavens tor clues to seasonal changes was also a major function ot some ot
the world's oldest calendrical structures, the Ziggurats oi Mesopotamia. According to Sir
Leonard Woolley, who excavated the large Ziggurat ot Ur, built by the Sumerians near today's
Baghdad, the word ::i<i(^urat meant "hill ot heaven" or "mountain ot god." (tig. 87) Sir Leonard,
whose reconstruction ot the Ur Ziggurat is shown in tigure 88, suggests that these huge
stairways with processionals ascending and descendmg them might have had to do with Jacob's
tamous dream m the Bible: "and behold a ladder set upon the earth, and the top ot it reached to
heaven, and behold the angels ot God ascending and descending on it."^''
The priests ot the ziggurats were also astrologers and astronomers who calculated the
movements ot planets, the sun and the moon, and established a lunar calendar tor predicting
seasonal changes, tloods, sowing and harvesting times, and so on.
The most tamous ziggurat was the Tower ot Babel in Babylon, with its legendary hanging
gardens ot Semiramis. (tig. 89) Livio Catullo Stecchini reconstructed the basic outlines ot the
Fig. 91. Assyrian b.is relict ot ziggur.it (7th century B.C.).

Ziggurat ot Babylon on the basis ot a cuneitorm text, the so-called Smith Tablet." The outlines
ot this reconstruction are shown in tigure 90. Constructions ot the golden section and Pythagorean triangle reveal correspondences to the tourth-diatessaron and titth-diapente root harmonies ot music. An Assyrian bas reliet trom the seventh century B.C. shows similar proportions,
(tig. 91)
TIMELESS PA ETERNS t)F SHARINc; / 4S

4h

THH Pcn\H< Oh 1 IMI I S

Figures 92 and 93 are the author's proportional studies ot the Ur Ziggurat. b<ised upon Sir
Leonard Woolley's excavations and ot King Ur Nainniu's reconstruction trom around the
twenty-second century B.C. (The age ot the earlier ziggurats buried below the present ruins
can only be guessed at; they could have been built as much as lOOO years earlier.) These
proportional analyses indicate that the terraces and temple which make up this great structure
share the proportions ot the golden section and the Pythagorean triangle.

TIMELESS PATTERNS OF SHARINC; / 47

15

16

18

19

20

Fig. 94. Comparison of cosmic
and biological rhythmic patterns.
4S

IMF POWKR CIH I I.MI I S

Rhythm

and harmonious

sharing

Calendric architecture revealed rhythmic patterns characteristic ot the caleiidric changes
themselves — the wanings and waxings ot the moon, the rhythms oi ebbs and tides, or menstrual
cycles ot the temale body.
The circular pattern in Hgure 94 represents a page ot the calendar tor May 1976. Every
square represents a day's record ot the ebbs and tides ot the Pacitic Ocean in Seattle, Washington. Fluctuations within the major rhythm are caused by the joint gravitational pull ot the
moon and the sun, the tormer benig the stronger one because ot its relative
closeness to the earth.
On a miniature scale, the wave patterns ot this cosmic rhythm are shared by our heartbeat, as
electrocardiogram B in tigure 94 indicates. Our brain waves are turther variations ot these
rhythms, depending upon our condition — light sleep, deep sleep, sweating, or the mental
disturbances called petit Dial <md (^rand nial, tor instance.
Our breathing has a similarly dinergic wave pattern: it is an ongoing rhythm ot inhaling and
exhaling, and similar tluctuations characterize the physical and mental cycles called biorhytliDis.
Our "inner clocks" allow us to register our own rhythmic patterns ot time, called circtuiian
rhythms. Air travelers become aware ot their circadian rhythms when crossing time zones:
their own inner time and outer, calendric time temporarily get out ot step.
By attaching pens to a pendulum and to a tuning tork, and by registering the pens' traces on
rolling paper, the mathematical physicist Sir james Jeans proved that weight and sound share
the same rhythmical, harmonious wave patterns, called sine curres, or simple luiniionuiil curves. ''^
(fig. 95)

Fig. 95. Simple harmonic patterns created by pendulum, /c/f, and tuning tork, r/i;/;f.

TIMEL ESS PATTERNS OF SHARINC; / 49

)i (

-/Avt ' f-fs''',

I ' 1 ,AMr,'-,rn;or-\ 'J' jit; :

II

-/"fJ
I

'^'ifJ ^ /'^
1
I

^27
T

5« ")
I

'"97 700
I
1

I

1

1

\

I

i

III

II

I

~0-i
\

X\

A

A

A

G

/\

A

A

B

A

A

A

A

A

C

D

E

F

&

52g

594

660

/04

79Z

A

A

A
B

Sot. f JO

, :^i::>riOM$ ft c ifcc-'^o

^30 1,056
]')()

r .x'

J
- ^-'-^

1

yUjfi

1

A

CO

/OO
■■)

40-J

l it; '^(), ( oi rcspoiulclK I' Ix tu ccil
DiusK.il soiiiiJv .ind colors

S(i

I MF POW l R 0\ 1 IMI i s

C

Light, color and sound also share the same wave patterns. What is more, they share the same
vibration rates, as J. Dauven proved in 1970 (see figure 96.)'*'* Diagram A is a composite oi both
vibrations; sound frequencies (the number ot vibrations per second) are shown with a dashdotted line, and color frequencies are shown with a solid line. The closeness of the two lines
indicates that the experience of harmonious rhythms is shared by the eye and the ear, even
though one registers it as color, the other as sound. The shared harmonies of colors and musical
chords are shown in diagram B. Here the double 3-4-5 triangles indicate the tonic chord A
minor (A-C-E), corresponding to indigo-green-orange on the color wheel, which might be
seen when an orange tree is in fruit and the leaves cast dark blue shadows. The tonic chord G
major
(G-B-D) corresponds to violet-blue-yellow, the colors of an iris or violet under a sunny
blue sky.
The essence of all vibration and rhythm is a sharing of diversities — weak and strong, in and
out, up and down, back and forth — at recurrent time intervals. This holds as true for the tides
of the ocean as for our heartbeat; for light, weight and sound as for patterns of plant growth.
If we compare our reconstructions of leaf outlines with so-called isocandle light distribution
patterns of lighting fixtures, as in figure 97, we see definite correspondences. The intensities of
light are measured and charted in these diagrams along radiating rays emanating in straight
lines from the center of the fixtures, spreading in ever wider orbits, represented by concentric
circles. This pattern is thus as dinergic in origin as the growth pattern of leaves or flowers,
created by radiational and rotational growth components.

TIMELESS PATTERNS (W SHARINc; / =-1

5_

A row ot suntlowcr seeds along spiral D iii hgure 7 shcnvs that the diagonal length ot the
seeds group themselves in harmonica! series represented by vertical bars in diagram 2 ot figure
9H. This pattern is similar to that ot the lilac leaf (tig. 17) and the cumulative length ot
K-J
neighboring groups ot seeds — represented by the upper and the lower b.irs. All share the same
gt)lden 5:8 relationship, approximating the musical root harmony ot titth-diapente. (tig. 98,
diagram 3)
('ountmg the number ot seeds in neighboring groups, as shown by the bars, we get:

O-N

Z-F

H-G

5
5

6

5
7

5
8

M-L
5
9

1
1

1
1.2

1
1.4

1
1.6

1

Y-H

_5_
10
1
1

etc. Divided bv 5 =

etc.

1.8

Such a series is referred to in algebra as a hamionic pro^resiion, a concept that plays an important
role, tor instance, in the mathematical interpretation ot sounds. A harmonic progression is
defined as a series of fractitms in which the nominator remains 1 while all neighboring denominators share the same difference, m this case 0.2. Put another way, a harmonic progression
consists ot the reciprocals of an arithmetical series. Recalling that in the Fibonacci series the
difference between neighboring numbers also approxim.ites the same ratio — 0 moving one
w.iy and \/(i> moving the other way — we see that the Fibonacci series is a truly harmonic
These few random examples illustrate that <ill rhythmic vibration is essentially harmonious
progression.
sharing. Since this sh.iring is universally present in musical sound, color, light and weight,
p.itterns of plant grow^th, ebbs, tides and calendric rhythms, as well as in our own biorhythms,
breathing, and heartbe.it, we can speak ot it as a basic pattern-forming process. In the next
chapter we will look into the role this pattern-forming process plays in shaping the anatomy of
animals.
hig. Diagr.tnis iit a row ot suntlovvcr sfcilv, along
spir.il D in fig. 7. 1. Rhythm ot golden relations between
neighbt>ring groups ot seeds; 2. diagram ot harmonic
seed series; 3. prevalence ot golden section proportions.

.S2

I HF. POWER or- LI.V1I I S

5: The

