Preface

why do <ipplc hlossdius .ilvv.ivs have tivi- petals' Oiilv thilcirt-ii .isk such questions. Adults pa\little attention to such things, t.ikmg them tor grantetl, like the tact that we use onlv as nianv
numbers as we can count on our ten tingers. When we look tleeplv into the p.itterns ot .in apple
blossom, ,1 se.ishell, or .1 swinging pendulum, however, we chsct>ver a pertection, an incredible
order, that awakens in us a sense ot awe that we knew as children. Something reveals itselt th.it
is infinitely greater th.in we .ire .uid yet part ot us; the limitless emerges trom limits.
This book scarciies tor some ot the basic pattern-torming processes that, operating within
strict limits, create limitless varieties ot shapes and h.irmonies. It is an interdisciplin.irv venture
into the no-man's-l.ind between the borders ot science, .irt, philosophv, .ind religion, .in area
th.it has been largelv ilisreg.irded in recent vears bec.iuse its contents are mt.mgible. This area,
however, bears investigation, since the powers th.it sh.ipe our lives and our v. dues have their
source here.
As Rene Dubos points out in .S'l) Hu))hin An .iiuDhil. this .ige ot attluence .uid technological
achievement is also an age ot .mxiety .md desp.ur. I r.iditional stici.il and religious v.dues have
eroded to the point where lite i>tten seems to have lost its me.ming. Whv isn't the h.irmonx' that
is apparent in natural torms .1 more powerful force in our social forms? I'erh.ips it is because, in
our fascination with our powers of invention and .ichievement, we h.ive lost sight ot the power
of limits. Yet now we .ire forced to cimfront the limits ot the e.irth's resources, .md the need to
limit over-population, big government, big business. ,ind big l.ibor. In .ill re.ilms ot our experience, we are finding the need to rediscover prt^per proportions. The proportuMis ot nature,
art, and architecture can help us in this effort, tor these proportions .ire sh.ired limitatu>ns that
cre.ite h.irmonious rel.itionships out of differences. Thus thev te.ich us th.it limitations are not
just restrictive, but they .ilso .ire cre.itive.
It is not an accident that an .irchitect should be writing such a b^x^k. for it is the business of
architects to work with proptirtions. This architect is old. It took him .1 lifetime to attempt to
answer the questions he .isked .is .1 child. These .mswers m.iv not s<Uist\- the experts, and the\'
won't still the curiosity of .1 single child, but thev might le.id t^t further, perh.ips mc>re fruitful
questii>ns .ibout the puzzles .iiul be.iuties hidden in the patterns ,uid proportions of this world.
Civorgv Hoczi
St'iUtlc, 11 \}.<hni\^i,vi

Acknowledgments

I Ills hodk (.iHild not li.ivc been completed v\ ithoiit the patient — .imi at times ncn-so-paticnt —
but .ilwavs taitlitullv sustaiiu'd suppi->rt ot niv witc. Manv iuIuts also helped me: chief amoni:
these were my brother and daughter, as well as members ot the Art and Music Department ot
the Seattle I'ublic Library, (ierald Dotson. Marilvn West. Regina Hugo. David and .Miriam
Yost. David Idmlinson, Dr. Werner ,ind .Margit Wemgarten. Dr. Richard .M Hraun. Donald
Cxillins, Hri.in Brewer, Rabbi (i>seph Samuels, [ohn A. S.mtord. |ohn Fuller and the statr ot
Shambhala Publications, headed bv Samuel Bercholz.
Research tor this book was greatly benctlted by access to collections in various departments
oi the University ot Washington, Se.ittle, granted bv Dr. Daniel O. (iraney in liuilogical
Structures and by Dr. [ohn Edwards in Entoniolc^gy, and by access to the collection at the
Thomas Burke Memorial Museum ot the University, granted by Don Coburn, senuir restorer
ot prehistoric skeletons, by liill I iolni, curatc^r ot Northwest Coast Indian Art, and bv .issistant
director Robert Free.
My study ot aquatic .inimals at the Se.ittle Aqu.irium was greatlv t.icilitated bv general
curator Dr. )ohn W. Nightingale, antl my study ot tishes ot Canadian I'acitic waters was aided
by the courtesy ot the Canadian Minister ot Supply and Services. Protessor Donald ]. Borror,
his ci)-authors, and their publishers helped by permitting me to use their illustrations in A i'wLi
(Hiicic to the Insects, Houghton and Mittlin Co., and An Introduction to Insects, Holt, Rinehart and
Winston, as models tor mv own proportion, il drawings. Fom Cole ot the Boeing C'ompanv's
public relations department provided me with dimensioned drawings ot the 747. To all ot these,
and to many other helpers — here unn.imed — mv sincere gratitude. For errors and mistakes
which, in spite ot all this good help, might have crept into the book, I alone am responsible.

hik;. ! ^ Center ot .1 J.ll^v

CHAPTER

I

1:

Dinergy

in

Plants

It IS s.irI th.it tlu' Biultlh.i oiuf g.ivc .i scrniDii without s.iving .i woni; he. mtTclv held up a
Hovvcr to Ills IistfiuTs. This w.is thr fannnis "f-loucr St-rnioi). ' .i scrnioii in the l.inu'uaec nt
patterns, the silent language of flowers W'h.it does the pattern of a (lower speak about'
It we look eK>sel\- at a flower, aiul likewise at (uher n.itural and man-niade creations, ue find
a unity and .in order coinnion to .ill ot them. This order can he seen in certain proportions
which appe.ir ag.iin and .igain, .ind also in the similarlv dvnamic wav all things gnnv or are
m.ide — bv .1 union ot ccnnplenient.irv opposites.
! he discipline inherent in the proportions and patterns ot natur.ii phemmien.i. <ind manifest
m the most .igeless and h.irmonious works ot man, .ire evidence ot the rel.itedness of all things.
It IS through the limits ot discipline that we can glimpse .md take part in the harmonv ot the
cosmos — both in the phvsR.il workl .ind in mir w.iv ot life. Perh.ips the message ot the Flower
Sermon h.id to do with hiiw the living p.itterns ot the flower mirror truths relev.uit to ,ill form^
oflite.
r.ike for instance a daisy, (tig. 1) I he pattern .it its center is shown in figure 2. The florets
that make up this pattern — here represented bv circles — grow at the meeting points of two sets
of spirals, which move in opposite directions, one clockwise, the other ctninterclockwisc. (See
diagram at center.)
Here two ot the spir.ils h.ive been recimstructed with the help ot a series of concentric
circles, at distances growing .ilong a logarithmic sc.ile, and a series of straight lines radiating
from the center. It we connect the consecutive meeting points ot these two sets ot oppcising
lines, we c.in see the d.iisy's growth spirals. T hese spir.ils .ire logarithmic .uid also equiangul.ir.
since the .ingle they describe with the radii remains alw.ivs the same. Hiis is illustr.ited bv the
diagram at the right, which shows that segments representing consecutive st.iges of grtnvth can
be rotated .iround the center until tliev completeK' overl.ip, like a folded tan, proving that old
and new stages ot growth .dl sh.ire the same angles .md the s.inie proportion.

DIM lU.V IN I'l .■W is 1

B
Fii; 3 1 lu- nolJcn section in ont.- ot the daisy's spir.ils
H.uh st.ik;c- ot growth shares the same proportions (see
shaded trianijles at right).

lust what this proportion is can be seen from Hgure 3, showing the unfolding of one of these
spirals (diagr.ini at left). As the spiral untolds from the daisy's center, the order of growth,
measured along equidistant radii marked E,F,G,H,I,J, increases at the same rate. This can be
seen from the triangul.ir diagram, where parts ot old and new growth increments ot each stage,
marked in the lett diagram by bars, consecutive numbers and also A's and B's, have been lined
up along vertical lines. All points where A's and B's meet in the triangular diagram tall upon
the s.ime slanting line, which meets the vertical scales at distances measuring 5 and 8 respective! v. The ratios between these two numbers approximate some remarkably reciprocal features: 5divided by 8 approximates 0.6 (0.625); 8 divided by 5+8 or 13 also approximates 0.6
(0.615). Conversely, 8 divided by 5 is 1.6, and 13 divided by 8 again approximates 1.6 (1.625),
the latter two ratios being the same as the tormer ones with 1 or unity added.
Expressed in equatit)n torm: A:B = B:(A+B). This is the tormula ot the celebrated j^oUen
section, a uniquely reciprocal relationship between two unequal parts ot a whole, in which the
stnall part stands in the same proportion to the Lir'^e part as the lar^e part stands to the whole.
The term i^ohien section derives trom the uniqueness as well as the distinctive value attributed to this proportional relationship. On any given line there is only one point that will bisect it
into twi> unequal parts in this uniquely reciprocal fashion, and this one point is called the point
of golden section. The complete reciprcK'ity ot this proportion strikes us as particularly harmonious and pleasing, <i tact that has been prtiven bv many scientific experiments since the end of

1 HI Ptn\ 1 R CM I IMll s

A

A
i (■••)

\\
\

\

tin- last crntiirv.' I'rfkrciit c- for this proportion is .iKii .ipparcnt m the tciultiKA' of p.ipcr
st.iiKl.inls to approximate it or its niiiltiplcs. iiulikhnii the sizes of paper nione\ . checks, aiul
c reilit cards.Figure 4 shows a sii-c ailed x'<'/'/c" rccldfi'^lc of S^H proportions; it also shows a line bisec ted b\'
the golden section into parts A=.S and B=H, with similar arcs above and below the line emphasizing the reciprocity of these relationships.
This rec iproc itv is also illustrated bv one of the c lassic.il construc tions o\ the golden section,
with the help of a sc|u.ire inscribed into a semicirc le (fig. .S). A circle drawn from the center of

the sc]uare"s base touching the opposite corners of the scjuare i radius r) will produce the golden
section's proportunis along l"n)th sides of the extended baseline.
If" the st]U.ire"s sides are 1 unit long, then e.ich of' the ex'
a iII be (».61H unit long and the
1 X ().6IS rect.uigles on either side of" the scju.ire will ; „
n rectangles. Each ot these
combined with the scju.ire form a larger golden rectangle, 1 x l.f)lH. These larger rectangles
\

-0 62^ ,-a:/i-0.€,l^ «:?=/6^ li:B=lbZ
Fig. 4. Approxmi.iiuni ot .i guklcii rctt.mgic (5 ^ H).

.md the smaller ones ,ire e.ich other's recipriK ,ils. in the sense th.tt the l.irger side of the small
ones and the sm.dler side of the large ones .ire the s.ime. The total length of these reciprocal
golden rcct.nigles is 2.2.^6 units, this number being identic.il with \ 5 .
It has often been demonstrated that the golden sectuMi's proportions are frequent in patterns
of organic growth, particularly between neighboring old <uid new increments. I his is the
reason why the biologist W.iddingtim proposed to call this proportion the rt'Liit'Jm'<<

P.itterns generated by spir.ds moving in opposite directums .ire frec]uent in nature, as we shall
nci}ilihor<.^
see. Here they cdncern us as special instances of a more gener.il pattern-fornung process: the
union of complementary opposites. Sun and moon, m.de <nid female, positive and negative
electricity, Yin .uul Yang — the union oi opposites h.is been since ancient times an import. mt
concept in mvthologies and mystery religions. The two p.irts of the golden section s proportions are unec]U.il: one is sm.dler, the other l.irger. Thev .ire often referred tci as nuihn and hw/^t
Minor and m.iji^ here .ire oppcisites united in .i h.irmoiuous proportion. I he process itself bv
which the d.iisy's h.irmonuuis p.ittern w.is reconstructed is likeu ise .i joining of complement.ir\oppiisites — str.iight r.idii .ind rot.iting circles.
M.mv terms refer to .ispects of the p.ittern-forming process of rhe union of opposites. but
strangelv enough none expresses its ijci/criJfiVc power. Polarity refers to opposites but withiuit the
indication th.it something new is being born. Diuiliiy .ind Juhoiomy indicate division, but do not
me.m jcMuing. Syiicr'^y indicates joining and cooperation, but does not refer specificallv to
Since there is no .ulec]u.ite single word tor this universal p.ittern-creating process, a new
opposites.
word, diiicri^y, is proposed. Diiicr^y is m.ide up of twci Crreek words: Jui — "across, through,
opposite:" <uid "energy." In the d.iisv this dmergic energy is the cre.itive energy organic
growth. I'o wh.it extent cnher pLmts show dmergic p.ittern torm.itions sh.dl be our next
cimcern.

Fig. 5. C^l.issic.il eonstructioii ot the goklc-ti section, vvilli
square within semicircle. Rect.ingles 1 ^ It 61H .itul
1 X 1.618 are reciprocal golden rectangles.
PlNl 1U;V IN 1>I .AiN ! S .-^

Windows

on the infinite

The center ot the suntlower (tig. 6) is also composed of florets, which eventually turn to
seeds, and they also grow along logarithmic, equiangular spirals, moving in opposite directions,
which are loined dinergically as in the daisy. In the drawing ot the model small pyramids approximate the shapes of the seeds. I he spirals which are tormed by this seed pattern are detailed intigure 7. Diagram a shows that spirals A and B are the outlines of the seeds and C and
D <ire their diagonals.
It one toUows the ditterent curvatures ot these spirals through the squares tormed bv the
radiating and rotating sets ot lines in diagram a, one can see that spiral A moves trom one circle
to the next as well as trom one radius to the next within a single row ot squares. We will call
this a curvature ot 1:1 , signifying that the rotational and the radiational components of growth
are equal. Spiral B moves through two squares while reaching trom one radius to the next,
crossing two circles: a curvature ot 1:2. In a similar manner one can say that spiral C has a
curvature ot 3:1, while spiral D approximates 5:1.
In spite ot their ditterences in curvature, all ot these spirals share the qualities ot being
logarithmic and equiangular, through all stages ot growth. Such stages are shown in diagram b
marked upon each spiral by lower-case letters. The spiral diagram c at the right shows, on the
example ot spiral type C, hcnv succeeding segments ot growth, which tollow each other in
cyclic order, can be tolded upon each other tan-like, as in the daisy. This demonstrates that they
are ot the same shape even though different in size, sharing the same proportional rate ot
growth. That this rate is again the rate ot the golden section is shown by diagram d.
I il; 6 Siintlinvc'r .iiul iiiodel o{ seed pattern.

Fig. 7. Typical spirals ot the sutitlower's seed pattern.
4

rut Ptn\ hK Of- 1 1.MITS

The nuinlxTs si^niK ing iic-iuhbonim nUi .iiul new st.i^fs ^'t erowili pr*'Vf N' Ih- nu-iubcrs ^'t .i
st>-c".illcJ sufnifuifion scru's, in u liii li c.il li luinibcr is the sum ihc o prc\ iou^ -uirs: 1 . 2. 3. ^.
13, 21. 34, 35, S^;, 144. 233, 377. etc. This is the t.niious lih.'tuh^i mmc.. atu-r the nKkn.inu- .'i
l.con.irclo ot l^is.i who intrtuliucd it mu^ luiropc .ihout er^ht huiulrcJ ve.irs ,id^\ to'jcthcr v. ith
[ iiiRlii-Ar-ihu nunuT.iK aiul tlu- dec imal system. An\- number in this series JiviJeJ hv the
tollowmg one approxim.ites (1.618 . . . aiul .in\' number (.livkieil b\- the previous one approximates 1.61S .... these bein^ the characteristic proportional rates between minor aiul niaji^r
parts of the gi^lden sectUMi. In liter. iture this rate is trequentb,' reterreJ to with the dreek letter

J J in / 1. ^ ?i ■i^ B 1 0 *j

Fit^. 8. CAMiipurcr priiu-out ot goKlcii section s
</> ratui and Fibon.icc i sctk-s.

phi (0).
The three diUs attcr the luiinbcrs indicate th.it these mimherv are "■irratumal, m> called
beciuse thev can ou\\ he approximated, never expressed tulK' m .i fraction. One cm keep
dividing anv ot the neighboring minibers — .itter 13 — witlnnit ever reaching an end. An IH.M
computer inice priiduced 40110 digits ot this number at which point it was stopped without
reaching a rational number. The computer printout in figure S was stopped at the forty-fifth
place after the decimal ptunt.
It h.is been recorded that the Pvthagoreans of ancient (Ireece. w ho are credited with ha\ ing
discovereil in the sixth centurv B.C^ the infinite n.iture ot irr<ituMial numbers, were puzzled,
frightened and filled with awe upon their discoverv and tried to keep it a secret, proscribing the
death penalty for tln^se who would d.ire to divulge it. Legend h.is it th<it a violator of this
prohibitii>n, who escaped to sea, drowned there. His de.ith w.is attributed to divine punishment.
The numbers of the Fibonacci series curiousK- re.ippear in the total number of the sunflower's spirals. The model in figure fi w.is made friMti a sunflower head th.it had .>4 and 53 spir.ds;
34:55 = 0.6181818 .... Suntlmvers with 89 and 144. and with 144 and 233 opposite spirals have
also been reported; 89:144 = 0.6180555 . . . ; 144:2.V> = 0.61802.57 ....
One does nor have to tear vengeful deities ti.> feel something like awe .it such unexpected
precision in .i p.ittern ot n.itur.il gnnvth. It seems unre.ison.ible to believe that the number ot
seeds m .i sunflmver is preord. lined, vet something like that is exactlv what h.ippens. lrration.il
numbers <ire not unre.isonable; thev .ire on\\ hcyonJ re.ison, in the sense that thev .ire bevond the
gr.isp of \vlu>le numbers. Thev .ire infinite .ind int.ingible. In p.itterns of organic growth the
irr.ituMi.il f/) r.itui ot the golden sectuMi reve.ils th.it there is indeed .m infinite ,ind int.mgible side
to our world.
V'c) sec (I world in ii {^nun of fdiul
and liciivi'ii in a ii'ilJ flotccr.
hold iiijnnty in the pahn oj your luind
and ctorntty in

hour.— ' W illi.im Blake

niNl Ho')' IN m A.M s .s

Fig. Id Apple blosscnns, apples and pears. ,ind tlovver ot loganberry bush.

Every daisy and sunnowcr is a window on the nitinite, as are apple blossoms and the flowers
of other trees and bushes bearing edible truits. These grow according to the pattern ot the
pentagon and its extension, the pentagonal star or pentagram, (tig. 9) in which neighboring
lines relate to each other in the dinergic golden relations ot neighbors. Apples and pears, when
cut through their girth, reveal the pentagonal star pattern in their seed structure, inherited
tr(Mn their original flower pattern, (tig. 10)
Each ot the triangles in the pentagonal star have two equal sides that relate to the third side
as 8 does to 5. or as 1.618 relates to 1 ... . These reciprocal relationships can be seen when the
pentagram is combined with the golden section's construction, as in figure 11, creating a \/ 5
rectangle, consisting of reciprocal golden rectangles. The smaller rectangle's sides are identical
with the sides of the pentagram's triangle.

(> rm- i>o\\ hK oi I

IS

The sitli's oT tlu- rii^lu-,inglc-cl t ri.iiigic . ten ot wliii. li luAi up the- pciit.iL'dn. .iKo .ippr. >>; im.itc
tin- Jiiu-rgif goLk-ii rrl.itKms ot iK-iglih(irs. As shown w ithin thi- ptnt.iL'"n.<l s-.ir. these Mi.ies
.ipproxuu.itc 4-, .iikI 3-unit le ngths, .inJ 3 ,iik1 5 are nciehhornie nu-iiilxTs ot the }-ihi>n.ict i
scries (3:5 = II. f)). This 3-4-n triangle is .it tunes reterrinl to as the I'yrlur^ tcjh .'rij»;-/( . lx-i.ause it
ilhistrates the Pythagorean theorem (the sc|u.ire ot the hvpoteniise ot a right triangle is equal to
tlie sum o[ the squ.ires oi the other two sules). This triangle is trequentK' touiul in plant
patterns, as figure 12 shows.
The pentagonal star was the saereJ emblem ot the Pythagorean fellowship, which consisted
of men and WHimeii living in eommuiiities and abstaining from all lu.xuries. dedicated to a life of

moder.ition and the pr.ictice of' hciling. The Pvthagore.ins applicil the letters of the name
"Hygcia." the goddess tif hcaling. to the tips ot their s.icrcd emblem. The ti ve-piunted st.ir has
rcmamcd ,i universal symbol of' good portent, .ippcaring in the national flags of man\-

Fig. 12. Pytliagorc.in

triangle in pi.iiits.

countries.''
I'he pentagon and pentagram, like all patterns, are defined bv their limits. Incorporated in
the harmonious patterns of' fruits and flowers, thev e.xemplifv an epigram attributed to
Pythagor.is, that limit '^trc:^ joTDi to the liuiitlfss. This is the power of limits.

niNtRtA' IN PL .^NTS

Harmonies

of music and growth

Bv lhirt>ioiiy we generally mean a titting, orderly and pleasant joining ot diversities, which in
themselves may harbor many contrasts. In this sense, harmonv is a dinergic relationship, in
which ditterent and otten contrasting elements complement each other by joining. That such
dinergic jtiining is at the heart ot all harmonies is suggested bv the origin ot the word harmony,
from the Clreek lhn»io<, to )oin.
The concept ot harmonv also goes back to Pvthagoras. who according to legend discovered it
while listening to the sound ot hammering that came trom ditterent anvils in a smith's shop.
This observation guided him by analogv to other instruments, such as the vibrating strings ot a
Ivre. He tound that two strings sound most pleasant together when they are equal, or when one
is plucked at 1 2. 2 3, or 3/4 ot the other's length: in other words, when the length ot the
plucked strings rel.itc in proportions expressible m the smallest whole numbers: 1, 2, 3. 4.
(t"ig. 131
The 1:1 proportion, which is identitv. is called unison. The 1:2 proportion, which produces
the same sound as the tull string, onlv at a higher pitch, is called the oaave because it reaches
through all eight intervals ot the scale (the eight white kevs ot the kevboard). The Greeks
called this proportion duipcison: Jui. "through, " pason. trom pas or pan meaning "all." The
pleasant sound ot the 2:3 proportion was called Jtapenic (penta, "tive"), today called the fi'ff/i,
reaching through tive intervals. The consonance ot the 3:4 proportion was called Jiatessaron
{tcssarcs. "tour"), or the tounh.
The 2:3 = 0.666 proporticm ot diapente is a close approximation ot the golden section's
(I.61S . . . ratio. Diatessaron is identical with the 3:4 proportion ot the Pythagorean triangle.
Diapason, the octave, has the 1:2 = 0.5 proportion ot a rectangle composed ot two equal
squares, having a diagonal ot \ 5 length, which is the joint length ot two reciprocal golden
rectangles, (tig. 14)

l)l/K^CKS(yy\, - of I ■.'2,- rr,mpa>^*'. -. : A t-tct .i y-^^ e.

Fig. 14. Visu.il cquiv.ik-nts of IN ilLigoriMn music ,il
h.iriiioiiK's .nul coiistriK tiKii nt the ^dklcu \ci lion.

niNMU.N 1\ PI AN I s ')

6/8

? .-3 = 0 (,66
d . 0.048

Pursuing further the role ot dinergy in musical harmonies, we find the 1:2, 2:3 and 3:4
proportions reappearing in the tirst and strongest overtones, also called partials or harmonics,
which reverberate within every musical sound, blending with its fundamental tone, as if
additional, invisible strings were being plucked simultaneously, accompanying and complementing the fundamental. It is this dinergic joining ot harmonics with the fundamental that
gives musical sounds their fullness, vitality and beauty — referred to as timbre — and distinguishes
them trom mere noise, which lacks such dinergic harmony ot ditterent sounds. This dinergic
harmony can be represented graphically, as in tigure 15 where the vibrating string diagrams of
tigure 13 have been combined. (The small ditterence between the fitth's 2:3 = 0.666 ratio and
the exact ratio ot the golden section, 0.618:1 = 0.618, is 0.48, marked d in the drawing.) This
kind ot diagram, borrowed trom the dinergic harmonies ot vibrating strings, shall be used
throughout this book to illustrate instances ot similarly harmonious proportions.
Looking at the pattern of the keyboard in tigure 16, we recognize its harmonious, golden
proportions: there are 8 white keys, there are 5 black keys, and these black keys are in groups of
2's and 3's. The series 2:3:5:8 is, ot course, the beginning ot the Fibonacci series, the ratios ot
these numbers all gravitating toward the irrational and pertectly reciprocal 0.618 ratio ot the

Fig 15 H.irmoiuc overtones of vibrating
string .iiui the golJcn section.

golden section.
Our Western diatonic scales and chords are yet turther instances ot the 1:2, 2:3, and 3:4
proportions in the dinergy ot musical harmonies. The two chiet modes ot Western scales, the
minor (considered to be the sad one) and the major (associated with brightness) differ trom
each other only in the length ot steps between certain ot their intervals, just as the minor and
major parts ot the golden section ditter trom each other only in their lengths. And just as the
joining ot minor and major parts delights us in the visual harmonies ot the golden section, so the
joining ot minor and major scales, called tnodulanons, enchant us when we hear them in the
movement ot chords and melodies.
Every one ot the minor and major scales has its own variants, or degrees — so-called dominants and subdominants — with their own sets ot chords, and the relationship ot these to their
tonic counterparts again tollows the abtn-e proportums. Dominants start and end on the tltth

lU THE POWER OF LIMl

Fig. 17. H.iniionuHis proportions ot .1 liLic Icif.
interval \vom the kc\iiotr (the first note ot the sc.ile). .ukI suhJoniinants st.irt and end on the
tourth interval.
It would go beyond the limits ot this present.ition — .md also hevond the limits ot the author's
expertise — to ilelve into turther details c^t dinergv and analogies ot visual proportions m
musical harmonies. However, one more instance slunild be mentioned: counterpeiiiu. In counterpoint, the dinergic )oining ot two or nu-ire ditterent, often contrarv nuisica! lines unite and
complement e.ich other while preserving their own identities, much like dinergicallv loined
spir.ils create visible h.irmonies m the daisv and the sunflower.''
l et us now look further into plant growth m the light ot what we've seen about music. d
harmony. Figure 17 is .1 rubbing taken tnun the b.ick side of a lilac le.it. ni.igram B shows that
the distances between the starring points ot the veins along the imdrib group themselves in a
h.irnn-mic order, like org. in pipes. I'he dist.mces between consecutive veins marked 1 to \0 m
diagr.im C form .1 simil.ir series. I hese distances .ind their groupings h.ive been lined up hv
neighboring p.urs in di.igram D. Their proportion.d rel.itionships t.ill within the narrow limits
ot the golden sectuMi's proportional rate (t.618 . . . .ipproxim.ited hv 5:8 = ().62.S (dash-dotted
line) and the .^:4 = 0.75 proportum of the pent.igiMi.d P\ thagore.ui 3-4-.^ tri.mgle. correspiMidmg
to the diapente and the di.itess.iron music.il h.irmonies.
These rel.itionships reveal growth patterns that .ire h.irmonious and dmergic in the sense that
all the minors ,ind m.ijors (large .iiid sm.ill veins .md br.inches) unite with their neighbors in
propiirtions limited to r<itu'>s ot the s.ime sm.ill whole numbers which create the root harmonies
ot music. Simil.irlv dmergic and h.irmonious growth processes can be observed in the shaping ot
le.ives tnher th.m the lil.ic.
niNER(;v IN l'L.^^■ls n

B Bloodleaf plant
hig. 18. Kccoiistriit tioii of leaf outlines.
12 / THE POWER OF LIMITS

In figure IH the outlines oi <i random selection ot leaves were reconstructed with the dinergic
method ot combined radiatnig and rotating lines. It one looks at these patterns not .is still
pictures but as traces ot" the dinergic process which brought them into being, then the outlines
ot these leaves become their story, recorded m the silent huiguage ot patterns.
The outlines ot" the rhododendron leaf (A) start trom the stem at the center with two rising
circles, moving trom one radius to the next. This pace increases to three circles at midspan,
only to slow down again to two, winding up with approximately 1 1/3 at the tip ot the leat.
This is the lite story ot the lanceolate leat pattern.
The rounded or orbiculate leaf of the bloodleaf plant (B) is produced by a ditterent pattern.
The contour starts bv crossing tive circles while moving trom the tirst radius to the second, and
this rhythm gradually decreases to three, then to two circles, tinally slowing down to one <n
maturation.
The two halves ot the begonia leat (C) develop at ditterent rates, making it characteristically
asymmetrical. Yet other varieties ot harmonious patterns are created by diverse rates ot
development in the quinquefoliolate leat ot the Japanese maple (D), the lobed leaves ot pelargonium (E), and the Concord grape leaf (F). In these latter two patterns, only the enveloping
outlines have been reconstructed, though the component details could very likely be drawn in a
similar manner. Finally, the cordate leaf of the lilac (G) starts by moving through tour circles
withm the span ot the tirst two radii, then it slows down to three, to two, and to one, only to
take a last heroic spurt, rising three circles betore the end.
These are just a tew examples ot leat outlines, tracing pattern-torming processes similar to
those that shape daisies, suntlowers, the tlowers ot edible truits, and musical harmonies. They
indicate that the same dinergic harmonies that delight our eyes in the shape ot leaves and
tlowers also enchant our ears in the chords and melodies ot music.
This chapter has ranged tar and wide in the pursuit ot dinergy, the energy-creating process
that transforms discrepancies into harmonies by allowing ditterences to complement each
other. Dinergy accomplishes this through the power of certain proportions, analogous to
musical and root harmonies, well-known since antiquity, chiet among them being the golden
section.
The power ot the golden section to create harmony arises trom its unique capacity to unite
the ditterent parts ot a whole so that each preserves its own identity, and yet blends into the
greater pattern ot a single whole. The golden section's ratio is an irrational, intinite number
which can only be approximated, yet such approximations are possible even within the limits ot
small whole numbers. This recognition tilled the ancient Pythagoreans with awe: they sensed in
it the secret power ot a cosmic order. It gave rise to their beliet in the mvstical power ot
numbers. It also led to their endeavors to realize the harmonies ot such proportions in the
patterns ot daily lite, thereby elevating lite to an art.

DINERGY IN PLANTS / \^

