introduction

When I was about 15 years old, I decided I wanted to be a composer, rather than a
physicist or mathematician. I had recently switched from classical piano to electric
guitar, and although I exhibited no obvious signs of compositional talent, I was fascinated by the amazing variety of twentieth-century music: the suavely ferocious Rite of
Spring, which made tubas sound cool; the encyclopedic Sgt. Pepper, which contained
multitudes; the hypnotic repetitions of Philip Glass, whose spirit seemed also to infuse
the music of Brian Eno and Robert Fripp; and the geeky sophistication of art rock
and new wave. I was aware of but intimidated by jazz, which seemed to be perpetually
beyond reach, like the gold at the end of a rainbow. (Told by my guitar teacher that
certain chords or scales were jazzy, I would inevitably ﬁnd that they sounded ﬂat and
lifeless in my hands.) To a kid growing up in a college town in the 1980s, the musical
world seemed wide open: you could play The Rite of Spring with your rock band, write
symphonies for electric guitars, or do anything else you might imagine.
I was somewhat surprised, therefore, to ﬁnd that my college teachers—famous
academics and composers—inhabited an entirely different musical universe. They
knew nothing about, and cared little for, the music I had grown up with. Instead,
their world revolved around the dissonant, cerebral music of Arnold Schoenberg and
his followers. As I quickly learned, in this environment not everything was possible:
tonality was considered passé and “unserious”; electric guitars and saxophones were
not to be mixed with violins and pianos; and success was judged by criteria I could
not immediately fathom. Music, it seemed, was not so much to be composed as constructed—assembled painstakingly, note by note, according to complicated artiﬁcial
systems. Questions like “does this chord sound good?” or “does this compositional
system produce likeable music?” were frowned upon as naive or even incoherent.
I studied many things in college: seventeenth-century masses, eighteenth-century
Lutheran chorales, and twentieth-century avant-garde music. I learned about
Heinrich Schenker, who purported to reduce all good tonal pieces to a small number of basic templates. I absorbed mathematical tools for constructing and deconstructing atonal compositions. But I did not learn anything whatsoever about jazz,
Debussy, Ravel, Shostakovich, Messiaen, or minimalism. In fact, even the music of
Wagner and Chopin was treated with a certain embarrassment—acknowledged to be
important, but deemed suspiciously illogical in its construction. Looking back, I can
see that the music I encountered was the music my teachers knew how to talk about.
Unfortunately, this was not the music I had come to college wanting to understand.
Twenty years later, things are different, and a number of the barriers between musical styles have fallen. Many composers have returned to the tonal ideas that my own

xviii

Introduction

teachers deemed irrelevant. Electric guitars now mix freely with violins, and everything
is indeed permitted. But despite this new freedom, tonality remains poorly understood. We lack even the most rudimentary sense of the musical ingredients that contribute to the sense of “tonalness.” The chromatic music of the late nineteenth century
continues to be shrouded in mystery. We have no systematic vocabulary for discussing
Debussy’s early 20th-century music or its relation to subsequent styles. Graduate students in music often know nothing about bebop, or about how this language relates
backward to classical music and forward to contemporary concert music. As a result,
many young musicians are essentially ﬂying by the seat of their pants, rediscovering for
themselves the basic techniques of modern tonal composition.
The goal of this book is to understand tonality afresh—to provide some new theoretical tools for thinking about tonal coherence, and to illuminate some of the hidden
roads connecting modern tonality to that of the past. My aim is to retell the history
of Western music so that twentieth-century tonality appears not as an aberration, the
atavistic remnant of an exhausted tradition, but as a vital continuation of what came
before. I hope that this effort will be useful to composers who want new ways to write
tonal pieces, as well as to theorists, performers, and analysts who are looking for new
ways to think about existing music.
While my primary audience consists of composers and music theorists, I have
tried to write in a way that is accessible to students and dedicated amateurs: technical
terms are explained along the way, and only a basic familiarity with elementary music
theory (including Roman numeral analysis) is presumed. (Specialists will therefore
need to endure the occasional review of music-theoretical basics, particularly in the
early chapters.) More than anything else, I have attempted to write the sort of book
I wish had existed back when I ﬁrst began to study music. It would make me happy
to think that these ideas will be helpful to some young musician, brimming with
excitement over the world of musical possibilities, eager to understand how classical
music, jazz, and rock all ﬁt together—and raring to make some new contribution to
musical culture.

PART I

Theory

This page intentionally left blank

chapter 1

Five Components of Tonality
The word “tonal” is contested territory. Some writers use it restrictively, to describe
only the Western art music of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. For them,
more recent music is “post-tonal”—a catch-all term including everything from Arvo
Pärt’s consonances to the organized sonic assaults of Varèse and Xenakis. This way
of categorizing music makes it seem as if Pärt, Varèse, and Xenakis are clearly and
obviously of a kind, resembling one another more than any of them resembles earlier
composers.
“Tonal” can also be used expansively. Here, the term describes not just eighteenthand nineteenth-century Western art music, but rock, folk, jazz, impressionism, minimalism, medieval and Renaissance music, and a good deal of non-Western music
besides. “Tonality” in this sense is almost synonymous with “non-atonality”—a
double negative, most naturally understood in contrast to music that was deliberately written to contrast with it. The expansive usage accords with the intuition that
Schubert, the Beatles, and Pärt share musical preoccupations that are not shared by
composers such as Varèse, Xenakis, and Cage. But it also raises awkward questions.
What musical feature or features lead us to consider works to be tonal? Is “tonality” a
single property, or does it have several components? And how does tonality manifest
itself across the broad spectrum of Western and non-Western styles? Faced with these
questions, contemporary music theory stares at its feet in awkward silence.1
The purpose of this book is to provide general categories for discussing music
that is neither classically tonal nor completely atonal. This, in my view, includes
some of the most fascinating music of the twentieth century, from impressionism to
postminimalism. It also includes some of the most mysterious and alluring music of
Chopin, Liszt, and Wagner—music that is as beloved by audiences as it is recalcitrant
to analytical scrutiny. My goal is to try to develop a set of theoretical tools that will
help us think about these sophisticated tonal styles, which are in some ways freer and
less rule-bound than either eighteenth-century classical music or twentieth-century
modernism.

1 Fétis (1840/1994), who popularized the term “tonality” in the early nineteenth century, was one of the
ﬁrst scholars to try to provide a general account of the phenomenon. (For more on the early history of the
term “tonality” see Simms 1975 and Dahlhaus 1990.) More recently, Joseph Yasser (1975), Richard Norton (1984), William Thomson (1999), Brian Hyer (2002), Carol Krumhansl (2004), and Matthew Brown
(2005) have offered different perspectives on the subject.

4

theory

More speciﬁcally, I will argue that ﬁve features are present in a wide range of
genres, Western and non-Western, past and present, and that they jointly contribute
to a sense of tonality:
1. Conjunct melodic motion. Melodies tend to move by short distances from note
to note.
2. Acoustic consonance. Consonant harmonies are preferred to dissonant
harmonies, and tend to be used at points of musical stability.
3. Harmonic consistency. The harmonies in a passage of music, whatever they
may be, tend to be structurally similar to one another.
4. Limited macroharmony. I use the term “macroharmony” to refer to the total
collection of notes heard over moderate spans of musical time. Tonal music
tends to use relatively small macroharmonies, often involving ﬁve to eight notes.
5. Centricity. Over moderate spans of musical time, one note is heard as being
more prominent than the others, appearing more frequently and serving as a
goal of musical motion.
The aim of this book is to investigate the ways composers can use these ﬁve features
to produce interesting musical effects. This project has empirical, theoretical, and
historical components. Empirically, we might ask how each of the ﬁve features contributes to listeners’ perceptions of tonality: which is the most inﬂuential, and are
there any interesting interactions between them? For instance, is harmonic consistency more important in the context of some scales than others? Theoretically, we
might ask how the various features can in principle be combined. Is it the case, for
example, that diatonic music necessarily involves a tonic? Conversely, is chromatic
music necessarily non-centric? Finally, we can ask historical questions about how
different Western styles have combined these ﬁve tonal ingredients—treating the features as determining a space of possibilities, and investigating the ways composers
have explored that space.
This book is primarily concerned with the theoretical and historical questions.
I am a musician, not a scientist, and although I will sometimes touch on perceptual
issues, I will largely leave empirical psychology to the professionals. Instead, I will
ask how composers have combined and might combine the ﬁve features. Part I of the
book develops theoretical tools for thinking about the ﬁve features. Part II uses these
tools to argue for a broader, more continuous conception of the Western musical
tradition. Rather than focusing narrowly on the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries
(the so-called “common practice period”), I attempt to identify an “extended common practice” stretching from the beginning of Western counterpoint to the music of
recent decades. The point is to retell the history of Western music in such a way that
the tonal styles of the last century—including jazz, rock, and minimalism—emerge as
vibrant and interesting successors to the tonal music of earlier periods.
My central conclusion is that the ﬁve features impose much stronger constraints
than we would intuitively expect. For example, if we want to combine conjunct
melodic motion and harmonic consistency, then we have only a few options, the most
important of which involve acoustically consonant sonorities. And if we want to

Five Components of Tonality

combine harmonic consistency with limited macroharmony, then we are led to a collection of very familiar scales and modes. Thus the materials of tonal music are, in
Richard Cohn’s apt description, “overdetermined,” in the sense that they are special or
distinctive for multiple different reasons.2 This suggests that when we look closely, we
should ﬁnd important similarities between different tonal styles: since there are only
a few ways to combine the ﬁve features, different composers—from before Palestrina
to after Bill Evans—will necessarily use the same basic techniques. In the second part
of this book I make good on this claim, tracing common practices that connect the
earliest examples of Western counterpoint to music of the very recent past.

1.1

the five features

Let’s consider the ﬁve features in more detail, with an eye toward understanding
why they might be so widespread throughout Western and non-Western music.
A preference for conjunct melodic motion likely derives from the features of the auditory system that create a three-dimensional “auditory scene.”3 An eardrum, in effect,
is a one-dimensional system that can only move back and forth. From this meager
input our brains create a vivid three-dimensional sonic space consisting of individually localized sounds: the phone ringing in front of you, the honk of a car horn
outside your window, and the sound of a droning music theorist off to your right.
To accomplish this dazzling transﬁguration, the brain relies on a number of computational tricks, one of which is to group sonic events that are nearby in pitch.4 Thus,
a sequence like Figure 1.1.1a tends to be heard as belonging to a single sound source,
whereas Figure 1.1.1b creates the impression of multiple sources. In this sense, small
melodic steps are intrinsic to the very notion of “melody.”
Acoustic consonance, or intrinsic sonic restfulness, is another very widespread musical feature.5 Figure 1.1.1 Small movements
Many styles make heavy use of consonant inter- sound melodic (a), while large
vals such as the octave and perfect ﬁfth, assign- registral leaps create the impression
of multiple melodies (b).
ing them privileged melodic and harmonic roles.
Scales containing a large number of consonant
intervals are found in seemingly independent
musical cultures, and there is evidence from infant
psychology that the preference for consonance
is innate.6 At present, however, we do not know
2 See Cohn 1997.
3 See Bregman 1990, Narmour 1990, and Vos and Troost 1989. Huron 2007 contains data about statistical properties of Western melodies, including conjunct melodic motion.
4 Wessel (1979) suggests that the relevant variable might be the “spectral centroid,” which in normal
listening circumstances is highly correlated with pitch.
5 Izumi (2000) and Hulse et al. (1995) indicate that nonhuman animals such as monkeys and birds can
distinguish consonance from dissonance.
6 Crowder, Reznick, and Rosenkrantz 1991, Zentner and Kagan 1996 and 1998, Trainor and Heinmiller
1998, Trainor, Tsang and Cheung 2002, and McDermott and Hauser 2005.

5

6

theory

for certain how universal or innate this preference is. Fortunately, this issue is largely
irrelevant in the present context: what matters is just that many listeners, both Western
and non-Western, do have a fairly deep-seated preference for consonant sonorities.
Slightly more general than acoustic consonance is harmonic consistency, or the use
of sonorities that resemble one another. For example, Figure 1.1.2a features a series
of major and minor chords, all audibly similar. Their resemblance gives the passage
a kind of smoothness, and we experience the chords as belonging together. Likewise,
Figure 1.1.2b uses a series of very dissonant chromatic clusters that also seem to
belong together. By contrast, Figure 1.1.2c uses very different-sounding harmonies,
switching aimlessly between different sonic worlds. This sort of harmonic incongruity is quite unusual in Western music, and often provokes spontaneous laughter—
suggesting that the expectation of harmonic consistency is very strong, even though
it is rarely discussed.
Figure 1.1.2 Harmonic consistency using consonant sonorities
(a) and dissonant sonorities (b). Sequence (c) does not exhibit
harmonic consistency.

In most Western and non-Western music, pitches are drawn from a relatively
small reservoir of available notes—typically, between ﬁve and eight.7 As a result,
Western music has a two-tiered harmonic consistency: at the local (or instantaneous)
level, a passage like Figure 1.1.3 presents a series of major and minor chords, which
are audibly related, while over larger time spans it articulates a scale by using only
seven different notes. The scale can thus be considered a kind of “large” or macro
harmony that subsumes the individual chords.8 Even though there is no one instant
at which this larger harmony is presented, it nevertheless has a signiﬁcant effect on
our listening experience: scale-based melodies are easier to remember than nonscalar
melodies, and notes outside the scale sound more pungent than notes in the scale. As
we will see, macroharmonies can be relatively consonant, like the diatonic or pentatonic scale, or relatively dissonant, like the chromatic scale. They can also participate
in larger-level voice leadings analogous to those connecting individual chords.
Finally, we often hear some pitches or notes as being more important (or “central”)
than others. These pitches tend to serve as points of musical arrival, to which others
are heard as “leading” or “tending.” Thus, one and the same sequence of notes—such
as that in Figure 1.1.4—can be heard in a variety of ways. If we hear it in a musical

7 Burns 1999 and Dowling and Harwood 1986. The range “ﬁve to eight” recalls familiar facts about the
limitations on human short-term memory (see Miller 1956 on “seven plus or minus two”).
8 Thanks to Ciro Scotto for suggesting this term.

Five Components of Tonality
Figure 1.1.3 Major and minor triads
belonging to the same diatonic scale.

Figure 1.1.4 A single melody will sound
different in different harmonic contexts.

context where C is the most stable pitch, then it sounds like a beginning that is in
need of some sort of continuation, ending with a comma rather than a period. But
in a context where F is stable, it sounds more complete, as if it ends with a period or
exclamation point. Centricity is again a very widespread feature of human music,
appearing in a large number of seemingly unrelated musical cultures. However, different styles can emphasize the tonic note to different extents: as Harold Powers once
noted, there is a much stronger feeling of centricity in Indian music than in Renaissance polyphony.9
Of these ﬁve features, harmonic consistency is clearly the most culturally speciﬁc.
The idea that music should consist of rapidly changing chords is a deeply Western
idea, in a double sense: it is deep, insofar as it characterizes much Western music
since before the Renaissance; and it is Western, since there are many cultures in which
the notion of a “chord progression” simply plays no role. (Many traditional nonWestern styles are purely monophonic, or feature an unchanging “drone” harmony;
however, there are now a large number of syncretistic styles that combine Western
harmonies with non-Western melodic and rhythmic ideas.) Acoustic consonance is
also somewhat culture-speciﬁc: although many cultures make some use of consonant
intervals, and although some have recognizably Western conceptions of consonance,
other non-Western styles sound quite dissonant to Western ears. By contrast, the three
other features—conjunct melodic motion, limited macroharmony, and centricity—
are common to virtually all human music. This near universality may be attributable,
at least in part, to features of our biological inheritance.10
Now for an important disclaimer. While I think that typical Western listeners prefer music that exempliﬁes the ﬁve features, I do not mean to suggest that such music is
intrinsically better than any other kind of music. “Tonal,” for me, is not synonymous
with “good.” (Nor is “popular,” for that matter: there is plenty of unpopular, nontonal
music that I happen to like, from Nancarrow to Xenakis to Ligeti.) In particular, I
have no interest in arguing that atonal composers are misguided, ﬁghting against
biology, or anything of the sort. Instead, the purpose of this book is an afﬁrmative
one: to develop new theoretical tools for thinking about tonality, and to provide new
insights into the relations between various musical styles. My hope is that this investigation will be useful to composers and theorists of all varieties, as even the advocates
of atonality will stand to gain from a deeper understanding of that which they are
trying to avoid.

9 Powers 1958.
10 Dowling and Harwood 1986, Narmour 1990.

7

8

theory

1.2

perception and the five features

This book is primarily concerned with what composers do, rather than what listeners
hear: the goal is to describe various ways in which the ﬁve features have been or might
be combined. But it is not possible to avoid perceptual issues altogether. After all, readers have a right to wonder whether my ﬁve features do indeed contribute to the experience of tonality, and if so, whether they are the only factors that contribute.
The ﬁrst question can be easily answered: all one needs to do is constrain randomly
generated notes according to each of the ﬁve features. Insofar as the constraints cause
random music to sound increasingly tonal, or at least ordered, then I am right about
their psychological importance. Furthermore, the same experiment can be used not
just to show that these features have important psychological effects, but also what
particular psychological effects they have. This is useful because familiar styles tend
either to combine many of the features, and hence be fully tonal in a traditional sense,
or else to abandon most of them à la radical atonality. Consequently, existing musical
works do not always help us to understand the speciﬁc contributions made by each
of our ﬁve components individually.
I strongly urge you to try this experiment for yourself: the results are not subtle,
and they demonstrate the powerful psychological effects that can be obtained with
simple musical means. (In particular, I encourage you to use the book’s companion website, which contains a number of illustrative examples.11) Unfortunately,
this is a case where a musical experience is worth a thousand words: no amount
of merely verbal description on my part will substitute for your own investigation.
Nevertheless, it is worth trying to describe these effects, if only to persuade you
to actually perform the experiment. Figure 1.2.1a presents a series of completely
random three-note chords, with pitches chosen arbitrarily from the range C2 to
C7. It provides a baseline against which subsequent examples can be judged. (Some
people, myself included, ﬁnd this sort of random texture to be oddly appealing.)
Figure 1.2.1b constrains the randomness by requiring that the notes move just a few
semitones from chord to chord. What results is very rudimentary sort of counterpoint, consisting of three independent melodic strands. Although it is considerably
less random-sounding than the pointillistic texture of (a), the harmonic structure
of the sequence still sounds somewhat indistinct, providing the ear with relatively
little to grab onto. Figure 1.2.1c combines conjunct melodic motion with harmonic
consistency, requiring that each chord be a “stack of fourths.” The melodic lines,
rather than wandering aimlessly, now seem to create chords with a distinctive harmonic identity, which in turn gives the passage a feeling of increased consistency.12
(This example might seem reminiscent of some Stravinsky or Hindemith.) Finally,

11 www.oup.com/us/ageometryofmusic
12 With a little practice it is easy to distinguish harmonically consistent sequences from those involving
random, unrelated chords. However, it should be said that some chords (such as the major triad or stack
of fourths) have a very distinctive sound, while others (such as C-Cs-Ds) are more generic. It takes more
compositional work to create a palpable sense of harmonic consistency using these generic chords.

Five Components of Tonality

Figure 1.2.1d restricts the chords to the same diatonic scale. To complete the transition from utter randomness to something recognizably tonal, I have replaced the
“fourth chords” of (c) with more consonant diatonic triads. Although the result will
not win any composition prizes, it does demonstrate that a kind of rudimentary
tonalness is in fact generated by my ﬁve features. Indeed, the differences between
Figures 1.2.1a–d are striking and unmistakable, even for a layperson with no specialized musical training.
Informal experiments like these suggest that, for typical listeners, the ﬁve features
play an important role in determining the tonalness (or perhaps “orderedness”) of
musical stimuli. Furthermore, I strongly suspect that for many listeners, “tonalness,”
“orderedness,” and “pleasantness” are correlated: all else being equal, music displaying
many of the ﬁve features will be preferred to music that does not.13 This constitutes
the testable psychological theory lurking at the core of this book. Personally, I think
it would be interesting to try to determine not just that the ﬁve features have important psychological effects, but also their relative importance. What makes a larger
difference to listeners’ perceptions, harmonic consistency, acoustic consonance, or
conjunct melodic motion? We lack even the most rudimentary data that would allow

Figure 1.2.1 Four randomly generated sequences. Sequence (a) is completely random;
(b) exhibits efﬁcient voice leading; (c) exhibits harmonic consistency and efﬁcient
voice leading; (d) exhibits harmonic consistency, efﬁcient voice leading, and limited
macroharmony.

13 Some preliminary studies, conducted by John Muniz, Cynthia Weaver, and Asher Yamplosky (graduate students at Yale University), suggest that conjunct melodic motion may contribute more to “orderedness” than “pleasantness.” Disentangling these issues is a subject for future research.

9

10

theory

us to answer this question. One of my hopes is that some psychologist readers will
be motivated to undertake the obvious experiments suggested by the ideas I will be
discussing.
Figure 1.2.1 shows that the ﬁve features can contribute fairly dramatically to the
sense of tonality. But are they necessary for creating tonal effects? And if so, are they
the only such features or are there others?
In some ways, I think the question is misguided. The point here is not to police
the use of the word “tonality” by setting strict limits on what may or may not be
described with the term, but rather to replace the crude opposition “tonal/atonal”
with a more nuanced set of distinctions. You can decide for yourself whether to use
“tonal” to describe (say) diatonic music without a tonal center, or chromatic music
with a strong sense of harmonic consistency; my job is just to show that the term
“tonality” typically applies to music that exhibits my ﬁve basic features. I should also
point out that I am neglecting important issues such as rhythm, motivic variation,
timbre, form, performance, and rubato, all of which can contribute to the sense of
tonality. (My goal is not to provide a complete theory of all music, but rather to
discuss a few general features whose musical importance is for the most part unquestioned.) That said, however, I confess that it is difﬁcult for me to imagine that I would
ever want to use the term “tonal” to describe music in which acoustic consonance
plays no role, in which there is no conjunct melodic motion or harmonic consistency,
in which no tone is heard as central, and which does not limit itself to a relatively
small number of pitch classes over short stretches of time. In this sense, it seems that
at least some of the ﬁve features are necessary for tonality, at least as I personally
understand it.
Throughout the twentieth century, composers devised new musical languages—
some idiosyncratic, some very widely used—intended to replace traditional tonality.
It is instructive to subject these alternative systems to the experimental test described
above: that is, to constrain random musical notes according to their basic principles,
and to listen for the perceptual differences that result.14 To that end, Figure 1.2.2 uses
“constrained randomness” to investigate one of the most prominent alternatives to
tonality, the twelve-tone system.15 On a ﬁrst (or even tenth) listening, I do not ﬁnd
the sequences in Figure 1.2.2 to be dramatically different from randomly generated
sequences such as Figure 1.2.1b. Indeed, if someone were to present the three passages
in a psychology experiment, I doubt I would notice that one was random while
the other two were not. This is not to say that twelve-tone structure makes no audible
difference, or that one cannot learn to hear the coherence in Figure 1.2.2, but rather

14 It is exceedingly difﬁcult to judge the effects of a musical syntax if we only encounter it in the context
of complete compositions, since compositional skill may mask the contributions of the syntax itself.
15 Figure 1.2.2a uses three successive rows to generate a sequence of 12 three-note chords. Figure 1.2.2b
sets the row in counterpoint against its inversional and retrograde-inversional forms, producing a series
of 12 three-note chords. I have borrowed the 12-tone row from Schoenberg’s ﬁrst consistently twelve-tone
piece, his Op. 25 Suite for piano.

Five Components of Tonality

11
Figure 1.2.2
Randomly
generated twelvetone music.

that the psychological effects here are relatively subtle—considerably less dramatic
than those produced by our ﬁve features.
Does this show that twelve-tone music is aesthetically problematic? Or that the
twentieth-century quest for alternatives to traditional tonality is fruitless? Not at all.16
But it does suggest that twelve-tone rows produce less powerful psychological consequences than harmonic consistency, conjunct melodic motion, acoustic consonance,
macroharmony, and centricity.17 And while twelve-tone music is just one twentiethcentury musical system, similar comments might be made about other approaches.
To my mind, this suggests that the ﬁve features are unusually powerful tools for creating musical coherence. To say this is not to deny that alternative tools may in principle
exist, but simply to reiterate the basic point that tonality constitutes a fairly unique
solution to some elementary compositional problems. If this is right, then the task of
providing an alternative to tonality is much more difﬁcult than one might intuitively
have imagined.

1.3

four claims

The argument of this book revolves around four basic claims, each of which concerns
ways in which the ﬁve features can interact with or constrain one another. In this
section I’ll brieﬂy outline these claims as a way of foreshadowing some of my central
preoccupations.

16 First, it is possible that there are gifted listeners who respond strongly and immediately to the nonrandom features of the sequences in Figure 1.2.2. Second, it is possible that with extensive training ordinary listeners can sensitize themselves to the sequences’ structure—as when one gradually starts to discern
the details in an all-gray painting. Third, it is possible that there are speciﬁc compositional techniques that
can make twelve-tone structure psychologically transparent. Fourth, it is possible that some listeners simply enjoy random pitch structures. And ﬁfth, it is possible that twelve-tone music can be attractive in ways
that make up for any potential absence of interesting pitch structure.
17 Schoenberg (1975, p. 215) observed that “composing [using twelve-tone techniques] does not
become easier, but rather ten times more difﬁcult” (see also Dubiel 1997).

12

theory

1.3.1 Harmony and Counterpoint Constrain
One Another
Imagine a composer, Lyrico, who would like to combine conjunct melodic motion
with harmonic consistency; that is, he would like to write melodies that move by
short distances while using harmonies that are structurally similar to one another.
Intuitively, it might seem that there are innumerable ways to satisfy these two constraints—that there is an entire universe of syntaxes consistent with these fundamental principles. But in fact, there are just a few ways in which they can be combined.
Consider the simplest possible situation. Suppose Lyrico decides to combine an
unchanging “drone” harmony with a moving melodic voice. Harmonic consistency
is thus obtained trivially: the chords in the passage will all be similar because there
is only one chord. Let us further imagine that Lyrico chooses to use a C major chord
as his drone. If he were to conﬁne the melody to the notes of this chord, the result
would be a series of unmelodic leaps (Figure 1.3.1a). This is because its notes are all
reasonably far apart. To obtain conjunct melodic motion, Lyrico can therefore introduce “passing tones” that connect the chord tones by short melodic steps. The result,
shown in Figure 1.3.1b, is a scale covering an entire octave, in which successive notes
are connected by relatively small distances, and in which chord tones alternate with
nonchordal “passing tones.” Lyrico can now write melodies that move freely along
this scale, alternating between stable and unstable notes.
But suppose Lyrico wakes up
Figure 1.3.1 (a) Conﬁning a melody to the notes
one day in a more ornery mood
of the C major chord produces large leaps, so it is
and decides to use the dissonant
necessary to add “passing tones” (b).
chromatic cluster {B, C, Df} as
his drone. Here the compositional
situation is reversed: where the
major chord is consonant, and has
its notes spread relatively far apart,
this chord is very dissonant and has
all its notes close together. Consequently, by conﬁning himself to the
notes of the chord, Lyrico can obtain conjunct melodies, as in Figure 1.3.2. However,
it takes a large number of passing tones to connect the Df in one octave to the B in the

Figure 1.3.2 (a) Conﬁning a melody to the notes of the cluster
{B, C, Df} produces conjunct melodic motion, but changing
octaves requires a large number of passing tones (b).

Five Components of Tonality

13

next. Since the resulting scale does not exhibit a regular alternation of stable “chord
tones” and unstable “passing tones,” it is difﬁcult to hear the nonharmonic tones as
connective devices that simply decorate an underlying harmony.
These two examples suggest a general moral: harmony and melody constrain one
another. Different types of chords suggest different musical uses. In particular there is
a fundamental difference between chords like {C, E, G}, whose notes are all far away
from each other, and chords like {B, C, Df}, whose notes are clustered close together.
When a chord’s notes are clustered close together, it is possible to create conjunct
melodies that use only the chord’s notes, but it is not possible to create scales that
have a regular alternation between chord tones and passing tones. When a chord’s
notes are relatively spread out, it is not possible to create conjunct melodies by using
only the notes of the chord, but it is possible to create scales with a nice arrangement
of chord and non-chord tones.
Now consider a more sophisticated problem. Suppose Lyrico decides to write a
C major chord followed by an F major chord, its transposition by ascending perfect
fourth. As shown in Figure 1.3.3, every note in the C major chord is near some note
in an F major chord: C is common to both,
E is one semitone from F, and G is two semi- Figure 1.3.3 (a) Every note of the
tones from both F and A. This means that C major triad is near some note of
Lyrico can write a sequence of C and F major the F major triad. (b) It is possible to
use a series of C and F major triads to
chords that articulates three separate melodies,
construct three simultaneous melodies.
each moving by small distances. This is counterpoint—a group of simultaneous melodies,
or voices, articulating mappings, or voice leadings, between successive chords. For example,
the ﬁrst voice leading in Figure 1.3.3b maps
G to A, E to F, and C to C. This voice leading is efﬁcient because all the voices move by
short distances. Clearly, efﬁcient voice leading
is simply conjunct melodic motion in all parts
of a contrapuntal texture.
As it happens, the major chord is particularly well suited for contrapuntal music.
Figure 1.3.4 shows that any two major chords can be connected by stepwise voice leading in which no voice moves by more than two semitones. This means that Lyrico can
write a harmonic progression without worrying about melody; that is, for any sequence

& œœ b œœ œœ # œœ œœ b œœ œœ # œœ œœ œœ œœ b œ œœ œœ œœ b b œœ œœ œœ œœ œœ œœ # # œœ
& bœ
œ
œ œ œ b œ œ œ œ œ œ b b œœ œ œ œ œ œ # œ œ b œ œ œ

Figure 1.3.4 Any
two major triads
can be linked by
stepwise voice
leading; in the
case of the tritone,
this requires
four voices.

14

Figure 1.3.5
Chromatic
clusters cannot
always be linked
by efﬁcient voice
leading.

Figure 1.3.6
Chromatic
clusters allow
conjunct melodic
motion to be
combined with
harmonic stasis.

theory

of major triads, there is always some way to connect the notes so as to form stepwise melodies. Conversely, Lyrico can write any melody whatsoever without worrying
about harmony, as there will always be some way to harmonize it with a sequence of
efﬁcient voice leadings between major chords.
But what if Lyrico writes the chromatic cluster {B, C, Df} followed by {E, F, Gf},
its transposition by ascending fourth? Here, none of the notes of the ﬁrst chord are
within two semitones of any note in the second, and hence there is no way to combine
a sequence of these chords so as to produce conjunct melodies (Figure 1.3.5). At the
same time, however, the chromatic cluster can do things that the C major chord can’t:
Figure 1.3.6 shows that it is possible to write contrapuntal music in which individual
melodic lines move by short distances within a single, unchanging harmony. Clearly,
this is possible only because the chord’s notes are all clustered together, ensuring that
there is always a short path between any two of them. The resulting music produces
a feeling of burbling within stasis, a kind of melodic activity within overall harmonic
restfulness.18
Once again, we see that different kinds of chords are useful for different purposes.
Chords that divide the octave very unevenly, such as {B, C, Df}, are ideally suited
for static music in which harmonies do not change. By contrast, chords that divide
the octave relatively evenly, like C major, can be connected to their transpositions
by efﬁcient voice leading, and are therefore suited for
contrapuntal music in which harmonies change quickly.
Remarkably, the most nearly even chords in twelve-tone
equal temperament are the familiar chords of Western music: perfect ﬁfths, triads, seventh chords, ninth
chords, and familiar scales. Besides being well suited for
contrapuntal music, these chords are all acoustically consonant, or restful and stable-sounding. This, then, is an
example of Cohn’s “overdetermination,” a situation in
which a familiar musical object is remarkable for multiple reasons: nearly even chords are interesting not just
because they permit the combination of harmonic consistency and conjunct melodic motion, but also because
they can be acoustically consonant.19
More generally, it would seem that composers who
wish to combine harmonic consistency and conjunct
melodic motion have relatively few options: they can either use familiar sonorities in
more or less familiar ways, or they can use chromatic chords whose notes are clustered

18 This sort of texture was popularized during the 1960s by composers such as Ligeti and Lutosławski;
precursors to the technique include Bartók’s Out of Doors (“Night Music”) and Ruth Crawford Seeger’s
String Quartet.
19 This observation has been made by Agmon (1991) and Cohn (1996), in the special case of the triad.
Both writers explained the specialness of the triad in terms of the way it is embedded in a larger collection.
In the following chapters, I provide an account that applies to consonant chords more generally and that
does not presuppose embedding into a larger scale.

Five Components of Tonality

together. The next few chapters will elaborate on this point, using the notion of near
symmetry to explain exactly how chord structure constrains contrapuntal function.
Later chapters will trace the practical consequences of this interdependence, considering a range of superﬁcially different styles, from Renaissance polyphony to contemporary jazz, and showing that they all utilize fundamentally similar procedures. Our
theoretical work will demonstrate that these similarities are not simply the byproduct
of historical inﬂuence, but also of the more fundamental ways in which the ﬁve features constrain one another. In other words, they testify to the fact that there are only
a few ways to combine harmonic consistency and stepwise melodies.

1.3.2 Scale, Macroharmony, and Centricity are
Independent
My second claim is that we need to distinguish the closely related phenomena of
scale, macroharmony, and centricity. A scale, as I use the term, is a means of measuring musical distance—a kind of musical ruler whose unit is the “scale step.” Relative
to the C diatonic scale, the notes E and G are two scale steps apart, since there is
precisely one white note between them (Figure 1.3.7).20 These same notes are one
step apart relative to the pentatonic scale C-D-E-G-A and three steps apart relative
to the chromatic scale. Similarly, C and E are two steps apart relative to the diatonic
and pentatonic scales, and four apart relative to the chromatic scale. The three scales
therefore give us three different ways of measuring musical distance, and three different estimates of the relative sizes of the intervals C-E and E-G. In principle, we should
not ask whether the intervals C-E and E-G are “the same size” unless we also specify a
particular musical “ruler.” As we will see, the richness of tonal music lies partly in the
way it exploits these various conceptions of musical distance.
If a scale is a musical ruler, then a macroharmony is the total collection of notes
used over small stretches of musical time. Typically, macroharmonies are also scales: a
composer might (for example) use only the white notes on the piano keyboard, while
also exploiting the unit of distance deﬁned by adjacent notes (the “scale step”). But in

Figure 1.3.7 Scale steps provide a means of measuring musical distance. The intervals C-E
and E-G are two steps large relative to the diatonic scale (a), two and one steps large relative
to the pentatonic scale (b), and four and three steps large relative to the chromatic scale (c).

20 Here and elsewhere, I use the term “C diatonic scale” to refer to the notes of the C major scale (i.e.
the white notes) without suggesting that the note C is special in any way. I use the term “C major” (or “C
ionian”) in contexts where C is a tonal center.

15

16
Figure 1.3.8
The music
makes use of two
scales to create
a chromatic
macroharmony.

theory

principle it is possible to separate the
two phenomena. Figure 1.3.8 shows a
passage of “polytonal” music in which
the upper staff moves systematically
along the C diatonic scale, while the
lower staff moves along Gf pentatonic. To explain how this music works, we need to postulate two different scales, one
for each staff. (Of course it would be possible to combine the notes in both staves into
a single chromatic scale, but the resulting collection would be useless for explaining
why the individual voices move as they do.) Here, then, is a passage of music that uses
pentatonic and diatonic scales to create a chromatic macroharmony. The concept of
“scale” allows us to describe the structure within each voice, while the concept “macroharmony” allows us to describe the global harmony they produce.
A second fundamental distinction is between macroharmony and centricity. “Centricity” refers to the phenomenon whereby a particular pitch is felt as being more
stable or important than the others. (In traditional tonality this is the tonic note; in
modal theory, it is the “ﬁnal.”) Chapters 4 and 5 will suggest that macroharmony and
centricity are completely independent: it is entirely possible, for example, to write
diatonic music in which no note is heard as a tonal center, just as one can write chromatic music with a very clear center. There is, however, a strong historical association between the two, with diatonic music often being centric and chromatic music
centerless. The explanation for this connection lies in the fact that some prominent
musicians believed that the diatonic scale had a unique “natural” tonic, and hence
that a centerless chromaticism was the main alternative to traditional tonality. Other
musicians, believing that centricity and macroharmony were independent, felt free to
explore a much wider range of scales and modes. Chapter 5 will thus propose that the
cleavage between the “scalar” and “chromatic” traditions, exempliﬁed by composers
such as Debussy and Schoenberg, was exacerbated by a fundamental disagreement
about the relationship between macroharmony and centricity.
Together, scale, macroharmony, and centricity are the three principal components of what I think of as the “general theory of keys”—a set of tools for describing
music that is tonal in the broad sense, even though it may not conform to the speciﬁc
conventions of eighteenth-century tonality. One of this book’s goals is to consider
various sorts of “generalized keys” in Western music. Particularly interesting here is
the gradual emergence of a musical language that combines a wide variety of macroharmonies and tonal centers. The earliest Western music explored the tonal centers contained within a relatively static and largely diatonic macroharmony (Figure
1.3.9).21 Classical music, which reduced the available modes to just major and minor,
created large-scale harmonic contrasts by juxtaposing different scalar collections (e.g.
G major and C major). It was only in the last decades of the nineteenth century
that these two procedures were combined, as composers began to feel free to use any

21 The presence of unnotated accidentals (musica ﬁcta) complicates matters somewhat.

Five Components of Tonality
Figure 1.3.9 (a) In earlier music, composers emphasized different centers within a single
ﬁxed diatonic collection. (b) In classical music, composers restricted the available modes to
two, creating long-term harmonic change by emphasizing different major or minor scales.
(c) Only in the twentieth-century were these two techniques systematically combined,
creating a much wider range of tonal areas to choose from.

of the seven modes of any of the twelve diatonic collections. This scalar vocabulary
was further extended with the use of additional nondiatonic scales—including the
pentatonic, whole tone, melodic minor, harmonic minor, and octatonic—creating
hundreds of possible combinations of macroharmony and tonal center. What results
is a dazzling proliferation of “generalized keys” providing a wealth of alternatives to
traditional major and minor modes.

1.3.3 Modulation Involves Voice Leading
My third claim is that tonal music makes use of the same voice-leading techniques
on two different temporal levels: chord progressions use efﬁcient voice leading to link
structurally similar chords, and modulations use efﬁcient voice leading to link structurally similar scales.22 As a result, tonal music is both self-similar and hierarchical,
exploiting the same procedures at two different time scales.
Figure 1.3.10 shows the opening of the last movement of Clementi’s D major
Piano Sonata, Op. 25 No. 6. The two parallel phrases present a series of three-voice
chord progressions: I–V6–I followed by I–IV–I and then V7/V–V. The bottom staff
shows that we can ﬁnd a higher-level harmonic motion relating two diatonic collections: the ﬁrst six measures limit themselves to the seven notes of D major, while the
rest of the phrase abandons the Gn in favor of the Gs. As we will see in Chapter 4, this
modulation, or motion between macroharmonies, can be represented as a voice leading in which the Gn moves by semitone to Gs. This means that the music exhibits two
sorts of efﬁcient voice leading: on the level of the half measure, there is a sequence of
eight efﬁcient voice leadings between triads; while on a larger temporal level there is a

22 This is not all that modulation does, of course, but it is typically part of it.

17

18

theory

Figure 1.3.10
Two levels of
voice leading in
Clementi’s Op. 25
No. 6.

single efﬁcient voice leading between D major and A major scales, occurring somewhere near the seventh measure of the example.
Figure 1.3.11 shows that similar processes occur in twentieth-century music. The
top system depicts the main theme of Debussy’s prelude “Le vent dans la plaine,”
which uses the pitches of Ef natural minor. When the theme returns, Bf moves by
semitone to Bff, producing a collection that is enharmonically equivalent to Fs
melodic minor ascending. Debussy’s “modulation” is thus analogous to Clementi’s,
although it involves modes that Clementi himself would never have used. Here, then,
we have a familiar tonal technique appearing in the context of a signiﬁcantly expanded
modal vocabulary. As we will see in Chapter 9, this same technique has been used by
a number of twentieth-century composers, including Stravinsky, Shostakovich, and
the minimalists. There are also a few non-Western styles that use voice leading to link
closely related scales.23
The idea that tonal music is hierarchically self-similar is central to the work of
Heinrich Schenker, who claimed that tonal pieces consisted of recursively embedded
patterns. The theory I have described is similar to Schenker’s insofar as I consider

23 Morton 1976 and Hall 2009.

Five Components of Tonality

19
Figure 1.3.11
Voice leading
between
macroharmonies
in Debussy’s
“Le vent dans la
plaine.”

tonal music to utilize efﬁcient voice leading at two temporal levels. Unlike Schenker,
however, I view macroharmonies and scales (rather than chords or melodic lines)
as the primary vehicles of long-range harmonic progression: for me, the long-term
voice leading in Figure 1.3.10 connects the D and A major scales rather than D and A
major tonic triads. By contrast, a Schenkerian would likely interpret the passage—and
indeed the entire piece—as involving chord progressions at all hierarchical levels. In
Chapter 7 I will return to these issues, suggesting that my approach, though perhaps
less uniﬁed than Schenker’s, more closely reﬂects the cognitive processes involved in
composition.

1.3.4 Music Can Be Understood Geometrically
My fourth claim is that geometry provides a powerful tool for modeling musical
structure. This is because there exists a family of geometrical spaces that depict the
voice-leading relationships among virtually any chords we might care to imagine.
Some of these (such as the familiar “circle of ﬁfths”) are relatively simple, but others (such as the Möbius strip containing two-note chords) are considerably more
complex. One goal of the book is to provide a user-friendly introduction to these
musico-geometrical spaces, explaining how they work, and showing how they allow
us to visualize a wealth of musical possibilities at a glance.
Suppose, by way of illustration, that our friend Lyrico decides to write music using
only the seven triads in the C diatonic collection. After a little exploration, he ﬁnds
that some of these are closer together than others: for example, he can turn a C major
triad into an A minor triad by moving only one note by one diatonic step, whereas
he must move each voice to turn C major into D minor (Figure 1.3.12). Pondering
this a little further, Lyrico eventually realizes that the diatonic triads can be linked in a
“circle of thirds” (Figure 1.3.13), where each chord can be connected to its neighbors
by a single-step motion. This circle allows him to deﬁne a kind of “distance” according

20

Figure 1.3.12
Voice leading
between diatonic
triads.

Figure 1.3.13
Single-step voiceleading between
diatonic triads
can be modeled
with a circle.

theory

to which C major and A minor are one step apart (since they are adjacent on the circle)
while C major and D minor are three steps apart (since there are two chords between
them).
Now suppose that Lyrico’s rival Avanta becomes frustrated with all this conservatism. “Why limit yourself to just the triads in that one seven-note scale?” she asks,
stamping her foot. “There’s a whole world out there beyond
the white notes, you know!” Avanta then proceeds to demonstrate some of the musical possibilities not represented in
Lyrico’s simple circular model: she shows that in the familiar chromatic scale, the C major chord can be linked to four
separate triads by single-semitone voice leading, and to seven
triads by a pair of semitone steps (Figure 1.3.14). What is the
analogue, in Avanta’s expanded musical world, to Lyrico’s circular map? How can she depict the voice-leading possibilities between all the triads
in the chromatic scale?
The answer turns out to be surprisingly complicated: instead of a simple sevenchord circular model, Avanta needs the three-dimensional, 40-chord lattice shown in
Figure 1.3.15. This ﬁgure provides a map of all the contrapuntal possibilities available to a composer who wants to use traditional triads, but is willing to step outside
the conﬁnes of a single diatonic scale. This complex-looking construction provides
the ﬁrst hint that ordinary musical questions might sometimes lead to nontrivial
geometrical answers. In fact, Chapter 3 shows that Avanta’s lattice lives in what mathematicians would call “the interior of a twisted triangular two-torus,” otherwise
known as a triangular doughnut. This space contains all possible three-note chords
in any conceivable scale and any conceivable tuning system. Analogous spaces depict

Five Components of Tonality

21
Figure 1.3.14
(a) Onesemitone voice
leading and (b)
two-semitone
voice leading
among triads.

Figure 1.3.15 This three-dimensional graph represents single-semitone voice leading
between major, minor, augmented, and diminished triads—represented by dark spheres,
light spheres, dark cubes, and light cubes respectively. Chords on the same horizontal crosssection are related by major-third transposition; vertical motion corresponds to semitonal
transposition, and the top face is glued to the bottom with a 120° twist. We will explore this
ﬁgure more thoroughly in Chapter 3.

voice-leading relations among four-note chords, ﬁve-note chords, and so on. We will
use them throughout this book, both for modeling chords and scales and for analyzing speciﬁc pieces.
For now, it is enough to note that the world of chromatic voice leading, as represented by Figure 1.3.15, is signiﬁcantly more complicated than the simple circle
representing diatonic triads. Because of this complexity, the fundamental logic animating nineteenth-century music has not always been clearly understood: theorists
have sometimes depicted chromaticism as involving whimsical aberrations, departures from compositional good sense, rather than as the systematic exploration of a
complex but coherent terrain. This has in turn led historians and composers to depict
nineteenth-century chromaticism as pushing tonal logic to its breaking point, such
that the step to complete atonality became all but inevitable. I will argue against this
point of view, using new geometrical tools to demonstrate that the music of Chopin
and Wagner can be just as rigorous as the music that preceded it.

22

theory

1.4

music, magic, and language

Having sketched some major themes, let me now step back to make a few remarks
about my approach to music theory. In this book I am primarily interested in the
idealized composer’s point of view: my goal is to describe conceptual structures
that can be used to create musical works, rather than those involved in perceiving
music. I stress the adjective “idealized,” as my goal is not to undertake a historical investigation of the way past composers actually conceived of their music, but
rather to describe concepts contemporary composers might ﬁnd useful—in other
words, to answer the question “what concepts would be helpful if I wanted to compose music like this?” Music theory, understood in this way, helps composers steal
from one another in a sophisticated fashion, allowing us to appropriate general
procedures and techniques rather than particular chords or melodies. Of course
it can also help performers and analysts understand music “from the inside,” by
showing how composers make use of the options available to them.
Of course, composer-based music theory cannot ignore listeners entirely: the
point is to write music that other people want to listen to, and this can only occur
if composers are dealing with musical features that listeners care about. But though
composers and listeners need to be synchronized in general, there is room for considerable divergence when it comes to the details. For example, classical composers
evidently considered it important to conclude a piece in the tonic key, even though
listeners are relatively insensitive to this feature of musical organization.24 This means
that theorists should not assume that the cognitive structures involved in making
music are the same as those involved in perceiving it: ideas that are central to the composer’s craft, such as the principle that a classical sonata should recapitulate the second theme in the tonic key, may have only a glancing relevance to ordinary listeners.
I ﬁnd it useful here to consider the analogy with magic. A stage magician uses various tricks to cause the audience to have extraordinary experiences—bunnies seem to
disappear, beautiful assistants seem to be sawed in half, and so on. Enjoying a magician’s performance does not require you to understand how the tricks are done; in
fact, understanding may actually diminish your astonishment. Nor is the magician’s
“ideal audience” composed of professional magicians: the point is to perform the
trick for people who will genuinely be fooled. In much the same way, I understand
composition to be a process of using technical musical tools to ensure that audiences
have certain kinds of extraordinary experiences. When composing, I make various
choices about chords, scales, rhythm, and instrumentation to create feelings of tension, relaxation, terror, and ecstasy, to recall earlier moments in the piece or anticipate later events. But I do not in general expect listeners to be consciously tracking
these choices. Listeners who do (“ooh, a dissonant s9 chord in the trombones, in
polyrhythm against the ﬂutes and inverting the opening notes of the piece!”) are like
professional magicians watching each others’ routines—at best, engaged in a different

24 Cook 1987, Marvin and Brinkman 1999.

Five Components of Tonality

sort of appreciation, and, at worst too intellectually engaged to enjoy the music as
deeply as they might.
One might contrast this approach with an alternative, on which the composer’s
and listener’s perspectives are thought to be more closely aligned. Here the relevant
analogy is not to magic, but to language: the idea is that composers write music that
contains various sorts of patterns, including familiar sequences of chords and keys,
thematic recurrences, and so on, while the listener’s job is to recover these patterns.
Expert listeners recover more patterns than inexpert listeners, and are consequently
more qualiﬁed to pass aesthetic judgment on particular pieces of music. Insofar as
some composers place patterns in their music that cannot be decoded aurally by
expert listeners, their compositions are thereby aesthetically ﬂawed.25 On this view,
music essentially involves a language-like transmission of syntactic patterns from
producer to receiver.
The linguistic model is attractive, and there is no doubt some truth to it. But I
think it understates the extraordinary distinctiveness of human language. Linguistic
abilities are remarkable both for their accuracy and for their homogeneity: if you say
“there is a tiger nearby,” I have no trouble repeating the sentence word for word, writing it down, or explaining what it means. Furthermore, almost any English speaker
can effortlessly distinguish grammatical utterances such as “there is a tiger nearby”
from nongrammatical ones like “nearby tiger is.” By contrast, musical abilities are
both heterogeneous and fairly inaccurate. First, there is an enormous spectrum ranging from congenital amusics to gifted listeners with extraordinarily accurate absolute pitch. These individuals have radically different musical capabilities as both
producers and consumers of music. Second, while competent language-listeners
are typically also competent language-speakers, this is not the case for music: most
people enjoy listening to music, while only a few enjoy creating it. Third, even expert
listeners lose a large amount of the “signal” in even moderately complicated music.
I have had more than three decades of musical training, and yet I—like most other
“expert” listeners—would have trouble notating, or recreating at the piano, the notes
and rhythms in a ten-second excerpt from an unfamiliar four-voice Baroque fugue.
Musically, in other words, I am analogous to a person who cannot reliably understand all the words in the sentence “there is a tiger nearby.”26
These differences no doubt reﬂect the fact that music largely lacks semantic content. A listener who does not understand “be quiet, there’s a tiger nearby” is a serious
danger to himself and others; consequently, there is tremendous pressure for speakers and listeners to converge on the same interpretation of sentences. By contrast, a
listener who does not follow the detailed syntax of a Beethoven symphony, but who
nevertheless enjoys it, creates no problems whatsoever. In some important sense it

25 See Babbitt 1958, Lerdahl 1988, Raffman 2003, and Temperley 2007.
26 Of course, musical signals are in some respects more complex than spoken sentences: listening to a
Bach fugue is like listening to four people speak at the same time. But this should make us wonder why we
tolerate higher information content in music.

23

24

theory

simply does not matter whether you follow all the details of a piece’s syntax; what matters is that you follow the piece well enough to enjoy what you hear. For in the end,
the composer’s well-being depends on your willingness to listen, not on whether you
interpret music in the same way that he or she does. Or to revert to our earlier analogy: what is important is not that you understand the magic trick, but simply that
you feel the force of the illusion.
I should pause here to mention that I have a personal perspective on these
issues, since I sometimes create music with the aid of algorithms and computers.
In these cases I can be fairly removed from the underlying syntactical structure
of the music I create, whether that be some complex melodic process, a gradually
shifting probability distribution over the twelve chromatic notes, or a harmonic
structure derived from a mathematical analysis of Mozart’s music. Here my compositional role is that of a gatekeeper or judge, selecting the computer-generated
passages that strike me as intuitively compelling, and arranging them, in a collagelike fashion, so as to produce the best musical effect. (Typically, I augment these
algorithmic passages with music composed intuitively, producing a ﬁnal product that blends the human and the inhuman.) The fact that some people seem to
like this music only serves to highlight the oddness of the linguistic approach. For
here the composer is only vaguely aware of the structures that, on the linguistic
model, the listener is supposed to be recovering. Given that I am not at all sure
that I am hearing these structures accurately, it seems presumptuous for me to
demand much more from my listeners. Instead, I am hoping that listeners will
be directly affected by the music in the same way I am—that is, tickled, amused,
impressed, or awed.
Faced with this situation, I draw several morals.
First, there is a potential for real divergence between what we might call “composer’s grammar” and “listener’s grammar.” Listeners may potentially grasp only a
fraction of the underlying syntax of a Bach fugue, a Beethoven symphony, or a John
Coltrane solo. (Some authors have claimed that this is particularly true when we consider the artiﬁcial syntaxes of twentieth-century atonality, and this may be true; but
the more important point is that there will be signiﬁcant gaps whenever we consider
music of any complexity.27) In this sense, listening is like trying to catch up to a train
that is forever just beyond your reach; indeed, the very fact that we miss so much
structure is no doubt part of what leads us to study scores, or listen repeatedly to
the same pieces. This means that there are at least two separate projects that music
theorists can engage in: modeling what composers actually do, and modeling what
listeners actually experience. We should be careful not to conﬂate these by acting as if
listening is “composing in reverse.”

27 See Lerdahl (1988, 2001) and Raffman (2003). Lerdahl asserts that it is desirable for “composer’s
grammar” and “listener’s grammar” to be close together, and suggests this is true for classical music. Furthermore, he postulates lossless musical perception, in which listeners have subconscious but completely
accurate access to most of the details in a musical score. He therefore believes the gap between composer
and listener is signiﬁcantly less severe than I do.

Five Components of Tonality

Second, we should be careful not to assume that there is any one thing that “listening” is. It is possible that some listeners are adept at recovering a large amount of the
structure in muscial pieces, but many listeners are not. The heterogeneity of musical
abilities makes it difﬁcult to abstract away from individual variation in favor of some
idealized “competent” listener. Can we describe as “competent” the listener who loves
Beethoven, but who performs poorly on standard ear-training tests? What about the
listener who hates music but perceives it very accurately? Does the “ideal” musical
listener have absolute pitch? A perfect memory for every musical detail? Is the point of
listening to music to experience aesthetic enjoyment, or is it to recover a kind of musical “syntax” that the composer placed in his or her music? Personally, I suspect there is
no uncontroversial answer to these questions: there simply is no “competent” or “ideal”
listener that is analogous to the “idealized speaker” of contemporary linguistics.
Third, listeners’ perceptions may in some respects be more crude and statistical than we would initially think. We do not determine the meaning of sentences
by estimating the proportion of nouns to verbs, but we do respond very strongly to
relatively crude global features of the musical stimulus. Does the piece use consonant
or dissonant harmonies? Does it restrict itself, over moderate spans of musical time,
to a small set of notes, and do these notes themselves change over larger time spans?
Do melodies in general move by short distances? The answers to these questions tell
us an enormous amount about how untrained listeners will respond to a piece. Hence
my ﬁve features might be compared to a set of basic tools which composers can use
to perform their musical magic.
Fourth, musical heterogeneity poses special problems for composers, who confront an audience of widely varying interests and abilities. Traditional tonal composers dealt with this by writing music that was immediately attractive, largely by virtue
of exploiting the ﬁve features. Many composers also built into their music layers of
additional, more complicated structure—complex thematic and formal interrelationships, intricate rhythmic devices, sophisticated contrapuntal tricks, and so on.
The result was a kind of music that listeners could engage with in multiple ways:
laypersons could simply enjoy a piece for the gross statistical features it shared with
many other compositions in the same style, while cognoscenti could become more
involved in the subtleties particular to that work.
I ﬁnd it fascinating that so many twentieth-century musicians chose to abandon this strategy. Composers such as Schoenberg, Webern, Berg, and Varèse—and
later Babbitt, Boulez, Cage, Xenakis, and Stockhausen—wrote music that listeners often found quite unpleasant. In many cases, this was because these composers rejected not just acoustic consonance, but also harmonic consistency, conjunct
melodic motion, limited macroharmony, and centricity. Some early modernist composers may have hoped that ordinary listeners would adapt to this new musical style,
adjusting their ears to the absence of familiar musical structures and coming to enjoy
atonality as deeply and directly as traditional music. But after several decades of
avant-garde exploration, composers began to realize that this might never occur. The
locus classicus of this new perspective is Milton Babbitt’s 1958 manifesto “Who Cares
if You Listen?”—in which he cheerfully acknowledged that his music was not enjoyed

25

26

theory

by laypersons, but only by a specialist musical community analogous to the specialist
community of professional mathematicians.28
Rather than criticizing this point of view, let me just say that I am interested
in music that does not make this choice: I like music that brings people together,
rather than dividing them, and I think the traditional strategy—writing immediately
attractive music that also contains deeper levels of structure—is as potent as it ever
was. (Indeed, it may be all the more necessary in an economic and cultural environment in which notated music is somewhat marginal.) In this book, therefore, I will
be primarily concerned with effects that can be achieved within a broadly attractive sound-world. From a technical standpoint, this restriction is relatively unconstraining, as a large number of avant-garde techniques are easily applied within a
consonant harmonic context: it is perfectly possible, for example, to write music that
is diatonic, or more generally macroharmonically consonant, while also being serial,
aleatoric, indeterminate, wildly polyrhythmic, and so on.29 Thus, the choice between
superﬁcial accessibility and off-putting dissonance is not forced on us by our interest
in particular musical techniques. Instead, it is a relatively independent reﬂection of
our own aesthetic preferences.

1.5

outline of the book, and a suggestion for
impatient readers

The book is divided into two halves, with the theoretical material front-loaded into the
ﬁrst ﬁve chapters. Chapter 2 reviews basic theoretical concepts and introduces simple
geometrical models of musical structure, representing pitches as points on a line and
pitch classes as points on a circle. These models are then used to investigate the relations between conjunct melodic motion, harmonic consistency, and acoustic consonance. Chapter 3 introduces higher-dimensional “maps” of musical space, providing
powerful tools for visualizing the interactions between harmony and counterpoint.
Chapter 4 introduces scales, describing them as musical “rulers” that allow musicians
to measure the distance between notes; it then identiﬁes a set of familiar scales that are
interesting for a number of distinct reasons. Finally, Chapter 5 describes the components of the generalized theory of keys. It proposes various tools for representing macroharmony and centricity, and contrasts two traditions in twentieth-century music:
the chromatic tradition, which largely abandons scales in favor of highly chromatic
textures, and the scalar tradition, which makes use of an expanded range of scales and
modes. Since Chapters 2–4 are the most technically demanding portion of the book,
Appendix F provides a series of study questions to help reinforce the material. These
questions make good homework assignments when the book is used in a classroom.

28 Babbitt 1958.
29 Avant-garde techniques have been used in consonant contexts by composers like Conlon Nancarrow,
Paul Lansky, Steve Reich (Cohn 1992), and “totalists” such as Mikel Rouse (Gann 2006).

Five Components of Tonality

The second part uses these ideas to reinterpret the history of Western music.
Chapter 6 proposes that there is an “extended common practice” stretching from the
beginning of Western counterpoint to the tonal music of the twentieth century. What
links these different styles is the combination of harmonic consistency and conjunct
melodic motion: the idea that music should have a two-dimensional coherence, both
harmonic (or vertical) and melodic (or horizontal). Chapter 7 uses geometrical models to investigate the functional harmony of the classical period, brieﬂy considering
the relation between traditional harmonic theory and the views of Heinrich Schenker. Chapter 8 explores the ways in which nineteenth-century composers exploited
efﬁcient voice leading in chromatic space, suggesting that there is more structure
to chromatic music than we might expect. Chapter 9 argues that twentieth-century
tonal composers used scales to counteract the trend toward a saturated chromaticism,
fusing chromatic voice-leading techniques with the limited macroharmony of earlier
periods. Finally, Chapter 10 treats what I call the “modern jazz synthesis,” a contemporary common practice that unites impressionist chords and scales, chromatic voice
leading, and the functional harmony of the classical era.
The design of the book means that readers will need to absorb a considerable
amount of theoretical material before reaching the analytical payoff in the second
half. Readers who are less interested in theory for its own sake may therefore want
to read the book out of order. Chapter 8 can largely be read directly after Chapters 2
and 3, although the discussion of Tristan will be enhanced by familiarity with the
material in §§4.8–10. Chapter 9 can be read directly after Chapter 4. This abbreviated
path hits the main theoretical highlights (new tools for understanding voice leading
and scales), as well as the most important analytical applications: to the chromatic
tonality of Schubert, Chopin and Wagner, and to the twentieth-century scale-based
tonality of Debussy, Stravinsky and Reich. When using the book in an advanced
undergraduate theory class, I have assigned pieces from Chapters 8–9 as homework
assignments early in the semester, while students are still reading the introductory
chapters. (For instance, I assign Chopin’s E minor prelude and F minor mazurka in
the week when students are reading Chapter 3.) That way, students have an opportunity to work with the music on their own before being introduced to my own particular perspective on these remarkable works.
Finally, a word of encouragement: it is possible to understand the gist of later chapters even while remaining somewhat fuzzy about the technical material in Chapters 2–4.
So don’t be afraid to forge ahead, returning to earlier sections as the need arises.

27

