chapter 9

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music
While nineteenth-century chordal procedures can be stunningly sophisticated, the
exploration of modality and nondiatonic scales tends to be relatively cautious by
comparison. As a result, the music often has an asymmetrical quality, combining
intensive investigation in one domain with a seeming indifference toward another.
Indeed, this asymmetry between chord and scale may help to explain why latenineteenth-century composers start to ﬂirt with atonality: for as we have just seen,
omnipresent chromatic voice leading can start to weaken the sense of centricity and
macroharmony, dissolving tonality in the universal solvent of semitonal motion.
Insofar as one’s musical world is circumscribed by the opposition between chromatic
counterpoint and functional harmony, and insofar as one resolves to avoid functional
harmony altogether, then one will inevitably be driven out onto the seas of relentless
chromaticism.
In this chapter I consider three techniques that twentieth-century composers
used to counteract chromaticism’s pull. The ﬁrst, chord-ﬁrst composition, exploits
efﬁcient chordal voice leading to generate a sequence of otherwise unrelated scales;
it thus augments nineteenth-century chordal procedures with additional scales that
piggyback on the chordal level. The second technique, scale-ﬁrst composition, uses
efﬁcient voice leading to connect scales rather than chords; the technique thus generalizes traditional modulation by extending nineteenth-century chordal practices
to a new scalar domain. Finally, there is the subset technique, which links scales by
way of common chords or common chord types. As we will see, this last technique is
intermediate between the ﬁrst two: when the shared subsets are small and chordlike,
it can be understood as a species of chord-ﬁrst composition; when they are large, it is
closer to scale-ﬁrst composition.
My ultimate goal here is to propose an alternative to historical narratives that
center on atonality and the avant garde. Reading these accounts, one sometimes
gets the sense that twentieth-century tonality is fundamentally static and backward-looking, as if the language had remained unchanged since the time of Brahms
and Wagner. My own view, by contrast, is that the nineteenth century bequeathed
a genuine and pressing problem to subsequent composers, namely synthesizing its
contrapuntal innovations with the ﬁve components discussed in Chapter 1. As we
will see, a large number of twentieth-century musicians solved this problem in an
essentially similar way, using scales to ameliorate the destabilizing effects of chromatic motion. To my ear, the result is a tonality that is renewed, refreshed, and

308

history and analysis

clearly distinct from that of earlier centuries: listening to Debussy or Miles Davis or
Steve Reich, one recognizes a genuinely novel approach in which scales play a new
and fundamental role.

9.1

Figure 9.1.1
Scale-ﬁrst and
chord-ﬁrst
composition.

three scalar techniques

Central to all three techniques is what jazz theorists call the principle of chord-scale
compatibility, illustrated in Figure 9.1.1. Here, chords are understood as subsets of
familiar ﬁve-to-eight-note scales. (Jazz theorists would say that the chord and scale
are “compatible.”) Given this two-tiered structure, it is possible for one element to
take the lead, determining the changes that occur on the other level. This relationship
might be compared to that between harmony and counterpoint: although both elements are important, passages can
be more harmonic or more contrascale first
scale
scale
puntal, depending on which property seems to be controlling the
music at a particular time. In much
chord first
the same way, chord and scale can
chord
chord
at different points seize control over
the music’s fundamental logic.
A key component of this
approach is that scales are understood to be more than mere byproducts—that is,
they are recognizable objects in themselves, with their own syntactical role to play.
The top staff of Figure 9.1.2 provides an example in which scales might be described
as derivative: the second chord, with Af and Fs, is accompanied by the unusual
scale C-D-E-Fs-G-Af-B; the third chord, with Ds, is accompanied by the equally
unusual C-Ds-E-F-G-A-B. In this passage, the scales are parasitic on the chords,
being determined by the chordal accidentals; no attempt is made to produce a scale
that divides the octave evenly, or contains a large number of consonances, or possesses any of the other virtues discussed in Chapters 4 and 5. By contrast, the second staff accompanies the same chords with collections that possess desirable scalar
qualities. The presence of these “virtuous” scales suggests a compositional mind that
is attuned to both the chordal and scalar levels—a musical “twofoldness” that is our
current concern.
Turning now to the techniques themselves, in chord-ﬁrst composition, the chordal
level predominates: thus, an efﬁcient voice leading like (E, Gs, B, D)®(F, Af, Bf, D)
might give rise to an E acoustic scale (containing E7) followed by a Bf mixolydian
scale (containing Bf7). The second of Scriabin’s Op. 48 Preludes, composed in 1905,
provides a particularly clear example (Figure 9.1.3). The three upper voices contain a
standard nineteenth-century progression in which semitonal voice leading connects
D minor, Bf minor, and an incomplete C major seventh, C-E-B; however, Scriabin
departs from post-Wagnerian practice by assigning a different scale to each chord.
Chords seem to be leading the scales in the following sense: we can easily imagine

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music
Figure 9.1.2 The unfamiliar scales in the top staff simply apply the chords’ accidentals to the
underlying C diatonic collection, and do not suggest particular attentiveness toward scales as
such; by contrast, those on the second staff are quite familiar, and exhibit many of the virtues
discussed in Chapter 4.

Figure 9.1.3 Scriabin’s
prelude, Op. 48 No. 2,
in which efﬁcient voice
leading in the upper staff
gives rise to a series of
scales.

composing the efﬁcient chordal voice leadings prior to the scales, but it is much more
difﬁcult to imagine starting with the F, Df, and G diatonic scales, composing the
chords only later.1
By contrast, in scale-ﬁrst composition, music progresses by way of efﬁcient voice
leading between scales themselves. The opening of Ravel’s Ondine, shown in Figure
9.1.4, begins with a shimmering wash featuring the Cs mode of B acoustic, Cs-DsEs-Fs-Gs-A-B (“Cs mixolydian f6”).2 A series of single-semitone changes creates,
successively, Cs harmonic major, Cs diatonic, and Gs acoustic. (Note that many
of these collections are incomplete.) Unlike Scriabin’s piece, one gets the sense of a
distinctively scalar logic, as if Ravel deliberately moved between closely related scales
by changing one or two notes at a time. Figure 9.1.5 uses our familiar scale lattice to

1 Note that I am considering the notes As, Cs, and Ef to be nonharmonic.
2 See also Tymoczko 1997.

309

310

history and analysis
Figure 9.1.4 The opening of Ravel’s “Ondine,” from Gaspard de la nuit, suggests a series of
single-semitone voice leadings among familiar scales.

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music
Figure 9.1.5 Ravel’s
scales plotted on the
scale lattice.

show that Ravel systematically explores a small region of the space, moving between
nearby collections. This is just the efﬁcient chromatic voice leading of Chapter 8,
applied now to scales rather than chords.
Finally, the subset technique juxtaposes scales sharing some contextually salient set
of notes. For example, Debussy’s “Collines d’Anacapri” presents the opening pentatonic theme B-Fs-Cs-E-Gs-B in three distinct scalar contexts: B diatonic, E diatonic,
and E acoustic (Figure 9.1.6).3 One could say that the music has ﬁve “ﬁxed” scale
degrees (B, Cs, E, Fs, Gs) and two “mobile” degrees (D/Ds and A/As). This technique
can sometimes be hard to distinguish from the scale-ﬁrst technique: for example,
since all three scales in Figure 9.1.6 can be linked by efﬁcient voice leading, one could
in principle say that the music exempliﬁes scale-ﬁrst composition. But it is important
here that the “ﬁxed” collection comprises the main theme of the piece. In describing
this music as an example of the subset technique, I am therefore making the claim
that the subset relationship is more important than voice leading: common tones,
more than counterpoint, determine the modulations in the prelude.
Clearly, the subset technique is intermediate between the other two approaches.
When the subsets are small, we can think of the technique as a special case of chordﬁrst composition: where chord-ﬁrst composition features efﬁcient voice leading,
such as (C, E, G)®(B, E, Gs), the subset technique uses “trivial” voice leadings, such
as (C, E, G)®(C, E, G), in which all the voices are left unchanged. However, when
the subsets in question are large (as in “Collines d’Anacapri”) the subset technique
more closely resembles scale-ﬁrst composition. (This is simply because two scales
that share a large number of notes can typically be linked by efﬁcient voice leading.)
Musical context is important here: when composers emphasize the ﬁxed subset—for

3 See Tymoczko 2004 and Kopp 1997 for more thorough analyses.

311

312

history and analysis
Figure 9.1.6 In Debussy’s “Les collines d’Anacapri,” the pentatonic theme B-Fs-Cs-E-Gs-B
acts as a ﬁxed subset, and appears in the context of several different scales: B diatonic (a), E
diatonic (b), and E acoustic (c).

instance by using it in important themes or melodies—then we may want to highlight
shared subsets rather than voice leading; in other situations, however, it may be that
the voice-leading relationships are paramount. Thus the distinction between the subset technique and the others is one of emphasis rather than fundamental technique.
Of course, the three techniques all have their antecedents in earlier music. In the
nineteenth century, the chord-ﬁrst technique sometimes occurs across modulations:
for example, Figure 9.1.7 presents the modulation from exposition to development
in the ﬁrst movement of Schubert’s Bf-major sonata, D. 960; the semitonal voice
leading between F major and Cs minor chords drags the rest of the music along for
the ride, leading to a dramatic shift in scale and key. Chapter 7 argued that the scaleﬁrst technique is used in ordinary modulations between closely related keys. (That
is, the distance between keys is largely a function of the size of the voice leadings
between the relevant scales.) Figure 9.1.8 provides a rare nineteenth-century example
that employs nonstandard modes: here, the Cs phrygian theme of Chopin’s Mazurka,
Op. 41 No. 1, returns as the ﬁfth mode of Fs harmonic minor. Finally, Figure 9.1.9
presents an example of the subset technique, from Chopin’s Gf major Etude, Op. 10
No. 5. In this piece, the right hand plays only black keys, which act as a ﬁxed subset
contained in both the tonic dominant scales. (Again, the two scales are also related
by efﬁcient voice leading; the point is that Chopin emphasizes the ﬁxed subset compositionally.) These examples suggest that what is new in twentieth-century music is

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music

313

Figure 9.1.7 Chord-ﬁrst modulation in the transition from exposition to development of
Schubert’s Bf major Sonata, D. 960, movement I.

Figure 9.1.8 The scaleﬁrst technique in Chopin’s
Cs minor Mazurka, Op.
41 No. 1. The theme,
originally in Cs phrygian
(a), returns in the Cs
mode of Fs harmonic
minor (b).

Figure 9.1.9 The
subset technique
in Chopin’s Gf
major (“black
key”) Etude,
Op. 10 No. 5.
Throughout the
piece, the right
hand plays only
black keys, which
serve as a ﬁxed
subset common
to the two
primary scales in
the piece.

314

history and analysis

not the techniques themselves, but rather the willingness to apply them more consistently, more frequently, and to a much wider range of scales and modes.

9.2

chord-first composition

We’ll begin with examples in which the musical logic resides in chords rather than
scales: on their own, the scales need not have any particular signiﬁcance; instead, they
are related by virtue of the chords they contain.

9.2.1 Grieg’s “Drömmesyn” (“Vision”),
Op. 62 No. 5 (1895)
The opening of Grieg’s short piece, shown in Figure 9.2.1, is based on a progression
that uses descending semitonal voice leading to connect familiar seventh chords, one
that might easily appear in Chopin’s music. (In fact, it can be modeled on the fourdimensional lattice used in the previous chapter.) Unlike nineteenth-century composers, however, Grieg treats the chords as a skeleton to be ﬂeshed out by diatonic
scales. On their own, these scales would seem arbitrary, without discernable logic or
pattern. But when we consider the chords, their signiﬁcance is clear: the chords are
connected by semitonal voice leading, while the scales just happen to contain them.
A traditionalist might hear Grieg’s piece as moving successively through the keys
of A, Df, Gf, and C major. But to my ear, the seventh chords are stable objects in
themselves rather than unstable objects that need to resolve. This is, in part, because
of the piece’s static harmony and avoidance of V7–I resolutions. But it is also a function of the subtle and shifting relationship between melody, chord, and scale: in the
ﬁrst and third phrases, the melody starts on the added sixth of the underlying harmony, while in the second and fourth phrases, the melody starts on the chordal seventh. Furthermore, the chords themselves move relative to the purported tonic: the
bass of the ﬁrst chord is the ﬁrst scale degree of A major, the bass of the second chord
is the ﬁfth degree of Df major, and the bass of the third chord is the second degree of
Gf major. What results is an extremely subtle counterpoint between the scale, tonic,
and melody, in which the three elements never once move in parallel (Figure 9.2.2).
Given this complexity, my ear tends to gravitate toward the bass as the most stable
Figure 9.2.1 Grieg’s Lyric Piece “Drömmesyn”
(Vision), Op. 62 No. 5. The piece is built
around a series of efﬁcient voice leadings
between four-note chords (a), which give rise to
diatonic scales (b).

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music
Figure 9.2.1 (Continued)

Figure 9.2.2 Grieg’s piece articulates an abstract counterpoint between the melody’s starting
note, the diatonic collection, and the root or bass.

315

316

history and analysis

note—which means that I conceive the melody as successively beginning on the sixth
degree of A major, the seventh degree of Af mixolydian, the sixth degree of Af dorian,
and the seventh degree of G mixolydian.

9.2.2 Debussy’s “Fêtes” (1899)
Figure 9.2.3 outlines the basic voice leading in the central section of “Fêtes,” the second of Debussy’s orchestral Nocturnes. The music is largely sequential, with its 16-bar
model divided into two eight-bar halves. The harmonies in the ﬁrst half of the second
16-bar unit (chords 9–12 on the example) are transposed up by minor third, while
the rest of the phrase is transposed by tritone: instead of Bø7–G7–Bø7–Gs°7, we hear
Dø7–Bf7–Dø7–B°7. The last 16 bars of the section repeat the harmonies of the ﬁrst 16
bars, but now accompanied by the movement’s opening theme—a running scalar
passage featuring Gf, Ef, and A diatonic (Figure 9.2.4). As in Grieg’s piece, the theme
remains ﬁxed in register, beginning twice on Bf despite the change from Df7 to Bf7.
Figure 9.2.3
Voice leadings
in the middle
section of “Fêtes.”
Each measure
represents four
bars of music.

Figure 9.2.4
In the third
phrase of the
middle section
of “Fêtes,”
the opening
chords return,
though now
accompanied
by scales
articulating the
movement’s
main theme.

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music

Thus it begins successively on the third degree of Gf diatonic, the ﬁfth degree of Ef
diatonic, and the third and seventh degrees of A diatonic.
Figure 9.2.3 indicates the relevant interscalar transposition under each voice leading from half-diminished to dominant seventh. (Voice leadings from dominant seventh to half-diminished use a backwards arrow, labeling relative to the root of the
half-diminished chord.) We see that the music exploits all of the different types of
(crossing-free) voice leadings between the two types of chord, mapping the root of
the half-diminished to the third, ﬁfth, seventh, and root of the dominant seventh.4
The technique here is essentially that of Wagner’s Tristan, albeit now accompanied
by a variety of diatonic modes. It follows that we can use our four-dimensional geometrical models to describe the passage: Figure 9.2.5 shows that Debussy’s chords lie
on the adjacent vertices of two hypercubes, with the half-diminished sevenths appearing just above the b°7 chord, and the dominant sevenths just below.5 The voice leading
connecting Fø7 to Df7 (as well as Gsø7 to E7, and Dø7 to Bf7) moves one note by two
semitones, and passes directly through the diminished seventh chord to the chord on
the other side.6 The remaining voice leadings, such as Fø7®Bf7 and Df7®Dø7, move
two notes by semitone, and do not pass through the diminished seventh chord.
The procedures in “Fêtes” can be found throughout Debussy’s compositions, and
are particularly salient in the Prelude to “The Afternoon of a Faun” (Figure 9.2.6). This
testiﬁes to a signiﬁcant degree of continuity between Wagnerian Romanticism and
Debussian impressionism: we ﬁnd the same fascination with half-diminished and
dominant seventh chords, and the same systematic use of the various voice leadings
connecting them.7 The big difference, to my mind, lies in the two composers’ attitude
toward scales. For Wagner, chromatic voice leading is just that—a chromatic technique that invariably brings the chromatic scale into play at the melodic level. For
Debussy, these chromatic voice leadings occur at a much slower rate, and give rise to

Figure 9.2.5 A geometrical depiction
of Debussy’s chords.

4 In the actual music, some of these voice leadings are slightly disguised.
5 Compare with Figure 8.5.10 to see how this ﬁgure is contained in the more familiar structure.
6 The fact that Debussy restricts himself to these chords strongly suggests that his harmonic choices
were motivated by voice-leading facts, even though the relevant voice leadings are sometimes disguised.
7 Cf. Holloway 1982 and Pople 2001.

317

318

history and analysis
Figure 9.2.6 Efﬁcient voice leadings between half-diminished and dominant seventh chords
in Debussy’s Prelude to “The Afternoon of a Faun”: mm. 6–9 (a), 17–19 (b), and 44–46 (c).

additional scales at the musical surface. By remaining in a single scale for a signiﬁcant
length of time, Debussy endows his music with a simple, classicist quality that is in
marked contrast to the relentless churning of Wagnerian chromaticism.

9.2.3 Michael Nyman’s “The Mood That
Passes Through You” (1993)
For a more contemporary example, we turn to one of Michael Nyman’s cues for the
movie The Piano. Nyman’s music is not so much a traditional “piece” as it is a vignette
or musical moment, meant to fulﬁll a speciﬁc dramatic need. (Part of its interest, in
fact, lies in its vernacular quality, demonstrating that chord-ﬁrst composition has
become part of a broader common practice.) Figure 9.2.7 shows that the music has
two basic sections, each based on a repeating chord progression. In the ﬁrst, we hear

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music

Bf minor, D major, and E major triads, each in root position, and each lasting for two
measures. (Note that the right hand contains a concealed ostinato ﬁgure, indicated by
the beamed noteheads.) In the second, we hear a sequence of four descending triads,
ﬁrst gs6–e6–B@–A@, and then B–e6–B@–A@, with a root position B major triad substituting for the ﬁrst-inversion Gs minor. (This is of course the “third substitution” of
§7.2.) The voice leading is mostly parallel and owes more to popular music than to
classical. Nevertheless, it is easy to hear echoes of the nineteenth-century concern
for efﬁcient voice leading, particularly in the repeated juxtapositions of major-thirdrelated triads. Figure 9.2.8 shows that the ostensibly parallel voice leading articulates
semitonal connections in pitch space.
As in the previous example, chords give rise to scales at the musical surface. In the
ﬁrst part of the cue, the Bf minor triad is accompanied by Bf natural minor, while

Figure 9.2.7 Michael Nyman’s “The Mood that Passes Through You,” from the soundtrack to
the movie The Piano. The brackets indicate two instances of major-third juxtapositions: Bf
minor–D major, and Gs minor–E minor.

Figure 9.2.8 Nyman’s left-hand arpeggios articulate a semitonal voice leading between
major-third-related triads.

319

320

history and analysis

the D and E major triads are accompanied by A diatonic. In the second part, the Gs
minor and B major triads are accompanied by B diatonic, E minor is accompanied
by G acoustic, and A major is accompanied by D diatonic.8 (Of particular interest
here is the appearance of G acoustic, one of the most important nondiatonic collections in twentieth-century tonal music and a favorite of Debussy’s.) Once again,
the scalar logic seems secondary: it is chords rather than scales that are determining
the music’s progress.9 Comparable passages can be found throughout postminimalist music, in the works of composers such as Glass, Reich, Adams, Torke, and Lansky
(Figure 9.2.9).
Note that the major-third system appears in twentieth-century styles as
diverse as Russian modernism, American minimalism, and film music. (In particular, it plays a role in both Figures 9.2.7 and 9.2.9.) The progressions in our
examples—and in recent music more generally—are distinctive insofar as they
replace the major triads typical of Schubert’s music with minor triads that produce a more ominous and brooding sound, an effect that is often highlighted by
driving or asymmetrical rhythms. Figure 9.2.10, from Prokofiev’s Overture on
Hebrew Themes, exemplifies these qualities, juxtaposing Af minor, E major and
C minor triads over pulsating eighth notes.10 Figure 9.2.11 shows some related

Figure 9.2.9
Chord-ﬁrst
voice leading in
Adams’ Nixon
in China, Act
I, Scene I, mm.
141–148.

8 Most of the scales are incomplete—unsurprisingly, given the length of the excerpt.
9 However, it is true that G acoustic shares six notes with D diatonic, which in turn shares six notes
with A diatonic.
10 Thanks to Daniel Zimmerman for pointing me to this piece.

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music

321
Figure 9.2.10
Major-thirdrelated triads
in Prokoﬁev’s
Overture on
Hebrew Themes,
R42.

Figure 9.2.11
The major-third
system in (a)
the G minor
prelude from
Shostakovich’s
Twenty-four
Preludes and
Fugues, (b)
Philip Glass’
Einstein on the
Beach, and (c)
the opening
credits of the
2004 television
series Battlestar
Galactica.

322

history and analysis

passages from Shostakovich, Philip Glass, and television music, which combine
a Schubertian (or Wagnerian) harmonic sense with a rhythmic impulse whose
roots lie in Stravinsky and popular music.11 Taken together, they suggest a genealogy by which the major-third system passes from Schubert’s Vienna to contemporary America by way of Russian modernist composers like Prokofiev and
Shostakovich, acquiring in the process a darker, more ominous quality.

9.3

scale-first composition

Next, we’ll consider passages that extend nineteenth-century chordal techniques to
scales themselves, generalizing traditional modulation to a broader range of scales
and modes.

9.3.1 Debussy’s “Des Pas Sur La Neige”
(1910)
Figure 9.3.1 contains the score to Debussy’s “Des pas sur la neige” (“Footprints in the
Snow”). As shown in Figure 9.3.2, Debussy’s piece explores a collection of ﬁve closely
related scales, all containing the ostinato D-E-F.12 These can be considered a kind of
“tonic region,” since each provides a different coloring of a basically D minor tonality.
In addition, the piece also contains three other scales forming a contrasting harmonic
region—Af mixolydian, Af dorian, and C whole tone. The ﬁrst two are again related
by single-semitone voice leading, and emphasize Af, the note a tritone away from the
tonic D. None of these is particularly close to the ﬁrst network, and the two regions
are audibly quite distinct.
The ﬁrst transition between these regions is worth examining more closely.
In mm. 8–9, C7 alternates with Cs7, while in m. 11, G7 alternates with Gfmaj7 (Figure 9.3.3). This semitonal shifting leads us into the foreign scale area: the C7 of mm.
8–9 belongs to the F diatonic of mm. 1–3, while the Cs7 and Gfmaj7 belong to the
Gf diatonic of mm. 29–31. The next harmonic move, from Df diatonic to C whole
tone, occurs by way of the shared subset Gf-Af-Bf-C, emphasized by the left hand in
mm. 13–14. The subsequent whole-tone passage represents the piece’s greatest point
of distance from the opening diatonicism. The transition back to D natural minor
illustrates one of Debussy’s characteristic modulatory devices, the use of an acoustic
scale as an intermediary between whole-tone and diatonic collections. As shown in
Figure 9.3.3b, Bf acoustic shares ﬁve of the whole-tone scale’s six notes, while also

11 The overtly Romantic harmony in Figure 9.2.11c is unusual in Stravinsky’s own music.
12 For this reason, one could also consider Debussy’s piece as an example of the subset technique
described in §9.4. (This is essentially the approach taken in Tymoczko 1997.) However, successive scales
are typically linked by small voice leadings, suggesting that both techniques are in play.

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music

323
Figure 9.3.1
(1 of 2)
Debussy’s “Des
pas sur la neige.”

sharing six of the diatonic scale’s seven notes—a hybrid of whole tone and diatonic
that smoothes the transition between them.13
Figure 9.3.4 summarizes the relations among the prelude’s scales. On the left is the
tonic region, containing C and F diatonic, A and D harmonic minor, and Bf acoustic.
On the right we have the contrasting key area of Df and Gf diatonic, with C whole
13 See Whitall 1975.

324

history and analysis

Figure 9.3.1
(2 of 2)
Debussy’s “Des
pas sur la neige.”

tone connected to both regions. The music initially moves to the secondary region by
way of upward semitonal transposition, returning to the tonic area via the C wholetone scale. A substantial number of Debussy pieces are constructed around similar
networks of scales, including “Le vent dans la plaine,” “Les collines d’Anacapri,” “La
ﬁlle aux cheveaux de lin,” L’isle joyeuse, “Les sons et les parfums tournent dans l’air
du soir,” and “Voiles.” Indeed, Debussy’s use of these techniques is so pervasive and
systematic that one could easily write an entire book about the subject.14

14 For more, see Tymoczko 2004.

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music
Figure 9.3.2 The tonic region in “Des pas sur la neige” contains ﬁve scales that are near each
other on the scale lattice.

Figure 9.3.3 (a) The transition between the tonic (D-centered) scalar region and the
secondary (black-note) scalar region occurs by way of semitonal shift upward. (b) The
transition back occurs by way of the C whole-tone and Bf acoustic scales.

325

326

history and analysis

Figure 9.3.4
The scales in
“Des pas sur la
neige.”

9.3.2 Janáček’s “On an Overgrown Path,”
Series II, No. 1 (1908)
Janáček’s piece is similar in spirit to Debussy’s, though with a distinctive Eastern
European ﬂavor. Figure 9.3.5 provides the score for the opening, while Figure 9.3.6
summarizes its scalar content. The ﬁrst section uses a different scale for each phrase:
beginning with Ef harmonic major, we hear Ef harmonic minor, the Af “Gypsy”
scale (equivalent to Af harmonic minor with raised fourth scale degree), Ef major,
and what is either a whole-tone scale on Ef or the “Gypsy major” scale Ef-F-G-ABf-Cf-D. The next section changes the texture somewhat, introducing a pedal note
marked by triplet octaves. We hear a pair of diatonic collections (Cs dorian and Cs
natural minor) that are somewhat distant from the opening scales. Phrase 8 uses
interscalar transposition to shift phrase 7 into Ef harmonic major, creating a harmonic but not thematic recapitulation. Phrase 9 deepens the sense of recapitulation
by repeating the melodic and harmonic content of phrase 2, though with the initial
notes slightly altered (Ef-Gf-Ef rather than Ef-Af-F, reiterating the pattern established by phrase 1). Phrase 10 oscillates between Es and En, as if undecided between
B Gypsy and B harmonic minor.
Figure 9.3.6 arranges the piece’s eight scales into two networks, each connected by
single-semitone displacements. The tonic network contains scales that are a semitone
away from the initial Ef harmonic major, arranged in a hub-and-spoke design.15 The
15 If we were to examine seven-dimensional chord space, we would see that these “spokes” were all at
right angles to one another; since we cannot visualize seven dimensions, however, we need to ﬂatten the
space so that it lies in two dimensions.

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music
Figure 9.3.5 The opening of Janáček’s “On an Overgrown Path,” Series II, No. 1.

327

328

history and analysis

Figure 9.3.6
The scales in
Janáček’s piece.

nontonic network contains Cs dorian, Cs natural minor, B harmonic minor, and B
Gypsy, arranged like railroad cars rather than the spokes of a wheel. The two networks are closer together than those in Debussy’s prelude, since Cs dorian could be
connected to Ef harmonic minor by way of an Ef natural minor that does not appear
in the piece. Janáček’s scales are also somewhat more exotic, largely because he begins
with a harmonic major rather than diatonic collection; semitonal alteration thus generates a series of colorful scales that include Gypsy and Gypsy major.
Although somewhat tangential to our current concerns, it is worth noting that the
B section of Janáček’s piece recalls Chopin’s F minor Mazurka (Figure 9.3.7). Here we
have a 10-measure phrase in which a series of ﬁrst-inversion triads descend in a “staggered” fashion. (Note also the clever use of double counterpoint: the first half of the
melody begins on the ﬁfth of the underlying B minor triad, but the second half starts
on the root of the Gs minor triad.) Figure 9.3.8 represents its chords using the cubic lat-

Figure 9.3.7
The middle
section of
Janáček’s “On
an Overgrown
Path,” Series II,
No. 1.

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music
Figure 9.3.8 The middle section of Janáček’s piece, plotted on the portion of the cubic
lattice that is near (but not at) the center of three-note chord space. Here, capital and small
letters refer to major and minor triads, “b°” and “Bf+” are diminished and augmented triads,
“Df4” refers to the fourth chord Df-Gf-B, and “Df7” refers to the incomplete seventh chord
Df-F-Cf.

tice that is near (but not exactly at) the center of three-note chord space.16 Like Chopin,
Janáček traverses the lattice downward, by moving one, two, or three voices by step at
each turn, producing a “liqueﬁed” version of a familiar descending step sequence.

9.3.3 Shostakovich’s Fs Minor Prelude and
Fugue, Op. 87 (1950)
Traditional composers raised the notes of the natural minor to bring it closer to
major. Shostakovich, however, was more likely to lower its notes, creating unfamiliar “hyperminor” tonalities with a distinctive sinister character.17 Figure 9.3.9

16 The cubic lattice at the center of the space, shown in Figure 3.11.2a, contains augmented triads at
the shared vertex and major and minor triads elsewhere; the lattices adjacent to the center have major or
minor triads at the shared vertices, and contain a greater variety of chord types.
17 For more on Shostakovich’s scales, see Carpenter 1995.

329

330

history and analysis

shows that Fs natural minor offers four opportunities for semitonal lowering: the second scale degree
can be lowered to produce the phrygian mode;
the fourth can be lowered to produce a chromatic
mode I will call “natural minor f4”; the fifth can
be lowered to produce the Fs mode of D acoustic;
and the seventh can be lowered to produce another
chromatic mode with half-steps Cs-D-Ef (“natural
minor f7”). The remaining notes are not good candidates for alteration, since
lowering A or D would produce note duplications, while lowering Fs would
change the tonic.
The four lowerings can be combined to produce 16 different seven-note scales,
including Fs locrian (which lowers both Gs and Cs) and the Fs mode of G harmonic
minor (which lowers all four notes). We can represent these 16 possible combinations
with a familiar geometrical structure, the four-dimensional cube in Figure 9.3.10.

Figure 9.3.9 Fs natural
minor has four degrees that
can be lowered by semitone,
represented here by the
closed noteheads.

Figure 9.3.10 The four lowerings can be combined to produce sixteen scales, eight of which
appear in Shostakovich’s Fs minor Prelude and Fugue. I have labeled only the scales relevant
to Shostakovich’s piece.

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music

(This graph depicts a portion of seven-dimensional chord space, near but not at its
center.) Eight of its sixteen scales appear either in the prelude or in the opening of
the subsequent fugue, and Shostakovich does not employ any scales not found on the
ﬁgure.18 In this sense, the “scale tesseract” represents the modulatory space through
which Shostakovich moves.
Figure 9.3.11 shows the tonic-key passages from the prelude and the opening of
the fugue. The prelude begins with 18 measures of Fs aeolian, disrupted by brief

Figure 9.3.11 Tonic-key passages in Shostakovich’s Fs minor Prelude and Fugue. These involve
a progressive sequence of lowerings, leading ultimately to the harmonized fugue theme.

18 One possible exception is the B major chord on the second page of the prelude, which might be
thought to imply Fs dorian. However, the complete scale is not stated explicitly, and in any case it could
easily be added to the graph as a point above Fs natural minor.

331

332

history and analysis

moments of chromaticism; the recapitulation lowers Gs to Gn, transforming Fs
natural minor into Fs phrygian. The fugue subject suggests a “phrygian f7” scale
Fs-G-A-B-Cs-D-Ef, which lowers the E of the preceding phrygian. (Note that while
the subject itself does not contain a second scale degree, the note appears in both
the countersubject and the subject’s continuation.) The harmonization of the fugue
subject, meanwhile, moves from the Fs mode of G harmonic major to Fs phrygian.
If we look only at these tonic-key passages, we see a sequence of semitonal descents,
beginning at natural minor and concluding with a “hyperminor” that has lowered
second, ﬁfth, and seventh degrees. We can represent this journey as a descending
motion along the right edge of Figure 9.3.10, much as we represented Chopin’s E
minor Prelude as a systematic series of descents along the four-dimensional chord
lattice.19 (Needless to say, it is amazing that such similar geometries can represent
both chords in Chopin and scales in Shostakovich!) Musically, this sequence of lowerings serves to prepare us for the unfamiliar tonality of the fugue: by moving gradually from a standard Fs natural minor to the hyperminor of the harmonized fugue
subject, Shostakovich slowly acclimates us to his unusual scalar vocabulary, fulﬁlling
the traditional function of a prelude in an unfamiliar manner.

9.3.4 Reich’s New York Counterpoint (1985)
Figure 9.3.12 lists the scales in Steve Reich’s New York Counterpoint for eleven
clarinets, one live and ten prerecorded.20 The ﬁrst movement opens with pulsating chords implying Af and Ef diatonic. These eventually give way to rhythmic
canons in Af diatonic, with the six voices divided into three pairs playing mostly
parallel tenths. As shown in Figure 9.3.13, the top voice in each pair plays the notes
(G, C, F), with the pitches Af, Bf, and Ef being ordered differently in each line;
the result of this permutation is that the dotted quarter note occurs on a different
pitch in each part. The movement then combines these canons with the original
pulsating chords, leading to modulations that produce subtle alterations in the
canonic pitches.21
The second movement is exclusively in B diatonic and again combines canons
with repeated chords (Figure 9.3.14). Two of the pairs now play exactly the same
music, with the third presenting a very slight variant. The canonic structure is consequently much clearer, sounding almost as if it had been produced by a digital delay.
The third movement begins with a Df acoustic scale that is related by single-semitone

19 Shostakovich’s prelude suggests a variety of other scales as well: mm. 17–23 vacillate between Bn and
Bf, suggesting Fs-Gs-A-Bf-Cs-D-Ef; mm. 29–30 suggest an explicit but ﬂeeting octatonic scale, which
can be associated with the collection Fs-Gs-A-B-C-D-Ef on Figure 9.3.10; and the end of the prelude
suggests the doubly lowered Fs-G-A-Bf-Cs-D-Ef. These scales, however, are often incomplete or accompanied by extraneous notes—a mild sort of polytonality typical of Shostakovich’s music.
20 For simplicity, the following discussion will use the notated pitches, rather than the sounding pitches
a major second below.
21 The live clarinet also plays noncanonic “resultant melodies” that draw their pitches from the canonic
parts; for simplicity, my discussion omits these.

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music

333

voice leading to the opening Af diatonic.22 The six canonic voices are now divided
into two groups, each playing mostly triads. At rehearsal 67, shown in Figure 9.3.15,
the bass clarinets enter in canon with the notes Ef-A-Ef, producing the seven-note
“whole tone plus one” scale Ef-F-G-Af-A-B-Df. (The rhythm of each bass clarinet
part is the four-against-three cross-rhythm, for which the phrase “pass the goddamn
butter” is a useful mnemonic.) The piece ends by oscillating between the “whole-tone
plus one” and diatonic collections, closing with the pitches Gs, B, Cs, and Ds—the
four notes common to the Df acoustic, E diatonic, and B diatonic scales.
Figure 9.3.16 graphs the scales using a two-dimensional scale lattice: the opening
Af diatonic is connected by single-semitone voice leading to both Ef diatonic and to
Df acoustic, and Df acoustic is in turn connected by single-semitone voice leading
to the “whole-tone plus one” scale. Similarly, the B diatonic of movement 2—three
steps ﬂatward from Af diatonic—is connected by single-semitone voice leading to
the E diatonic of movement 3. Note that the “whole-tone plus one” collection appears
naturally on the graph, as a third layer of scales surrounding the central zigzag of
ﬁfths: in particular, the “Df whole-tone + Af” scale is connected by single-semitone
voice leading to both B acoustic and Df acoustic.23 Such graphs are characteristic of
Reich’s later pieces: like many of his works, New York Counterpoint makes very heavy
use of the diatonic collection, occasional use of the acoustic scale (as well as other
familiar scales such as the harmonic minor), and more sporadic use of exotic scales
such as the “whole-tone plus one.” Scales are often linked by efﬁcient voice leading
and frequently demarcate compact regions in scale space. However, Reich’s modulations themselves give the sense of a relatively free journey through the space, rather
than a systematic oscillation around a single tonic region.

Figure 9.3.12
Scales in Steve
Reich’s New York
Counterpoint.

22 The acoustic scale’s Bf is never stated. My analysis is inﬂuenced by the fact that Reich frequently uses
the scale in other pieces.
23 This graph of diatonic, acoustic, and “whole-tone plus one” scales has analogues in some (but not
all) of the situations in which there is a generalized circle of ﬁfths: for instance, it exists in the case of diatonic seventh chords, but not diatonic triads. Interested readers are invited to explore this.

334

history and analysis

Figure 9.3.13
Canons in the
ﬁrst movement
of New York
Counterpoint
(a). The canonic
upper voices
reorder the last
three pitches, so
that a different
note is held in
each part (b).

Figure 9.3.14 Canons in the second movement of New York Counterpoint. The paired voices
play almost exactly the same music, the one exception being starred at the end of the second
measure of the second staff.

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music

335
Figure 9.3.15
Canons in the
third movement
of New York
Counterpoint.

Before moving on, I should mention the fascinating relationship between the
harmonic and rhythmic structures in Reich’s music. Since New York Counterpoint is
written in twelve-beat measures, its various rhythmic patterns are structurally analogous to familiar equal-tempered chords. For example, the opening measure of the
third movement contains attacks on beats 0 (the downbeat), 2, 4, 5, 7, 9, and 11 (Figure 9.3.15). As pitch classes, these are the C diatonic scale.24 Figure 9.3.15 shows that
the ﬁrst canon enters at a delay of two eighth notes, which means that there are ﬁve
common attack points between the original rhythm and its canonic statement; this is
the rhythmic analogue to the ﬁve common tones between C and D major. Thus, just
as Reich frequently juxtaposes scales that share nearly all of their notes, so too do his
rhythmic canons often maximize (or nearly maximize) their common attack points.
It would be an interesting project to trace this parallelism more carefully, with an

Figure 9.3.16 The scales in the
third movement of New York
Counterpoint, graphed on an
extended version of the twodimensional scale lattice.

24 For more on the pitch-class/rhythm isomorphism see Babbitt 1962, Pressing 1983, and Cohn 1992b.
Note that, for simplicity, I am just talking about the rhythm in the ﬁrst measure of the two-measure pattern.

336

history and analysis

eye toward understanding the relationship between these two musical domains. For
instance, it is suggestive that the ﬁrst explicit appearance of the “diatonic rhythm” in
New York Counterpoint occurs precisely at the introduction of the ﬁrst nondiatonic
pitch collection.

9.3.5 Reich’s The Desert Music, Movement 1
(1984)
The Desert Music, for orchestra and chorus, explores the ideas in New York Counterpoint on a much grander scale.25 As in New York Counterpoint, the ﬁrst movement
opens with pulsating eighth-note chords, moves eventually to rhythmic canons, and
concludes by synthesizing the two textures.26 The music begins with four repetitions
of a ﬁve-chord sequence, stated in pulsating eighth notes, with the chorus singing the
syllable “de.” Figure 9.3.17 shows that the vocalists’ chords contain ﬁve or six pitch
classes and suggest a number of familiar scales: the ﬁrst belongs to Ef acoustic and F
harmonic major; the second to Ef acoustic and Af diatonic; the third to Ef acoustic
and Bf whole tone; the fourth to Cs harmonic major and B acoustic; and the ﬁfth to
C and F diatonic. The instrumental parts add extra notes, creating a series of six- and
seven-note sonorities (Figure 9.3.18). The ﬁrst, third, and fourth sound like altered
dominants, by virtue of combining a major third and minor seventh; the second and
ﬁnal chords sound like extended minor chords.
The logic of this opening progression can be clariﬁed by imagining that it
begins “in medias res,” with the true (and hidden) starting point being the ﬁnal D
dorian. We then have a sequence of ﬁve scales that move efﬁciently and in a ﬂatward
direction: D dorian, F harmonic major, Af diatonic, Ef acoustic, and a “strange” scale

Figure 9.3.17 Reich’s The Desert
Music opens with a sequence of ﬁve
chords in the chorus, each suggesting a
variety of scales.

25 I am indebted here to Quinn (2002), who discusses scale-to-scale voice leadings in Reich’s music.
Callender 1998 and Morris 1987 are also relevant.
26 Interestingly, the middle movement of The Desert Music contains the same rhythmic pattern as the
middle movement of New York Counterpoint, suggesting that the later piece consciously reuses ideas from
The Desert Music.

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music

F-G-Af-Bff-C-Df-Ef.27 (Note the resemblance to Shostakovich’s prelude and fugue,
which also moves ﬂatward through closely related scales.) Both the efﬁcient voice leading and the ﬂatward tendency are clear on Figure 9.3.19a, which represents the modulations on our three-dimensional scale lattice. (Since the strange scale does not appear
on the lattice proper, I have added it to the bottom of the graph using dotted lines.) It
is also clear why Reich begins with F harmonic major rather than D dorian: by reserving the most dramatic harmonic shift for the end of the phrase, he creates a striking
Figure 9.3.18 (1 of 2) A reduction of Reich’s The Desert Music, movement 1.

27 This strange scale can be understood as an Af diatonic collection with lowered second scale degree;
it is somewhat reminiscent of the jazz “altered scale,” the fourth mode of the acoustic collection.

337

338

history and analysis

Figure 9.3.18
(2 of 2) A
reduction of
Reich’s The
Desert Music,
movement 1.

cadential “brightening”—as if the clouds had suddenly parted to reveal a glittering
blue sky, illuminated by a ray of D-dorian sunshine.28
The second half of the movement cycles through similar scales while introducing both freely composed choral parts and Reich’s trademark rhythmic canons. The
canons start in F mixolydian, a scale not previously heard in the piece. The music
then articulates a series of single-semitone voice leadings, from F mixolydian to Ef
acoustic to Af diatonic and back to Ef acoustic. From there the modulations become
more dramatic as we move to a mode of B acoustic by a four-semitone shift. (This
mode, called “F altered” by jazz musicians, is connected to the “strange” scale by twosemitone voice leading; it can be understood as a “normalization” of this earlier scale,
since both harmonize the ﬁve-note choral chord F-Af-A-Df-Ef.) In Figure 9.3.19b, I
map this second part on the scale lattice. Once again it is clear that the music moves in
a generally descending (ﬂatward) direction, frequently exploiting efﬁcient voice leading between nearby scales. Figure 9.3.19 clariﬁes at a glance the similarity between
the modulations in the two parts of the piece—a relationship that would be rather
tedious to describe verbally.

28 It is interesting that for both Reich and Shostakovich, the dorian mode represents a comparatively
bright tonality—as if their scalar palette had been shifted toward the darker end of the harmonic spectrum.

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music
Figure 9.3.19 Scales in The Desert Music, movement 1. (a) The progression of scales from
R5–R9, and (b) the progression from R20–R44. The progression from R45–54 is the same as
that in (b), but without Bf diatonic (F mixolydian).

The ﬁfth and ﬁnal movement of The Desert Music returns to these ideas, cycling
through the same basic scalar progression eight more times, and ending with the pulsing chords of the opening. The beginning of the movement is particularly interesting: in
Figure 9.3.20, I show that it moves between four different modes, each suggesting an Ef
dominant sonority—Ef acoustic, Ef mixolydian, Ef mixolydian f6, and Ef whole tone
plus Af. It is signiﬁcant that the “whole-tone plus one” scale appears almost exactly as
it did in New York Counterpoint: tritone motion in the bass transforms a mixolydian f6
mode (missing its fourth scale degree) into a “whole-tone plus one” scale sharing six of
its seven notes. In fact, Figure 9.3.21 traces the passage on the same graph we used to represent New York Counterpoint, showing that it explores very similar harmonic territory.
Here we see clear evidence of a common practice linking one Reich piece to another, and
more generally to a broader tradition of twentieth-century scalar thinking.

9.3.6 The Who’s “I Can’t Explain” (1965) and
Bob Seger’s “Turn the Page” (1973)
Figure 9.3.22a shows the chords in the Who’s “I Can’t Explain.” The verse is constructed around a I–VII–IV progression in E mixolydian, while the chorus is a standard I–vi–IV–V progression in E major. The two parts of the song therefore involve

339

340

history and analysis

Figure 9.3.20
A summary of
the opening The
Desert Music,
movement 5.

Figure 9.3.21 Scales in the opening The Desert Music, movement 5.

a single-semitone change over a ﬁxed tonic, exactly analogous to the opening of
Debussy’s “Des pas sur la neige.”29 Bob Seger’s “Turn the Page,” shown in Figure
9.3.22b, is a kind of dorian-mode dual to The Who’s song. The verse contains virtually the same chord progression, i–VII–IV–i, though with a minor tonic rather than
major. (Note that The Who’s mixolydian and Seger’s dorian modes are related by
the single-semitone shift Gs®G.) At the end of the chorus, Seger switches brieﬂy to
natural minor, employing a standard rock VI–VII–i progression.

29 In Debussy’s prelude, the semitonal voice leading Bf®B connects D natural minor to D dorian; here
the voice leading D®Ds connects E mixolydian to E major.

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music
Figure 9.3.22 Scales
in The Who’s “I Can’t
Explain” (a) and Bob
Seger’s “Turn the
Page” (b).

Of course, these two songs have been arbitrarily selected from among thousands
that use closely related modes. I cite them chieﬂy to make the point that the procedures we have been discussing have entered the musical vernacular: not only can
they be found in works of self-conscious “art music,” but also in ﬁlm music, jazz, rock,
and no doubt in other styles as well. At this point in musical history, it is totally unremarkable to ﬁnd musicians of virtually any stripe exploiting efﬁcient voice leadings
between the full range of diatonic modes. Scale-ﬁrst composition, in other words, is
simply an accepted part of our contemporary tonal language.

9.4

the subset technique

We now turn to the subset technique, whereby a composer uses scales that all contain
some prominent collection of notes. These notes are held ﬁxed and remain stable
across scale changes, while the remaining notes are “mobile” and are altered to form
a variety of different collections.30

9.4.1 Grieg’s “Klokkeklang” (“Bell Ringing”),
Op. 54 No. 6 (1891)
Figure 9.4.1 presents the opening of the “Klokkeklang,” one of Grieg’s most unusual
and inventive works.31 Discarding functional harmony in favor of open ﬁfths, the
piece creates an austere soundworld that perfectly captures the effect of distant tintinnabulation. The ﬁrst phrase is in C diatonic, featuring a C-G/F-C drone in the
left hand and a series of (mostly) descending parallel ﬁfths in the right. The phrase
is comprised of four two-measure groups, each immediately echoed. The ﬁrst two
“echoes” ﬁll in the bare ﬁfths of the right hand with an additional note, forming diatonic triads; in the third “echo” the right hand is transposed down by step, while the
ostinato shifts downward by minor third, leading to a cadence on G.

30 Clark (2002) discusses the subset technique in Schubert’s music, but applied to chords rather than
scales.
31 For another perspective, see Sutcliffe 1996.

341

342

history and analysis
Figure 9.4.1 The opening of Grieg’s Lyric Piece “Klokkeklang” (Bell Ringing), Op. 54 No. 6.

In the second phrase, outlined by Figure 9.4.2, the ostinato shifts to G-D-A, and
the ﬁfths ascend by diatonic third.32 The echoing process is now extended, with each
two-measure idea appearing four times: as in the ﬁrst phrase, the ﬁrst echo ﬁlls in
the bare ﬁfth with an additional note, but the second and third echoes repeat the
preceding four measures with added sharps. (This sort of systematicity evokes the
algorithmic practice of “change ringing,” which in turn anticipates the music of later
composers such as Nancarrow, Reich, and Ligeti.) As shown in Figure 9.4.2, the right
hand combines with the ostinato bass to form two different diatonic collections: the
white-note C diatonic and the two-sharp D diatonic. We can think of the music as
containing ﬁve “ﬁxed” pitches D-E-G-A-B and two “mobile” pitches F/Fs and C/Cs.
The end of the phrase brings a surprise: when the white-note collection ascends
by thirds to B5, completing the diatonic circle of thirds, its echo adds a Gs that creates an A diatonic collection. This Gs clashes with the Gn and A in the ostinato,
creating a mild polytonal dissonance.33 (It is possible that Grieg meant this G/Gs
clash to evoke the bells’ inharmonicity.) The climactic gesture concludes with a long
passage in which the ﬁfths descend by diatonic thirds, from E5-B5 to G3–D4. Once
again, there is a clash between different forms of a note in different registers: the top
note of the gesture (Bn) suggests C diatonic, while the bottom note (Bf) suggests F
diatonic. The next two measures present a pair of mysterious sonorities, G minor and
F augmented. As shown in Figure 9.4.2, these combine with the ostinato to imply D
harmonic minor, here missing only its En. The ﬁnal chord “normalizes” Cs to Cn,
preparing for the recapitulation.
Surveying the whole of Grieg’s piece, then, we can say that there are three “ﬁxed”
notes (D, A, E) and four “mobile” notes that can appear either inﬂected or unin-

32 Note that the tonal center shifts to D before the scale itself changes, a possibility discussed in §4.5.
33 As in much polytonal music, the different scales are clearly distinguished by register: all the
notes below E5 belong to D diatonic, while those above A2 belong to A diatonic. Furthermore, the
wide registral separation between the Gs5 in the right hand and the clashing G3 in the left ameliorates the sense of dissonance, creating a sense of independent auditory streams, each with its own
macroharmony.

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music

343
Figure 9.4.2
A reduction
of the central
section of
“Klokkeklang.”

ﬂected (Bf/B, F/Fs, C/Cs, and G/Gs). The play of inﬂections suggests a variety of
different scalar collections, each stated fairly explicitly: C diatonic, D diatonic, A
diatonic, F diatonic, and D melodic minor. (Figure 9.4.3 shows that these ﬁve collections are all contained within two adjacent cubes of the scale lattice.) The piece progresses from a neutral “white-note” state in which all notes appear uninﬂected, to a
climactic section in which all four inﬂections are presented within the span of eleven
measures (mm. 43–53). Interestingly,
the B section begins by contrasting two
scales that are close but not adjacent on
the lattice (C and D diatonic), with the
separation increasing as the music progresses: D diatonic moves sharpward
to A diatonic, while C diatonic moves
ﬂatward to F diatonic, and thence to the
nondiatonic D harmonic minor (see
the arrows in Figure 9.4.3). This progression brings to mind a pistol duel,
in which the participants begin back to
back and walk several paces away from
each other.

9.4.2 “Petit Airs,” from
Stravinsky’s Histoire
du Soldat (1918)
Stravinsky’s “Petit airs au bord du ruisseau” exhibits an easygoing folksiness, depicting a wandering soldier relaxing by a brook, enjoying his newfound (and hard-totune) ﬁddle. On the surface, the music would seem to have nothing to do with Grieg’s
austere tone painting. But when we dig deeper, we ﬁnd that there are interesting
resemblances between the pieces, beginning with their ostinati: the double bass in
“Petit airs” plays a “walking” motif G-D-A-G that outlines the same three pitch classes
as those in the B section of Grieg’s “Klokkeklang” (Figure 9.4.4). As in Grieg’s piece,
Stravinsky seems to divide his pitch material into “ﬁxed” notes that always appear in
the same form (G-D-A-E-B) and “mobile” notes that can either be inﬂected or uninﬂected (F/Fs, C/Cs). Not surprisingly, Stravinsky juxtaposes these “mobile” notes

Figure 9.4.3
Scales in
“Klokkeklang.”

344

history and analysis

Figure 9.4.4
Scales in
Stravinsky’s
“Petit airs,”
from Histoire du
soldat.

Figure 9.4.5
“Petit Airs” uses
the diatonic and
acoustic scales
combining F/Fs
and C/Cs.

more freely than Grieg, often assigning different accidentals to different instruments:
for instance, in mm. 29–37, shown in Figure 5.6.9, the clarinet and bassoon play in
D diatonic while the violin adds Fn and Cn, creating two tonally distinct “strata.”
Polytonality, which occurs only ﬂeetingly in “Klokkeklang,” is much more pervasive
in Stravinsky.
There are four familiar scales that contain the ﬁve “ﬁxed” notes, and they can
all be represented by a square face of our scale lattice (Figure 9.4.5). Like Grieg,
Stravinsky systematically explores the scales that can be constructed in this way.
Figure 9.4.4 shows that each of the collections appears prominently in “Petit airs.”
Particularly noteworthy are mm. 53–60, which present an explicit statement of the G acoustic collection.
(See the bottom system of Figure 9.4.4.) This nondiatonic scale acts somewhat like Grieg’s D harmonic
minor, providing a striking point of contrast with the
surrounding diatonic and polytonal music.

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music

9.4.3 Reich’s City Life (1995)
The third movement of Steve Reich’s City Life features a repeating ostinato built
upon the ﬁfth D-A. The movement is divided into three sections, each beginning
with the sampled words “It’s been a honeymoon.” (The unhappy tone of the sampled
voice creates a striking contrast with the text’s meaning.) After about 20 seconds, the
remaining instruments enter, ﬁlling out the D-A ﬁfth with scale fragments. Figure
9.4.6 shows that these fragments suggest D lydian, the fourth mode of A harmonic
minor, and D mixolydian. Reich’s music therefore exempliﬁes, in a particularly obvious and systematic fashion, the same procedures at work in both Grieg and Stravinsky. Once again, we have a set of “ﬁxed” scale degrees stacked in ﬁfths, ﬁlled out by
additional “mobile” degrees that appear in a variety of forms.34
The resemblances among Grieg’s “Klokkeklang,” Stravinsky’s “Petit airs,” and
Reich’s City Life might initially seem to be completely fortuitous, purely superﬁcial
similarities with no deeper signiﬁcance. But in fact, there are important historical and
musical connections among the three composers. At a purely musical level, all three
were interested in exploring alternatives to functional harmony, while stopping short
of complete atonality. In particular, all three embraced a wide variety of scales and
modes, and devised creative ways to generalize traditional modulatory procedures.35
And then there are speciﬁc historical connections as well: Grieg was an important
inﬂuence on Ravel, whose music in turn was important to Stravinsky; and both Stravinsky and impressionism inﬂuenced the language of jazz, which was in turn important to Reich.36 So it should perhaps not be terribly surprising to ﬁnd these three
composers mining similar musical territory.
Indeed, it would not be too surprising even if there were no historical connections among them. For as we have seen in Part I, the familiar scales of the Western
tradition—such as the diatonic, acoustic, and harmonic scales—are in many ways
natural objects of musical exploration. Furthermore, the idea of writing music that
exploits scales containing a particular ﬁxed subset is reasonably intuitive, and we
can well imagine each composer happening upon it independently. Thus, rather
than considering the resemblances among our three pieces to be insigniﬁcant coin-

Figure 9.4.6 A summary of Steve
Reich’s City Life, movement 3.

34 Reich’s movement again uses the “diatonic rhythm” {0, 2, 4, 5, 7, 9, 11}. The music opens by setting
this rhythm in canon with itself at a distance of an eighth note. This is analogous to combining the C and D
major scales, and leads to ﬁve shared attacks. Later in the piece, the canonic distance increases to a quarter
note, analogous to combining C and E diatonic collections, which decreases the number of shared attacks
to three. The music thus exhibits a common Reichian technique of moving from relative rhythmic alignment toward increased disalignment. See Cohn 1992.
35 See Tymoczko 1997, 2002, 2003a, 2006.
36 See, among many other sources, Herresthal 2005 and Strickland 2000.

345

346

history and analysis

cidences, I prefer to think of them as symptomatic of shared musical concerns crossing stylistic boundaries.

9.4.4 The Beatles’ “Help” (1965) and
Stravinsky’s “Dance of the Adolescents”
(1913)
In “Help!,” John Lennon’s lead vocal largely conﬁnes itself to the ﬁrst ﬁve pitches of
the A major scale, with a sixth note (Fs) appearing only in the song’s introduction
(Figure 9.4.7). This simple melody, almost obsessive in its repetitiveness, becomes a
ﬁxed set of pitches that are contextualized within two different scales, A major and A
mixolydian. Here timbre reinforces the distinction between the ﬁxed subset and the
mobile pitches: the lead vocal conﬁnes itself to the ﬁxed notes, while both the guitar
and backup vocals articulate the mobile pair G/Gs. (Note that the resulting scales, A
major and A mixolydian are the only two diatonic collections containing the ﬁxed
pitches.) Particularly interesting is the mixolydian cadence that accompanies the lead
vocal D®Cs: in the key of A major, melodic D®Cs would likely be harmonized with
V7–I; in “Help!,” however, this archetypal schema is replaced by a striking modal progression in pure major triads, D–G–A. (This technique, whereby common melodic
schemas are modally reharmonized in pure triads, seems characteristic of the Beatles
in particular and rock music more generally.) Note also that the opening progression
b–G–E7, familiar from §3.10, links three chords that share the notes B and D; it again
introduces the seventh chord precisely when the root motion changes from major
third to minor third.
Stravinsky’s “Dance of the Adolescents” uses a somewhat more abstract version of
the same technique, in which it is not particular notes that are held ﬁxed, but rather
more abstract intervallic patterns. The scales in Figure 9.4.8a share the major pentachord {G, A, B, C, D}, and hence are related by the subset technique. Those in Figure
9.4.8b do not share any ﬁve-note subset; nevertheless, they are audibly similar by
virtue of the fact that they all contain some major pentachord—that is, they contain
a ﬁve-note segment that is transpositionally equivalent to {G, A, B, C, D}. Just as two
major scales sound very similar, by virtue of being transpositionally related, so too
do these scales sound somewhat similar by virtue of the fact that they contain large,
transpositionally related subsets. (Or to put it another way, the scales all contain the

Figure 9.4.7 A sketch
of the Beatles song
“Help!” The upper
staff contains the
notes in the lead vocal
line, while the lower
staff outlines the
harmonies.

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music
Figure 9.4.8 The subset
technique in its concrete (a) and
abstract (b) forms.

interval pattern 2-2-1-2.) This is particularly true when the composer chooses to
emphasize these subsets in some salient way.
In the “Dance of the Adolescents,” the major pentachord forms the basis of the
folksy theme shown in Figure 9.4.9. (Here A is the tonic, suggesting natural minor
or dorian.37) The theme can be embedded within familiar scales in three ways: we
can add E and F, producing A aeolian; we can add E and Fs, producing A dorian; or
we can add Ef and F, producing the “locrian s2” mode of F acoustic.38 These scales
can then be transposed to produce three general modal categories, aeolian, dorian,
and locrian s2. Figure 9.4.10 shows that the folksy theme appears in each of these
modal contexts in the second half of the “Dance of the Adolescents.”39 Since each of
our three mode types appears at least once, we can say that Stravinsky exhaustively
exploits the various ways of embedding his theme in familiar modal contexts.
Though it might again seem fanciful to compare Stravinsky to the Beatles, the
resemblance is upon reﬂection relatively clear. Both “Help!” and “The Dance of the
Adolescents” exploit melodic material that is deliberately simple or even primitive.
Indeed, in both pieces the ﬁxed material is remarkably similar, with the ﬁxed pitches
being A-B-Cs-D-E-(Fs) in “Help!” and the ﬁxed intervallic pattern being 2-2-1-2
Figure 9.4.9 The folk-like melody used in the “Dance of
the Adolescents.”

37 This folksy melody seems to be original to Stravinsky. For an extended discussion of Stravinsky’s
borrowings, see Chapter 12 of Taruskin 1996.
38 A fourth possibility combines Ef and Fs, producing a mode of G harmonic major; here, however,
the augmented second is melodically awkward. The three possibilities in the main text represent the only
way to embed the theme in a scale whose steps are at most two semitones large, and whose thirds are at
least three semitones large (§4.4).
39 In each case, the music also adds some characteristically Stravinskian polytonal elements, such as
bassoon trills foreign to the underlying scale; nevertheless, the underlying scales are fairly clear. Note also
that consecutive scales, such as G locrian s2, Bf dorian, and Bf natural minor, are often linked by minimal voice-leading. Interestingly, Stravinsky uses both of the single-semitonal voice leadings connecting
acoustic and diatonic scales, one of which preserves the ﬁxed subset (R31–32) and one of which does not
(R25–27).

347

348

history and analysis
Figure 9.4.10 Stravinsky presents his folk-like melody in ﬁve scalar contexts.

in “Dance of the Adolescents.” Both pieces contextualize this simple melodic material within musical textures that are anything but primitive, adding sophisticated
harmonies, countermelodies, and orchestrational embellishments. (In fact, both
pieces use Debussyian parallel triads, the ﬁrst in the chorus’s vocal harmonies, the
second in the orchestral wash.) And both pieces use an expanded scalar vocabulary
in which scalar and chromatic transposition are available, and in which ionian and
mixolydian are more or less on equal footing. (Note that by ignoring transposition

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music

and centricity, we can see that both pieces augment their “ﬁxed” pitches in essentially similar ways, extending A-B-Cs-D-E with either G or Gs to form two different
diatonic collections.) All of which is just to say that both pieces make relatively
straightforward use of the possibilities afforded by an expanded scalar vocabulary.

9.4.5 The Miles Davis Group’s “Freedom Jazz
Dance” (1966)
We’ll close with what might seem like a trivial example of the subset technique, one in
which the shared collection is a perfect ﬁfth—or maybe just a single note. The Miles Davis
Group’s “Freedom Jazz Dance,” from the album Miles Smiles, consists in a series of improvisations over a static Bf harmony. Although one might casually say that the piece is “in
Bf,” this description masks an important subtlety: it is actually in a variety of Bfs, since
the soloists interpret the tonic drone differently. The piece thus provides an interesting
improvisational counterpart to the precomposed music we have been considering.
Since it would take us too far aﬁeld to discuss the entire piece, a few brief remarks
must sufﬁce. The bass line, played by Ron Carter, is based on Bf and often features
fourths-based riffs such as F-Ef-Bf. The harmonic accompaniment, played by Herbie Hancock, often uses chords such as E-Bf-Ef, drawn from the blues scale on Bf
(Bf-Df-Ef-En-F-Af). Hancock’s relatively sparse accompaniment leaves the soloists
plenty of freedom, and they respond by “coloring” the Bf drone in a variety of ways.
Figure 9.4.11 provides a series of excerpts from the solos, showing that the improvisers play a number of familiar scales—Bf natural minor, Bf melodic minor ascending,
Bf mixolydian, Bf acoustic, Af harmonic minor, and the Bf-Cf octatonic scale. (Of
course, there is also a lot of nonscalar playing in the piece as well.) From the standpoint
of the current chapter, the interesting point is that the Miles Davis Group’s notion of
“being in Bf,” like Debussy’s notion of being “in D,” is general enough to encompass
natural minor, dorian, the acoustic scale, and even the octatonic. In other words, the
relevant conception of tonality is not the major-minor system of the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries, but rather the extended scalar system of the twentieth.

9.5

conclusion: common scales,
common techniques

In this chapter, we have seen numerous appearances of scales such as the acoustic and octatonic. When I ﬁrst started thinking seriously about twentieth-century
tonality, I was amazed to ﬁnd so many different composers using such similar scales.
Why do these collections reappear in so many different styles? Was there a kind of
underground commerce in scales, with composers cluing each other in to their most
important discoveries? Did Debussy and Stravinsky talk scales and modes during
their conversations in Paris? Did George Gershwin teach impressionist techniques
to the early beboppers? Did Steve Reich learn the “altered scale” from some jazz harmony book? The alternative, that so many different composers had independently

349

350

history and analysis
Figure 9.4.11 Excerpts from the solos in the Miles Davis Group’s version of “Freedom Jazz
Dance.” Miles Davis favors traditional Bf minor scales, Wayne Shorter makes heavy use of Bf
acoustic, and Herbie Hancock uses even more exotic octatonic and harmonic minor scales.
(Asterisks indicate notes outside the scale.)

found their way to the same basic collections, seemed even more improbable: for how
could so much haphazard investigation converge on such similar outcomes?
Now, of course, this strikes me as considerably less surprising. Although there
may have been some composer-to-composer commerce in scales, we can explain the
convergence without it. After all, one of the main claims of Chapter 4 is that traditional
scales are overdetermined, with a variety of different considerations pointing toward
the same basic scalar collections—viz. familiar scales divide the octave relatively
evenly, contain large numbers of consonant intervals, avoid consecutive semitones
while having relatively small gaps between their successive notes, and are generally

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music

optimal from a variety of independent perspectives. Thus we should not be astonished to ﬁnd composers of different stylistic proclivities using octatonic or acoustic
scales. Of course composers would independently ﬁnd their way to these collections—
much in the way that different mountain climbers tend to follow the most obvious
routes up a particular cliff.
This is not to say that these scales are the only important ones, or that all twentieth-century tonal music makes use of them. Some tonal composers, including
Messiaen and Shostakovich, constructed idiosyncratic scales that do not possess
the virtues I have highlighted. (Messiaen used seven symmetrical “modes of limited
transposition” whereas Shostakovich sometimes constructed ad hoc modes out of
octatonic and other scale fragments.) Others—particularly “neoclassical” composers—eschewed nondiatonic scales in favor of a pervasive (and occasionally somewhat
brittle) diatonicism. Still others created polytonal effects by superimposing multiple
scales at the same time, leading to musical textures poised delicately between tonality
and atonality. There is plenty of variety in twentieth-century tonal music, with scalar
procedures playing only one part in an ensemble cast.
Nevertheless, it is striking that at least three major twentieth-century tonal styles—
impressionism, jazz, and postminimalism—make use of the same basic collection of
nondiatonic scales and modes. These scales, along with the three techniques in this
chapter, constitute a twentieth-century “common practice” that is larger than any
particular tonal composer, and indeed than any particular tonal style. Although the
outlines of this common practice may be less clear than the outlines of earlier common practices, its very existence indicates that the difference between the nineteenth
and twentieth centuries is more a matter of degree than of kind. The naive contrast
between nineteenth-century homogeneity and twentieth-century individualism is
misleading: if there is an enormous harmonic gulf between Mussorgsky and Johann
Strauss, then there are also interesting threads of continuity between Debussy, jazz,
and Reich. Indeed, I would go so far as to say that the scales and techniques described
in this chapter represent the single most interesting example of a twentieth-century
tonal common practice—one that results not just from conscious imitation, but also
from a simultaneous convergence on an intrinsically fertile territory.

351

