chapter 10

Jazz
This last chapter reviews some central features of jazz harmony, emphasizing connections with earlier styles. For reasons of space, I focus on a collection of ideas
that evolved in the late 1950s and early 1960s, and that now form a kind of lingua
franca for contemporary improvisers. My goal is to show that jazz synthesizes the
contrapuntal preoccupations of late nineteenth-century chromaticism with the
scale-based procedures of early twentieth-century modernism, creating a contemporary “common practice.” This common practice has inﬂuenced composers such
as Steve Reich and John Adams, resulting in a network of relationships that cross
the boundaries between notated and non-notated music (sometimes called “serious” and “popular”). Given these pervasive inﬂuences, it is reasonable to wonder
whether we make too much of the boundaries between styles: if jazz is both inheritor of early modernism and progenitor of late twentieth-century postminimalism,
then at what cost do we segregate it from “legitimate” concert music? My answer
is that the cost is large indeed. We can obtain a full picture of twentieth-century
tonality only by considering notated and non-notated music as part of an integral
tradition.1
In saying this, I do not mean to efface the obvious differences between improvised and notated music, but rather to suggest that we sometimes take these differences too seriously. Ask yourself whether a highly avant-garde composer like
Xenakis is more or less like Debussy than is an improvising musician like Bill
Evans. True, both Xenakis and Debussy use notation, but once we move past this
fact there are few similarities in their specific approaches to melody, harmony,
and rhythm. Meanwhile, Bill Evans is an improviser who self-consciously borrowed ideas from impressionism, whose chords and scales relate to Debussy’s
in very clear ways, and who helped transmit certain musical techniques from
Debussy to late-twentieth-century tonal composers. From this point of view, it
seems short-sighted to say that Schoenberg, Xenakis, and Lachenmann “belong
with” Grieg and Debussy, simply because they all happen to use musical notation.
To say so is to fetishize superficial resemblances at the expense of more profound
and purely musical connections.

1 For an alternative approach, see Taruskin 2005, which attempts to treat the notated tradition in isolation from other styles.

Jazz

10.1

basic jazz voicings

Basic jazz harmony derives from an elementary voice-leading schema ﬁrst described in
Chapter 7, in which ﬁfth-related diatonic seventh chords are connected by descending
stepwise voice leading. Figure 10.1.1 moves the schema up by diatonic third, so that
it connects the four upper voices of a series of ninth chords. Here we have a ﬁve-voice
passage in which the bass leaps while the upper voices move by step. Figure 10.1.1c
embellishes this pattern once more, suspending the ninth of the ii9 chord into the
dominant and replacing the seventh of the tonic sonority with a sixth.2 The resulting
chords are fundamental to modern jazz, and are sometimes called the A and B “left
hand” voicings, as they leave the pianist’s right hand free to improvise (Figure 10.1.2).

Figure 10.1.1 (a) A basic nineteenth-century voice-leading schema, linking ﬁfth-related
diatonic triads by stepwise voice leading. (b) The same schema, now interpreted as the upper
four voices of a sequence of ninth chords. (c) A variant that suspends the ninth of the ii chord
into V, forming a thirteenth; the note B in the Cmaj9 chord is also replaced with A, so that all
four upper voices move down by step from V to I.

Figure 10.1.2 The “left hand voicings” in their
A and B forms.

2 The form E-G-B-D does appear, though E-G-A-D seems to be preferred. (See McGowan 2005 on
“dialects of consonance” in jazz.) This preference is sometimes attributed to the desire to avoid the minor
ninth that can result when a melodic C is played above the chordal B. However, the change may also reﬂect
the fact that the voicing E-G-A-D is a diatonic “fourth chord”(§10.2). Relevant here is the fact that a diatonic seventh chord like E-G-B-D is already somewhat “fourthy,” as it contains two component fourths
(B-E and D-G) and can be written as a stack of fourths with one missing note (that is, as B-E-[A]-D-G).
When substituting E-G-A-D for E-G-B-D, a jazz musician can use efﬁcient voice leading to change E-B
into E-A, heightening the fourthiness without drastically changing the sound of the chord.

353

354

history and analysis

Since each of these chords contains all but two of the notes in the diatonic scale,
jazz pedagogues sometimes describe chord voicings negatively, by identifying the diatonic notes that a particular chord should not contain: for example, they say that a ii
voicing can contain any diatonic note except the leading tone; that a V voicing can
contain any diatonic note except the tonic; and that the I voicing can contain any
diatonic note except the fourth scale degree. These forbidden tones are sometimes
called “avoid” notes, indicating that they should be avoided if a chord is to have a
particular harmonic function.3 The underlying idea is that there are certain basic
voice-leading motions that are essential to deﬁning harmonic function: the introduction of scale degree 4 as one moves from tonic to predominant, the resolution
^1®^7 as one moves from predominant to dominant, and the resolution ^4®^3 coupled
with the return of scale degree 1, as one progresses from dominant to tonic (Figure
10.1.3). “Avoid notes” obscure this skeleton by introducing certain notes prematurely.
(For instance, including the leading tone in the ii chord tends to blur the difference
between predominant and dominant, just as includFigure 10.1.3 The basic
ing the tonic note in V tends to blur the difference
voice-leading structure of
between dominant and tonic.) The advantage is that
the ii–V–I. As long as these
this approach conveys the freedom inherent in jazz:
contrapuntal motions are
as long as the fundamental voice-leading skeleton is
clear, the schema can be
embellished with a large
reasonably clear, notes can be freely added without
variety of additional notes.
disturbing the effect of functional harmony.4 Indeed,
even the basic voice-leading skeleton can sometimes
be slightly obscured, as in Figure 10.1.4.
This sort of harmonic ﬂexibility would lead to incoherence, were it not for several important facts. First,
jazz makes extremely heavy use of root position chords,
providing unambiguous clues as to a chord’s identity.5
Figure 10.1.4 The schema in Figure 10.1.3 need not always be presented in its entirety. In (a)
the root of the V chord is transposed by tritone; while in (b) the leading tone is absent from
the V chord. In both examples, the open noteheads show tones involved in the basic schema
of Figure 10.1.3.

3 The term “avoid note” is often associated with Mark Levine (1989), though he says he heard it at
Berklee in the 1950s.
4 It is interesting that the ascending semitonal resolution of the leading tone, so central to classical
harmonic practice, is not among the basic voice-leading motions in jazz.
5 Temperley (2007) makes the same point.

Jazz

Second, where classical composers use many highly similar chord progressions (such as
I–IV–vii°–I and I–ii–V–I), jazz musicians tend to use the ii–V–I schema almost to the
exclusion of the others. This prevents confusion between chords with closely related
pitch content. Third, jazz tunes typically repeat the same chord progressions over and
over, giving listeners many opportunities to identify a tune’s harmonic structure. Furthermore, many jazz compositions reuse the same progressions: ostensibly distinct
tunes like “Oleo,” “Anthropology,” and “Rhythm-a-ning,” all use the chord progression
from George Gershwin’s “I Got Rhythm”; while others, including “Au Privave,” “Blue
Monk,” and “Collard Greens and Black-Eyed Peas,” use variants on the standard blues
progression. (In fact, the blues and “rhythm changes” together account for a substantial
fraction of the jazz repertoire.) Taken together, these simpliﬁcations make it much easier to identify jazz harmonies. And because listeners have a pretty good idea what chord
is coming, improvisers can be correspondingly free in their harmonic embellishments.
Not surprisingly, the preceding ideas can sometimes be useful for analyzing twentieth-century notated music.6 Figure 10.1.5 shows several classical anticipations of the
jazz A and B voicings, while Figure 10.1.6 shows a series of six- and seven-note chord
voicings, all avoiding precisely the notes that jazz pedagogy recommends. Furthermore,
twentieth-century composers have a noticeable tendency to place the root in the bass
of “extended” chords: pieces like Debussy’s “Sirènes” and Reich’s The Desert Music, for
Figure 10.1.5 A and B voicings in classical music. (a) Ravel, “Forlane” from Le tombeau de
Couperin, m. 130, presenting the A voicings on V and IV (upper staff). (b) Grieg’s Lyric Piece
“Salon,” Op. 65 No. 4, m. 1 outlines the dominant B voicing with its ascending sixteenth
notes. (c) The same piece has a variant of the A dominant voicing, in which the root of the
chord replaces the ninth. (d) Scriabin’s Etude, Op. 65 No. 3. The four highest notes of the G7
chord outline an A voicing.

6 See Tymoczko 1997, 2002, and 2003.

355

356

history and analysis
Figure 10.1.6 Concert-music chords that omit the jazz “avoid notes.” The ﬁrst three examples
present tonic voicings that omit the fourth above the root. (a) Debussy’s “Sirènes,” m. 8.
(b) Ravel Jeux d’eau, m.1 (c) Reich, Different Trains, movement 1. (d) A ii11–Vsus–I in Ravel’s
“Rigaudon,” from Le tombeau de Couperin, mm. 1–2. The dominant voicing is a suspended
chord, analogous to Figure 10.1.4b; as in jazz practice, the leading tone becomes the “avoid
note” in the suspended chord. (e) An extended predominant in Ravel’s Pavane pour une
infante défunte, mm. 67–68. ( f ) Altered dominant chords in the opening of Reich’s The
Desert Music, movement 1, all conspicuously omitting the fourth above the root. (g) Debussy,
Prelude to “The Afternoon of a Faun,” R10, is similar.

example, consist largely of extended root position dominant chords, embellished with
sevenths, ninths, and other tones.7 We should not, of course, be too surprised by such
correspondences, both because of the historical connections between notated music
and jazz, and because many of these principles are tantamount to common sense: it is
only natural, when using extended sonorities, to want to avoid harmonic confusion by
placing the root in the bass; just as it is only natural to want to clarify harmonic function
by avoiding the tonic note in dominant voicings.
7 Some of the ideas in this section have been explored by Dan Harrison (1994) in the context of late nineteenth-century music. Like jazz pedagogues, Harrison argues that a chord with a prominent leading tone
and ﬁfth scale degree can often be interpreted as a dominant chord, no matter what other notes it contains.
However, he diverges from jazz pedagogy by interpreting tonal harmony as fundamentally triadic, and by
taking IV to be the characteristic predominant. McGowan 2005 adapts Harrison’s ideas to a jazz context.

Jazz

10.2

from thirds to fourths

Traditional tonal theory teaches that harmonies are generated by extending thirds
upward from the root. But as chords grow larger, their identity as stacks of thirds
becomes less and less determinate. Postwar jazz musicians exploit this fact to reconceive traditional chords as quartal rather than tertian in origin: for example, Figure
10.2.1 rearranges the dominant and tonic A voicings as stacks of diatonic fourths,
producing a distinctively modern feel. (A pianist might play these voicings when
accompanying a soloist; guitarists—whose instruments are tuned in fourths—play
them as a matter of course.) As shown in the ﬁgure, each voicing can be extended
upward by one or two fourths before encountering an avoid note.
These quartal voicings suggest that we might want to look for a fourth-based predominant voicing as well. The most common option here, shown in Figure 10.2.2, is
called the “ ‘So What’ chord,” since it appears prominently in Bill Evans’ playing on the
Miles Davis tune of the same name. The “ ‘So What’ chord” consists of three perfect
fourths and one major third, and is often encountered in the form shown in Figure
10.2.2b, with the lowest note doubled in the soprano. (Guitar players will recognize
this as the open strings of the guitar, tuned down a major second.) We, of course, recognize the chord as a stack of two-step intervals in the pentatonic scale. If we begin on
a different pentatonic note—as in Figure 10.2.2c—we obtain all the various chords
that insert a major third into a sequence of ﬁve perfect fourths. (In each case, the
chord exhausts the notes of a pentatonic scale.) Figure 10.2.3 combines a “ ‘So What’
chord” with quartal V–I voicings to produce a fourth-based version of the ii–V–I
schema. Such quartal voicings have been important to jazz since the 1950s, and many
pianists play three-note quartal voicings as a matter of course. Often associated with
McCoy Tyner, they create an “open” feel that evokes the sound world of Stravinsky,
Bartók, and Hindemith.8
Not surprisingly, the trend toward quartal voicings goes hand in hand with an
increasing use of melodic fourths in solos. Passages in melodic fourths can occasionally be found in the recordings of the 1940s, particularly by musicians associated with
Lennie Tristano, but they become much more common in the early 1960s, largely

Figure 10.2.1 The dominant
and tonic A voicings
reinterpreted as stacks of
fourths. In (c) the stacks are
extended until they reach an
“avoid note.”

8 Scriabin’s “mystic chord” is often voiced as a stack of acoustic scale fourths: C-Fs-Bf-E-A-D. Fourths
appear prominently in Stravinsky (Firebird Suite [1919], “Infernal Dance,” R26), Bartók (Out of Doors,
movement 2), and Hindemith (Ludus Tonalis).

357

358

history and analysis
Figure 10.2.2 Quartal predominant voicings. (a) The
“So What” voicing. (b) The same voicing with the
bass note doubled in the soprano. This is a complete
stack of pentatonic thirds: D-F-G-A-C-D-F-G-A-C-D.
(c) Other inversions of the “‘So What’ chord” begin the
stack of thirds on a different note of the F pentatonic
scale. Each voicing has four perfect ﬁfths and one foursemitone “near ﬁfth.”

Figure 10.2.3 Quartal ii–V–I voicings
played with both hands (a) and with the
left hand alone (b).

through the inﬂuence of the John Coltrane Quartet. One way to create quartal melodies is to use small collections of notes that are themselves stacks of fourths: by randomly selecting notes from among a small stack-of-fourths collection, one will obtain
a high proportion of fourths, allowing the improviser a degree of melodic freedom
while still ensuring that the resulting music will sound reasonably “fourthy.”9 Figure
10.2.4a presents a passage from the ﬁfth chorus of Keith Jarrett’s solo on “You and
the Night and the Music” (from At the Deer Head Inn) in which the four-note stack
of fourths {F, G, Bf, C} expands to a ﬁve-note pentatonic scale in the last measure of
the example. Figure 10.2.5, the opening of the tune “Freedom Jazz Dance,” is quite
similar: here, a pentatonic arpeggio (F, Bf, Ef, G, C, F) is augmented by the note D to
form a six-note stack of ﬁfths.10
In Chapter 4, we noted that the pentatonic scale is a minimal perturbation of
a pure stack of fourths, returning to its starting point without passing through all
twelve pitch classes (§4.4). It is interesting to think that similar considerations might
play a role in explaining the more spontaneous improvisational choices made in
1960s jazz. For suppose you are an improviser who would like to play melodic fourths

9 Two thirds of the intervals randomly selected from the notes F-G-C will be perfect fourths or ﬁfths,
50% of the intervals in F-G-Bf-C are perfect fourths or ﬁfths, and 40% of the intervals in Ef-F-G-Bf-C
are perfect fourths or ﬁfths.
10 Pentatonic scales also appear in early jazz, though their effect is more folksy than quartal. My sense is
that the pentatonic playing in the 1960s is only loosely connected to these earlier procedures.

Jazz

359
Figure 10.2.4
Two passages
from Keith
Jarrett’s solo on
“You and The
Night and The
Music,” which
exploits stacks of
fourths.

Figure 10.2.5 The
opening of “Freedom
Jazz Dance” begins
by arpeggiating the
Ef pentatonic scale,
adds a D to create a
diatonic hexachord, and
concludes with the Df
pentatonic scale.

in a largely diatonic environment: like the designer of scales, you have an interest in
ensuring that your melodic fourths do not lead you too far away from the underlying harmony (Figure 10.2.6). One natural solution is to incorporate a four-semitone
“near fourth,” so that the sequence of intervals returns to its starting point after just
ﬁve notes. Virtually the same considerations apply to the abstract problem of designing ﬁve-note scales, and indeed to the problem of tuning an instrument in fourths:
thus guitars, lutes, and viols often include an anomalous major third to ensure that
the top string sounds the same note as the lowest, although the precise location of the
third varies from instrument to instrument. It is somewhat remarkable that the same
fundamental facts can help such disparate musical phenomena.
Fourth chords and pentatonic scales are now so central to jazz as to be virtually
identiﬁed with the style. In fact, the enormous popularity of 1960s jazz means that
composers who build quartal harmonies are more likely to be heard as referencing
jazz than (say) the earlier works of Stravinsky, Hindemith, or Bartók. Of course, jazz
musicians were in turn inﬂuenced by these same composers, deliberately borrowing quartal harmonies from the notated tradition in order to evoke a more modern
sound.11 To my mind, this is a remarkable instance of the oft-neglected interaction
between jazz and concert music: quartal harmony, originally the province of the

11 James Moody, in a personal conversation, recalled that a number of musicians in the 1940s and
1950s were interested in Hindemith’s fourth chords.

360

history and analysis
Figure 10.2.6 (a) An extended sequence of melodic fourths will generate notes that clash with
the underlying harmony or scale. (b−c) To correct this problem one can add a “near fourth,”
producing a pentatonic or diatonic collection.

notated avant-garde, moved eventually into jazz, where it became incorporated into
the canons of functional harmony; from there, it moves back into notated music
as various contemporary composers borrowed jazz sounds in their own compositions. It would hardly be possible to write a coherent history of quartal harmony,
itself a crucial component of twentieth-century tonality, without considering jazz
and concert music together.

10.3

tritone substitution

Perhaps the most mysterious feature of jazz harmony, from a classical standpoint, is
the practice of replacing a dominant seventh chord with its tritone transposition. For
a musician with a classical education, these “tritone substitutions” can seem like harmonic sorcery—chaotic acts of rule breaking that defy all musical logic, yet nevertheless produce compelling musical effects. But as we will see, the tritone substitution is
anything but mysterious: indeed, it is a straightforward generalization of traditional
chromatic procedures, one that can easily be explained using our familiar geometrical
models.
Figure 10.3.1 applies a tritone substitution to the second chord in the ii7–V$–Imaj7
progression discussed at the start of the chapter. The tritone in the upper staff is
unaffected by the change, while the notes in the lower staff move semitonally in contrary motion. The substitution’s effectiveness can thus be attributed to two factors:
it preserves the leading tone and seventh of the V7 chord, the “tendency tones” most
directly responsible for pushing it forward toward the tonic; and it does not radically
disrupt the contrapuntal ﬂow in the remaining voices, transforming descending diatonic steps into descending chromatic steps. Figure 10.3.2 provides an example that
uses quartal voicings. (Here an additional voice plays the root of the chords; for the
time being, we can imagine that the bass player has miraculously intuited that the
pianist intended to make the substitution.) Once again, tritone substitution preserves
the tendency tones B-F and moves the remaining voices by semitone: A and E, the

Jazz

ninth and thirteenth of a G7 chord, become Bf and Figure 10.3.1 (a) A familiar
Ef, the thirteenth and ninth of Df7. Again, the sub- seventh-chord ii–V–I voicestituted notes ﬁt naturally within the contrapun- leading schema. (b) The
dominant chord can be replaced
tal framework of the original progression, leading
with its tritone transposition so
to familiar voice-leading motions in each of the as to preserve the notes in the
individual lines: in fact, the A-Bf-G motion in the upper staff, moving those in the
soprano of Figure 10.3.3 recalls a gesture common lower staff by semitone.
in classical minor-key harmony.
If we think about this a bit more, we will eventually notice that both of these examples exploit the
fact that tritones are unchanged by tritone transposition, while perfect fourths can be connected
to their tritone transpositions by semitonal voice
leading. It follows that as long as a chord can be
decomposed into perfect fourths and tritones, it can
be replaced by its tritone transposition without much disrupting the music’s harmonic or contrapuntal fabric. In effect, the substitution takes advantage of the symmetry, or near symmetry, of the chord’s two-note constituents. Figure 10.3.4 reminds
us that tritone transposition corresponds to reﬂection around the central horizontal
line of the two-note Möbius strip: every chord gets sent to the point where its image
would appear, if the “line of tritones” were in fact a mirror. Since tritones are at the
mirror’s location, they are identical to their tritone transpositions, and since perfect
fourths (or ﬁfths) are very close to the mirror, tritone transposition does not move
them very far. Musically, this means that tritone substitution preserves tritones while
minimally perturbing fourths and ﬁfths.
Three points are important here. First, tritone substitution relies crucially on the
fact that jazz harmony uses seventh chords rather than triads. A four-voice dominant seventh chord can be decomposed into a perfect ﬁfth and tritone, whereas a
plain triad cannot. (Similarly, the upper voices of a ﬁve-note ninth chord can be

Figure 10.3.2 Tritone substitution as applied to
the quartal version of the A voicing. The notes
in the middle staff are preserved, while those in
the upper staff move by semitone.

Figure 10.3.3 Tritone substitution
produces a f^7®^5 leap reminiscent
of the f^7®f^6®5 motion in classical
minor-key harmony.

361

362

history and analysis
Figure 10.3.4 (a) Tritones can be linked to their tritone transpositions by zero-semitone
voice leading, while perfect fourths can be linked to their tritone transpositions by semitonal
voice leading. (b) These facts reﬂect the geometry of two-note chord space.

decomposed into tritones and ﬁfths.12) Second, tritone substitution is most naturally applied to the dominant chord, since it preserves the all-important tritone
between leading tone and fourth scale degree. Contrapuntally, it may be possible
to apply tritone substitutions very broadly, but many of these substitutions disrupt
the basic musical skeleton described in §10.1 (Figure 10.3.5). Not surprisingly, jazz
musicians most often apply tritone substitution to dominant chords, less frequently
apply it to predominant chords, and almost never apply it to the tonic. Finally, tritone substitution and quartal chord voicings go hand in hand. Originally, jazz harmonies were much more clearly tertian, and tritone substitution was most often
found in the basic form shown in Figure 10.3.1. The increased use of added notes
eventually allowed jazz musicians to reinterpret traditional harmony quartally
while also making manifest the underlying logic of tritone substitution. (When a
chord is arranged in fourths, it is clear that tritone substitution preserves its quartal

12 In fact, efﬁcient voice leading between seventh chords (or the upper voices of ninth chords) preserves this partitioning when chord-roots relate by fourth, ﬁfth, or tritone: the voice-leading schema in
Figure 10.1.1a sends the third and seventh of D minor into the seventh and third of G7, while sending
the root and ﬁfth of D minor into the ﬁfth and root of G7. This is also apparent in the upper voices of
Figure 10.1.3. With other root progressions, the third/seventh pair exchanges places with the root/ﬁfth pair,
as in (C, G, E, B)®(C, G, E, A).

Jazz

organization.) The happy convergence between quartal voicings and tritone substitution may therefore have contributed to the increased systematization of what was
originally a more ad hoc collection of musical practices.
Readers will no doubt notice that this discussion echoes ideas in earlier chapters.
In §7.2, we discussed diatonic “third substitution” in classical music—the process
of replacing a diatonic triad, such as IV, with a third-related diatonic triad, such as
ii6. Our explanation was that the substitution kept two notes ﬁxed while moving the
remaining note by diatonic step (Figure 10.3.6). The preceding explanation of tritone
substitution has the same essential structure: here, tritone-related dominants share
two common tones (the crucial third and seventh) while the remaining notes move
by chromatic step. Tritone substitution, like diatonic third substitution, therefore preserves something of the harmonic and contrapuntal character of the original chord,
with the difference between the cases lying in the intrinsic geometry of the relevant
chord spaces: since three-note diatonic triads divide the octave into three nearly even
parts, they can be linked to their third transpositions by very efﬁcient voice leading; since fourths and ﬁfths divide the octave into two nearly even parts, they can be
linked efﬁciently to their tritone transpositions. This example nicely illustrates the
power of the geometrical approach: were it not for our intensive exploration of the
geometry of chord space, we might never think to associate the third substitutions of
the eighteenth century with the tritone substitutions of the twentieth. And thus we
would miss an important connection between these two very different periods.
Since the tritone substitution has its roots in basic musical facts, we should expect
it to appear in earlier styles as well. Figure 10.3.7a reminds us that the standard German sixth chord can be understood as a tritone substitution for the applied dominant
chord V7/V. (Indeed, tritone substitution presumably originates with augmented sixth
chords, as discussed in Chapter 8.) Figure 10.3.7b applies the tritone substitution to the
standard viiø$–I6 progression. The result is a striking progression from ivø7 to I6, commonly associated with Strauss’ Till Eulenspiegel. The progression demonstrates a principle close to any jazz musician’s heart: if a particular half-diminished chord works

Figure 10.3.5 Tritone substitution applied
to tonic (b) and predominant (c) chords. The
tonic substitution is not very effective, while the
predominant substitution is somewhat more so.

Figure 10.3.6 Diatonic thirdsubstitution (a) and chromatic
tritone-substitution (b). Both
substitutions preserve important
notes in the ﬁrst chord while
moving the remaining notes by
short distances.

363

364

history and analysis

Figure 10.3.7 Classical chord progressions that can be understood as tritone substitutions.
(a) The augmented sixth chord can be seen as a tritone substitution for V7/V. (b) The central
chord progression in Till Eulenspiegel can be seen as a tritone substitution for a common
viiø$–I progression. (c) The initial progression of Tristan can be seen as a tritone substitution
for iiø$–V. (d) In the “Forlane” from Le tombeau de Couperin, Ravel embellishes a descendingﬁfth sequence with tritone transpositions.

as a dominant sonority, then its tritone transposition will probably work as well. Figure
10.3.7c shows that the Tristan chord can be derived by applying the tritone substitution
to the ﬁrst chord in a standard iiø$–V7 progression. (Recall from Chapter 8 that Wagner
explicitly uses these substitutions in Tristan.) Finally, Figure 10.3.7d presents one of many
passages from Ravel that can be analyzed in terms of tritone substitution—a beautiful
g s–G7–c–f s–F7–Bf progression that embellishes
descending ﬁfths with tritone-related chords. (Since Figure 10.3.8 Voice leading
the music presents both chords in the tritone-re- between ﬁfth-related (a) and
lated pair, the term “tritone embellishment” might tritone-related (b) dominant
seventh chords. The two voice
be more appropriate here.) These are just some of
leadings are individually T-related,
the countless passages from nineteenth- and early and are nearly the same size.
twentieth-century music that involve something
like tritone substitution. From this perspective, jazz
simply codiﬁes procedures that are already present,
at least in embryo, in notated music.
Finally, it is worth noting that the tritone substitution depends on the very same features of
chord structure at play in descending-ﬁfths progressions. The two voice leadings in Figure 10.3.8
are roughly the same size, since their second

Jazz

chords differ only by semitone. Traditional tonal syntax exploits the ﬁrst voice
leading to connect ﬁfth-related dominant seventh chords in sequence. Tritone
substitution exploits the second to replace one dominant seventh chord with its
tritone transposition. In this sense, the possibility of tritone substitution is latent
in the basic routines of traditional tonality. Over the course of its history, tonal
harmony exploits this possibility with increasing frequency—beginning with augmented sixths in the eighteenth century, progressing through the occasional use
of tritone substitutions in the early nineteenth century, leading to more daring
impressionist uses of the technique, and culminating in its universal acceptance
in modern jazz.

10.4

altered chords and scales

In composed music, it is possible for chords to change as rapidly as the melody. In
improvisation, however, very high rates of harmonic change have the effect of constraining a player’s freedom; he or she expends so much mental energy thinking
about chords that little is left for melodic invention. As a result, jazz typically features
at most one or two chords per measure, with improvisers playing four, eight, or more
notes per chord. For exactly this reason, scales provide invaluable guidance about
which melodic notes will sound good, particularly when improvisers need to negotiate the altered and extended chords central to jazz harmony.
The lower staves in Figure 10.4.1 show the basic voice-leading skeleton from
the beginning of the chapter. Since the harmonies all belong to C diatonic, it would
be possible to play that scale for the entire passage. But doing so requires the player
to handle the avoid notes with some care: for instance, the tonic scale degree, when
played over the dominant chord, will typically need to be treated as a passing or
neighboring tone. Figure 10.4.1 identiﬁes an alternative approach, where the avoid

Figure 10.4.1 An improviser who plays diatonically will need to handle the “avoid notes”
with care, for instance by making them into passing or neighboring notes. Another alternative
is to raise the avoid notes by semitone, in which case they can be used more freely. The
resulting ii–V–I progression uses three different scales.

365

366

history and analysis

notes are raised by semitone to create altered chords.13 Since there are no avoid notes,
the improviser is now free to treat all seven scale tones as if they were harmonic: for
instance it becomes possible to leap in and out of the altered notes, sustain them
for long durations, and so on. But notice that the passage now involves a series of
three different scales: ii7 is accompanied by C diatonic, V7 by G acoustic, and Imaj7
by G diatonic. The simple ii–V–I progression, the archetype of functional harmony,
has become a fundamentally polyscalar construction.
Figure 10.4.2 shows that the G acoustic scale combines a lower whole-tone fragment
G-A-B-Cs with an upper octatonic fragment Cs-D-E-F-G, each spanning a tritone.
(Jazz musicians sometimes call this the “lydian dominant scale.”14) Now it can happen
that one musician will spontaneously use a tritone substitution while others do not, as
in Figure 10.4.2b: here, the pianist plays fII7 while the bass player plays the ﬁfth scale
degree. Given the bass, listeners are likely to hear G as being the most important note
in the chord, understanding the scale to be the fourth mode of Df acoustic. Notice
Figure 10.4.2 (a) The lydian dominant mode of the acoustic scale combines a wholetone lower tritone with an octatonic upper tritone. (b) Here, the pianist makes a tritone
substitution, playing the Df lydian dominant mode, while the bass player does not. (c) The
result is a G altered scale, which combines an octatonic lower tritone with a whole-tone upper
tritone.

13 George Russell’s Lydian Chromatic Concept (1953, but reprinted in 2001) explicitly discusses this
practice. However, the technique itself was used by Debussy and other early twentieth-century composers.
14 The term is symptomatic of a widespread tendency to elide the difference between scale and mode.

Jazz

that here the whole-tone and octatonic fragments have switched positions: it is the
lower tritone G-Af-Bf-B-Cs that is octatonic, and the upper tritone Cs-Ds-F-G that
is whole tone. Jazz musicians call this new scale the G “altered scale,” since it contains
many more nondiatonic “alterations” than G lydian dominant: rather than the solitary
s^4, the altered scale has f9, s9, s11/f5, and s5/f13.15 Perhaps its clearest precedent in
classical music occurs in the minor mode, where the lowered and raised forms of the
leading tone sometimes collide (Figure 10.4.3).16
We have now considered two ways to ﬁll the
tritones G-Cs and Cs-G with whole-tone or octatonic scale fragments. Since each tritone can contain either fragment, it is reasonable to wonder
what happens when we combine them freely. It
turns out that we can form three different scales
in this way—whole tone, acoustic, and octatonic,
with the acoustic appearing in both lydian dominant and altered modes (Figure 10.4.4). Each
contains the notes {G, B, Cs, F} and hence can
appear over either V7 or its tritone substitute.
These scales, together with the diatonic, are in
many ways the central scales of jazz harmony:
they are played by countless improvisers and
are highlighted in virtually every jazz textbook I have encountered.17 They have also
reappeared at various points throughout this
book. Chapter 4 argued that these scales are
theoretically interesting, since they are the
only scales with one-or-two semitone steps
and three-or-four semitone thirds. Chapter 9
showed that the same scales play an important role in a wide variety of twentiethcentury notated music.18 Here we see that
they are essential to jazz as well.
Figure 10.4.5 reproduces a number of
extended and altered dominant sonorities

15 The altered scale is often spelled with two thirds and no fourths, as in G-Af-Bf-Bn-Df-Ef-F-G
(Figure 9.3.18, R43).
16 It would be interesting, in fact, to investigate whether early jazz players played this quasi-harmonic
minor scale in contexts where later musicians use the altered scale.
17 See Tymoczko 1997 for a survey of various textbooks’ treatments of scales.
18 Interestingly, it was jazz theorists—in their role as practical-minded pedagogues—who ﬁrst isolated
this collection of scales and asserted their importance. And though more academic theorists were aware of
the individual scales, they did not begin to emphasize the group until well after they had been discussed in
jazz. Indeed, the ﬁrst published theoretical discussion of the four scales seems to be Tymoczko 1997, which
was preceded—and directly inspired—by Levine 1989.

367

Figure 10.4.3
(a) A harmonic
minor scale with
an additional
(neighboring)
f^7. (b) The
resulting notes
are very similar
to the altered
scale.

Figure 10.4.4
There are four
ways to combine
octatonic and
whole-tone
upper and
lower tritones,
producing one
whole tone scale,
one octatonic
scale, and two
modes of the
acoustic scale.

368

history and analysis

from the beginning of Chapter 8, showing that each belongs to one of our four
scales. One might wonder whether one of these scales will inevitably contain any
given altered dominant chord. The answer is “almost.” Recall from §4.4 (and Figure
10.4.6) that seven types of scale contain every “nonchromatic chord”—that is, every
chord that does not include a chromatic cluster such as {C, Cs, D}. To incorporate
all of these chords we would need to expand our four-scale vocabulary to include the
hexatonic and harmonic collections. (Jazz musicians typically use chromatic clusters
only as a special effect, so we do not need to worry about chords with clusters.) Interestingly, however, it turns out that the hexatonic and harmonic scales are in practice
rarely needed. Figure 10.4.7 shows that there are only four nonchromatic set classes
with ﬁve or fewer notes not contained within some diatonic, acoustic, whole-tone,
or octatonic scale. Consequently, the four basic scales are sufﬁcient for most musical
circumstances.
Of course, jazz musicians use other scales as well (Figure 10.4.8). Pentatonic scales
can impart a “fourthy” ﬂavor to predominant, dominant, and tonic chords. The

Figure 10.4.5
Scales that are
compatible with
common altereddominant
chords.

Figure 10.4.6 The
transpositions of
these seven scales
contain all the
sets that do not
themselves contain
a chromatic subset
such as {C, Cs, D},
and hence all of the
common extended
or altered tonal
harmonies.

Jazz
Figure 10.4.7 The ﬁrst column lists the number of set classes containing a chromatic cluster
such as {C, Cs, D}. The second lists the number of set classes contained in the diatonic,
acoustic, whole tone, and octatonic scales. The third lists the number of set classes that do not
contain a chromatic cluster, but are not contained in one of these four scales. All set classes
belong to one of these three categories.

Three Notes
Four Notes
Five Notes
Six Notes

Chromatic
1
5
16
32

Dia, Aco,
Wt, Oct
11
23
19
13

Other
0
1
3
5

Figure 10.4.8 Other scales commonly played in jazz. Pentatonic scales are often used over ii,
V, and I. The hexatonic scale can be played against a tonic major seventh. The acoustic scale
often appears over iiø7 in the “locrian s2” mode; the same scale sometimes appears against
a bare tonic triad (without the seventh). Harmonic minor is sometimes used for minor-key
dominant chords, as in classical music, and harmonic major can be used over a majorseventh tonic.

acoustic scale can be played over a iiø7 or I chord, lending a minor coloring to the
major mode ii–V–I. Acoustic and harmonic minor scales often appear in minormode contexts, while the hexatonic can be played over a major or minor tonic
chord. More unusual scales, such as the gypsy scale, are sometimes used to evoke an
exotic or non-Western ambience. Taken together, these conventions provide a fairly
robust set of rules for associating chords and scales, thus synthesizing functional
harmony, nineteenth-century chordal techniques, and impressionist scale use.19 And

19 Jazz pedagogues, as noted in Chapter 9, describe these conventions as “the principles of chord-scale
compatibility.”

369

370

history and analysis

though these fundamental principles are familiar from the twentieth-century notated
tradition, they are applied in jazz with a systematic rigor that far exceeds anything
found earlier.

10.5

bass and upper voice tritone
substitutions

I have already mentioned that a bass player or pianist will sometimes make a tritone substitution without alerting the other musicians. In bass-only tritone substitutions, the same upper voices are reinterpreted as belonging to a new root
a tritone away. This is illustrated in Figure 10.5.1a, where the seventh, ninth,
third, and thirteenth of a G7 voicing become the third, ﬂat thirteenth, seventh,
and sharp ninth of a Df7 altered chord. (This could occur if the bass player, but
not the pianist, decided to apply a tritone substitution.) In the upper voice version of the substitution, the bass stays ﬁxed, while the upper voices move by tritone. For instance, in Figure 10.5.1b, the seventh, ninth, third, and thirteenth of
the G7 voicing become the third, ﬂat thirteenth, seventh, and sharp ninth of a G7
altered chord.20 (This could happen if the pianist applied the tritone substitution
independent of the bass player.) Note that this substitution changes the macroharmony more dramatically than the bass-only version, since many more notes are
affected: both voicings in Figure 10.5.1a belong to the same G acoustic collection,
while in (b) the second belongs to Df acoustic.
Figure 10.5.1 Bass substitution
Scales provide a useful way to conceptualize
and upper-voice substitution.
these transformations. The whole-tone, octatonic,
Here either the bass player or
lydian dominant, and acoustic scales all contain
pianist makes the substitution,
but not both. In each case, the
both the dominant note (^5) and its tritone substieffect is to transform a diatonic
tute (f^2); thus as long as a chord’s notes are chovoicing containing the seventh,
sen from one of these scales, they will be consistent
ninth, third, and thirteenth above
with either of the chord roots a bass player might
the root into an altered voicing
play (Figure 10.5.2). Furthermore, since both whole
containing third, ﬂat thirteenth,
tone and octatonic are tritone symmetrical, upper
seventh, and sharp nine.
voice substitution will send a whole-tone voicing to another whole-tone voicing, and an octatonic voicing to another octatonic voicing. (Since
any of the notes in these scales can reasonably be
played over a V7 chord, these new chords will be
guaranteed to work reasonably well.) Meanwhile,
upper-voice substitution exchanges the G lydian
dominant mode for G altered: hence any collection
of upper voices drawn from one of these scales can

20 This is just the A voicing of Df7 over a G bass.

Jazz
Figure 10.5.2 Upper-voice substitution leaves the whole-tone and octatonic scales
unchanged (top two lines), exchanges the lydian dominant and altered modes of the acoustic
scale (line three), and sends the diatonic scale to its tritone transposition (bottom line).

Figure 10.5.3 Independent applications of the tritone transposition can clash with purely
diatonic voicings. Here, the diatonic notes C and D clash with the bass player’s (tritone
substitute) Df; similarly, the unsubstituted G in the bass clashes with the pianist’s Gf
diatonic.

be transposed by tritone to produce a voicing drawn from the other. By contrast,
this same procedure can lead to problems in diatonic contexts: since upper-voice
substitution sends the C diatonic scale to Fs diatonic, it can create clashes with the
bass line, as in Figure 10.5.3.
One important musical consequence is that a soloist can always play a descending-by-semitone melodic sequence over a sequence of dominant harmonies that
descend by ﬁfths. In effect, the soloist applies the upper-voice tritone substitution
to every other chord, as shown in Figure 10.5.4. The harmonic meaning of the notes
thus alternates between chords: for example, in Figure 10.5.4a, the augmented triad
represents the seventh, sharp eleventh, and ninth in the ﬁrst and third chords, and
the third, root, and sharp ﬁfth of the second and fourth chords (Figure 10.5.5).
Similarly, the melodic fourths in 10.5.4b alternate between lydian dominant and
altered voicings. This idiom, by which dominant voicings move chromatically over
a descending ﬁfth bass line, is ubiquitous in jazz, providing an easy way to cope with
fast descending ﬁfth sequences.
Readers will not be shocked to learn that these ideas are again anticipated, often
very explicitly, in the music of Debussy, Ravel, and other early twentieth-century
composers. Debussy in particular was extremely fond of the lydian dominant mode,
and often constructed textures in which a dominant seventh chord is accompanied

371

372

history and analysis
Figure 10.5.4 Chromatically descending voicings can always accompany descending-ﬁfths
patterns in the bass. In effect, tritone transposition is applied to every other chord in the
sequence.

Figure 10.5.5 This
table shows how tritone
substitution affects the
notes in a dominant voicing.
The root of the dominant
chord becomes the s4 (or
s11) and vice versa. (Notes
here are labeled according
to their intervals above the
bass.) The f9 and ﬁfth are
exchanged, and so on.

by a sharp eleventh. (See Figure 10.5.6a.) Both Debussy
and Ravel also apply tritone substitution independently to either the bass or upper voices: for instance,
in Figure 10.5.6b, Ravel begins by alternating between
C7 (expressed by the “mixolydian f6 mode”) and Gf7
(expressed by a voicing that belongs both to Gf diatonic
and lydian dominant); when the music returns, however, the bass stays ﬁxed, producing an “altered” voicing
of the C7. In (c), from Debussy’s “La danse de Puck,” a Cs
altered scale alternates with standard V7 voicing, suggesting an upper-voice substitution. Finally, Figure 10.5.6d
presents a much-discussed passage from Debussy, in
which semitonally descending A voicings in the right
hand appear over descending ﬁfths in the bass, exactly
as in Figure 10.5.4. (This passage includes an upper
voice Af pedal.21) In light of the preceding examples,
it does not seem entirely anachronistic to describe this
as a series of Debussian dominants, in which diatonic
voicings alternate with their tritone substitutes.

21 This progression echoes a similar passage in Berg, as discussed in Stuckenschmidt 1965.

Figure 10.5.6 Impressionist composers preﬁgured many central ideas of jazz harmony. In
(a), from Prelude to “The Afternoon of a Faun,” mm. 61–62, Debussy uses an acoustic scale
over V7, as in Figure 10.4.1. In (b), from Ravel’s “Ondine,” bass substitution is applied to
the dominant chord at the end of m. 46 and m. 51. In (c), from the Prelude “La danse de
Puck,” Debussy applies something like upper-voice substitution, moving between altered
and diatonic dominant voicings. In (d), from Six épigraphes antiques, No. 4, Debussy uses
descending-semitone voicings over a descending-ﬁfths bass line, applying the upper-voice
substitution to every other chord in the sequence.

#œ œ œ #œ #œ œ œ œ œ œ œ œ œ œ œ
3
3
j
j
j j3
# œœœ
œœ œœ œœ œœ œœ
œœ
œœ
œ
œ
? œ˙ . œ œ œ œ
˙.
˙.
˙.
&

˙

bœ bœ
œœ
œœ
œœ
bœ
bœ bœ bœ
b
œ
b
œ
œ
œ
œ
œ
œ
œ
œ
œ
œ
œ
œ
œ
œ
œ
œ
œ
œ
œ
œ
œ
œ
b
œ
?œ
bœ
œ
œ

m. 46

?

j
œ

bœ.

bœ

œ
˙.
C7

bœ
bœ

bœ

Gf7 (diatonic)

m. 51 (transposed up by minor third)

œœ
œœ
œœ
bœ
bœ
œœ b œ œ œ œ œ œ œœ œ œ œ œ œ œ œœ œ œ œ œ œ œ b œ b œ œ b œ œ œ œ œ
bœ
j bœ
bœ
œ b b b œœœ
? œ œ˙ . b œ b œ .
œ
œ ˙.
&

C7

C7 (altered scale)

tritone-related pairs:

A/Ds

D/Gs

œ œ œ #œ œ #œ #œ #œ
œ
.
®
œ # œ ..
& # œr n ˙˙˙
œœœœ Œ . œ œ œ œ
˙
ŸÈ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ ŸÈ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ ŸI~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
#˙
˙
#œ
œ
? #œ
..
..
#œ

Cs altered
Cs7[f5f9]

Cs diatonic/lydian dominant
[f13]

Cs9
3

3
3
bœ
& b œ b œ œ œœœ œ œ b # œœœ
‰ bœ ‰ œ ‰
J
j ‰ b œj ‰
? Œ
bœ
bœ
bœ

Bf7

Ef7 (alt.)

b œ bb œœ
œœ b œ œ œœ œ b œœ œ
b œœ ‰ œœ ‰ b b œœ ‰
J
j ‰ b œj ‰ j ‰
bœ
bœ
bœ
bœ
bœ
3

Af7

Df7 (alt.)

Gf7

374

history and analysis

10.6

polytonality, sidestepping, and
“playing out”

So far we have been imagining an idealized performance situation in which players
are always perfectly in synch, and their notes systematically related. But of course this
is unrealistic: in the blur of the improvisatory moment, there is room for a good deal
of asynchrony, as players go their own way by stepping outside of the underlying harmony. One of the most interesting features of contemporary jazz is the way players
negotiate and exploit this possibility—deliberately moving between states of being
together and being apart.
The origins of this technique can perhaps be traced to the blues, which is characterized by “blue notes” that create a delicious dissonance with the underlying harmony.
In Figure 10.6.1, scale degrees f3 and f5 are superimposed above a dominant seventh.
The music thus suggests a kind of polytonalFigure 10.6.1 The blues often features
ity, or clash between independent harmonic
polytonal clashes between melody and
streams, in which an upper-register (Afriharmony.
can American) “blues scale” contrasts with
a lower-register European harmony. Figure
10.6.2 presents a more audacious example,
drawn from Warne Marsh’s solo on the tune
“Smog Eyes.” The underlying harmony here
is a tonic Ef major, but Marsh begins his
solo with a wonderfully brash E major chord a half step too high. What is more, he
embellishes the top note of the line with an upper neighbor. As s^4 in Ef major, An
would typically resolve upward to the Bf; but as the fourth scale degree in E major,
it is an upper neighbor to the Gs. The authority of Marsh’s phrasing is such that
the downward resolution feels utterly compelling, suggesting that we hear E major
as being both locally stable (relative to the An, which wants to resolve downward
to it) and globally unstable (relative to the key of the rest of the ensemble). Marsh
intensiﬁes the feeling of resolution by lowering Gs to Gn, initiating a descending
arpeggio that resolves the entire E major triad down by semitone to the tonic Ef.
(Note how register and tonality interact: the line ascends to the doubly dissonant
An, the upper neighbor to the third of a chord that is itself an upper neighbor; then

Figure 10.6.2 Out-of-key playing in Warne Marsh’s solo on “Smog Eyes.” Marsh plays an
E major ﬁgure over an Ef harmony; the A is an upper neighbor to the Gs, and the entire E
major triad resolves downward to Ef.

Jazz

the descent brings the music back into the key.) All of this, of course, occurs over
a supposedly stable tonic triad. Marsh thus exploits two fundamentally different
mechanisms of tension and release: there is the standard tonal oscillation between
dominant and tonic, but also the oscillation between states of being in the same key
and states of being apart.
These concepts can again be applied, mutatis mutandis, to music in the classical tradition. Chopin, for example, was an improvising musician who also liked to
exploit sudden shifts between semitonally related keys. For example, the B section
of his ﬁrst Nocturne, shown in Figure 10.6.3a, contains a four-measure phrase that
shifts from Df major to D major and back. This semitonal shift—which a jazz
musician might call “sidestepping”—is perhaps comparable to Marsh’s temporary
shift from Ef to E major. Figure 10.6.3b shows an example from Chopin’s second
Nocturne, where a cadence on Bf major immediately leads to a dazzling digression
to E major. The underlying musical impulse here is again not so foreign to jazz: the
music brieﬂy and dramatically shifts to a distant and colorful key, before settling
back to its proper home. Of course, an improviser like Marsh typically shifts key
independently of the rest of the ensemble, creating a polytonal clash. Chopin, who
Figure 10.6.3 Sidestepping in Chopin. (a) In the ﬁrst Nocturne (Op. 9 No. 1), Chopin shifts
suddenly from Df major to D major, in the middle of the phrase. (b) In the second Nocturne
(Op. 9 No. 2), he returns from Bf to Ef by way of E major.

375

376

history and analysis

as a solo player was in complete control of the music, and who was in any case uninterested in polytonality, shifts the entire texture at the same time.22
There are some jazz pieces in which the ii–V–I architecture of functional harmony disappears almost entirely, being replaced by this process of moving in and
out of synchrony. (The ambiguous term “modal jazz” is sometimes used in this context, though it can also refer to other musical phenomena.23) McCoy Tyner’s “Passion
Dance” is a good example: although the tune itself contains a few chord changes, the
solo section is entirely based on a tonic F7 chord, implying a drone-like mixolydian.
In his solo, Tyner reinforces this drone-like feeling by continually reverting to a low
F-C ﬁfth in the bass. Above this, the right hand plays melodic stacks of fourths, with
the fourths F-Bf-Ef and G-C-F representing the tonic voicings, and formations like
Fs-B-E representing the nontonic (out-of-key) states.
Figure 10.6.4 shows two phrases that occur near the beginning of Tyner’s solo,
each exhibiting the same basic oscillation between in-key and out-of-key playing. In
the ﬁrst, Tyner repeats the descending stepwise pattern G-F-Ef in an unsystematic

Figure 10.6.4 Harmonic motion in “Passion Dance” largely consists in oscillations between
in-key and out-of-key playing.

22 The semitonal shifts in Prokoﬁev and Shostakovich sometimes do create polytonal effects, and are
perhaps even closer to those in jazz. See Frankenhauser 2008.
23 “Modal jazz” can be used to describe either highly diatonic pieces with very few chord changes, or
relatively chromatic music in which harmonic tension is generated by out-of-key playing.

Jazz

chromatic sequence, presenting it on Ef (in a variant form), Fs, F, D, Ds, Cs, C and
Bf, before returning to F mixolydian. (Note that the out-of-key section begins with
the hands moving in contrary motion, with the right-hand scale fragment descending while the left-hand fourths ascend.) The second phrase departs from F mixolydian only in its fourth measure, moving to the black-note pentatonic collection while
the quartal voicing shifts up to Fs-B-E. One can hear this music as suggesting a dominant seventh sonority on Fs, a semitone away from the tonic. However, the musical
impression is not so much of motion between well-deﬁned chords as of oscillation
between two basic harmonic states—“home” and “away,” with the “away” state potentially manifesting itself in a variety of different harmonic colors.
While the solos on “Passion Dance” are almost entirely devoid of traditional
chord progressions, many jazz pieces combine this sort of “playing outside” with traditional tonal functionality. Harmonic tension in this music thus arises from motion
within a key (from stable I to unstable V and back), from motion between keys (from
the global tonic to various subsidiary regions), from neighboring and passing tones
(creating ﬂeeting dissonances with the underlying harmony), and from more radical
motion between states of being together and being apart. The interaction between
these four kinds of tension can produce music of extraordinary subtlety, in which
the choice between functional tonality and other modes of pitch organization can be
made anew every few seconds.
I should also mention one more way in which jazz musicians evoke a sense of
polytonality or “being apart”: the use of dominant voicings that contain a triad foreign
to the tonic key. (Pedagogues sometimes call these “upper structure” voicings.) Figure 10.6.5 shows how to combine the essential notes of the dominant harmony (root,
third, and seventh) with a triad foreign to the underlying key. (The ﬁgure eliminates
those voicings that contain an Fs, which would create a chromatic cluster with F-G
in the dominant voicing, or a C, which would prematurely anticipate the resolution

Figure 10.6.5 “Upper structure” dominant voicings combine root, third, and seventh in
the bass with a foreign triad in the upper voices. Upper-voice tritone substitution leaves the
lowest three notes unchanged, transposing the triad by tritone. This provides a convenient
way to remember and categorize these voicings.

377

378

history and analysis

of the leading tone.) Jazz soloists can create polychordal effects by emphasizing the
“upper structure” triads, for instance by playing prominent E-major or Ef-major
arpeggios over an accompanimental G7 chord. Although these upper structure arpeggios could in principle be described as altered dominant chords, they evoke a sensation
of polytonality not too dissimilar from the cases we have been considering.

10.7

bill evans’ “oleo”

We’ll now use these ideas to analyze Bill Evans’ version of Sonny Rollins’ “Oleo,” from
the 1958 trio album Everybody Digs Bill Evans. It’s an unusual and austere piece, like
Bach in its stripped-down rigor: for much of the recording, Evans plays only with his
right hand, while the drummer Philly Joe Jones lays out, leaving the bass player (Sam
Jones) to improvise two-part counterpoint with the solo line. By omitting left-hand
chords, Evans creates space to depart from the tune’s underlying framework—playing
outside the key for a signiﬁcant portion of the solo. (Because of the wide registral and
timbral separation between the instruments, clashes between melody and bass are
not at all jarring.) The coordination in the ensemble is itself virtuosic—the tempo
is fast (approximately 240 beats per minute) and the music replete with destabilizing syncopations and polyrhythms. Yet the players manage not only to make musical
sense, but also to swing.
The piece is a repeating 32-bar AABA form, based on the chord changes to
Gershwin’s “I Got Rhythm” (Figure 10.7.1). (Each AABA unit is called a “chorus.”)
Traditionally, the B section of “Oleo” is improvised, with only the chords being ﬁxed.
In the ﬁrst three choruses, Philly Joe Jones drums normally only in the B section; in
the A sections he either remains silent or plays a dotted half-note polyrhythm on the
hi-hat. (At the start of the fourth chorus, he explodes into activity in what is, to my
mind, one of the most dramatic entrances in all of jazz.) Two features of the tune are
noteworthy. First, the B section (mm. 17–24) features a series of whole-tone voicings that descend semitonally over descending ﬁfth chords, discussed earlier in §10.5.
Second, Evans begins the dotted-quarter ﬁgure on the second eighth note of measure
17, creating a continuous dotted-quarter pulse that lasts until the second half of measure 20. This is a common technique, whereby soloists start a polyrhythm so that it
will synchronize with the main pulse at a structurally important moment—here the
downbeat of m. 19.

10.7.1 Chorus 1
The solo opens with a blues gesture emphasizing f5 and f3, shown in Figure 10.7.2.
The phrase is delayed so as to start on beat three of the ﬁrst measure, although the
casual listener might easily miss this. The sixth measure of the solo features an octatonic scale over Ef7 and is followed by a pair of two-measure phrases that recall the
blues-inﬂected opening. (These phrases develop the Bf-F-Ef-D motive bracketed on
the example.) Evans then plays two repetitions of a two-and-a-half-measure phrase,

Jazz

379
Figure 10.7.1
Sonny Rollins’
tune “Oleo,” as
played by Bill
Evans.

each divided into six-beat units. These phrases sidestep between a B major triad,
whose third is embellished with an upper neighbor, and a Bf major triad embellished
in the same way. The B major chord can be understood either as an out-of-key element or as a (triadic!) tritone substitution for a dominant F major triad.
The B section begins with a development of this six-beat idea: what was once a
second-inversion B major triad becomes a root position G major triad, representing
the seventh, ninth, and eleventh of an Aø7 chord. Figure 10.7.3 interprets this as an
efﬁcient voice leading between Bf and G major triads—reminiscent of the chromatic
progressions we ﬁnd in nineteenth-century music, although here the G major triad
is an upper structure of Aø7. (The Bn suggests the A mode of the F acoustic scale, also
known as “locrian s2.”) The next phrase spins out this idea into a longer melodic
line. The ﬁnal A section begins with another example of sidestepping, as secondinversion major triads slide chromatically back and forth between Bf and C, leading

380

history and analysis

Figure 10.7.2
The ﬁrst chorus
of Evans’ solo.

to an embellished scalar descent from F5 to A3. It is interesting that the ﬁnal sixteen
bars of the chorus feature four appearances of the same basic musical shape, marked
on the score with the Greek letter b. Having somewhat less individuality than a classical motive, this “shape” is more like a turn or melodic curlicue, a stylized way to get
from one place to another.24 This particular pattern is characteristic of Evans’ playing, and appears repeatedly in many of his solos; almost every jazz improviser has a
similar collection of favorite melodic devices, small “signatures” that help deﬁne the
player’s style or sound.

24 In this respect it is perhaps analogous to the small cells that contribute to the identity of an Indian
Rag.

Jazz

381

Figure 10.7.3 Measures 47–49
articulate an efﬁcient voice leading
between Bf and G major triads.
However, the G triad represents
the upper notes of an extended Aø7
chord.

10.7.2 Chorus 2
The second chorus, shown in Figure 10.7.4, begins by linearizing a set of four-note
voicings. Figure 10.7.5 shows that the Cs minor seventh can be understood as a tritone
substitution for, or upper structure of, G7, though it is also possible to understand it
as a chromatic passing chord.25 The next phrase features rhythmic displacement of
a sort that is quite common to jazz: the rhythmic and registral accents are on beats
2 and 4, as if the entire phrase had been shifted forward by one beat (Figure 10.7.6).

Figure 10.7.4
The second
chorus of Evans’
solo.

25 One implication of Figure 10.5.4 is that “tritone substitute” and “chromatic passing chord” are
intimately connected.

382

history and analysis
Figure 10.7.5 The ﬁrst phrase of the chorus linearizes a collection of
four-note voicings, similar to those discussed earlier in the chapter.

Figure 10.7.6 The second phrase of the chorus displaces the accent: on its own, the melody
would be heard with the registrally accented notes on strong beats (lower line); as played,
however, the notes are rhythmically weak, creating a kind of polyrhythm.

The B section begins with a trick that appears in the statement of the tune: the
augmented triad D-Bf-Fs, originally the root, ﬂat thirteenth, and third of the chord,
is shifted down by semitone as the chord roots fall by ﬁfth, producing Cs-A-F, the
sharp eleventh, ninth, and seventh of the chord. The pitches of the sixth phrase recall
the very opening of the solo (Figure 10.7.2, mm. 33–35), except here the En is treated
as a lower neighbor to the F; meanwhile, the dotted-quarter rhythm sets up the virtuosic polyrhythms of the next chorus. The end of the phrase returns to eighth notes,
delaying the resolution of the Bf7 chord until the third beat of m. 94. Philly Joe Jones
enters precisely when Evans ends his phrase, one bar before the end of the chorus—an
incredibly brash entrance that sets the stage for the dazzling music that is to follow.

10.7.3 Chorus 3
The climactic chorus, shown in Figure 10.7.7, reaches a peak of rhythmic density,
chromaticism, and polyrhythmic complexity. It is built on a common rhythmic
device, an extended series of dotted sixteenth notes grouped in fours. On the page, the
rhythm looks almost unplayable, particularly at this tempo, but it is not actually that
difﬁcult. (To practice it, begin by playing a series of dotted quarters against a quarter-note pulse; then, while holding the dotted-quarter pulse ﬁrmly in mind, let your
ﬁngers play four notes in the span of each dotted quarter.) Although conceptually

Jazz

383

straightforward, the device produces a spectacular impression and has been adopted
by a number of musicians.
Evans’ playing here is largely chromatic and outside the tonal system: he moves
the motive F-Gf-F-D up and down by semitone, with no regard for the underlying chord changes—an apotheosis of the more cautious sidestepping earlier in the
solo. (Note, by the way, that both the rhythm and the contour of this motive are
anticipated by the seemingly throwaway turn in mm. 5 and 13 of the tune.) Since
the dotted-sixteenth groups fall on the downbeat of every third measure, the rhythm

Figure 10.7.7
The third chorus
of Evans’ solo.

384

history and analysis

articulates three-measure units. However, the pitches articulate a phrase of nine dotted-quarters that is repeated a half step lower (Figure 10.7.8).26 Evans breaks off his
polyrhythm on the fourth beat of the seventh measure of the chorus, taking a onebar rest that allows him to resynchronize with the tune’s eight-bar units. After this
brief pause, the second phrase begins a ﬁve-group unit that descends chromatically
(mm. 105–106), repeated at the interval of an ascending major third (mm. 107–108).
(Note that here Evans observes the two-measure phrasing of the tune, reigning in
the dotted quarters’ tendency to group the measures into threes.) The next phrase
(mm. 109–112) begins with another chromatically descending ﬁve-group unit, but
continues diatonically, creating a subtle feeling of resolution as the chromatic macroharmony clariﬁes. Note that the sequence picks up right on schedule on the second
eighth note of m. 109, suggesting that there is a missing dotted-quarter unit across
the barline of mm. 108–109.
Figure 10.7.8 The rhythm of the dotted sixteenth-note ﬁgure articulates three-measure
groups. However, the pitches articulate a nine dotted-quarter sequence.

The B section opens with the last appearance of the dotted-sixteenth-note idea,
this time using a G harmonic minor scale over a D7 chord. The next phrase returns
to the shapely melodic playing of the earlier sections of the solo: we hear a G altered
scale over G7; a Gf7 arpeggio that suggests an upper structure of (or tritone substitution for) the C7; and a slightly chromaticized C-7 arpeggio. The phrase ends with a
little octatonic ﬁllip over F7. Evans marks the return of the A section by introducing a
new harmonic idea, a quartal passage articulating the notes F-G-Bf-C.

10.7.4 Chorus 4
Like the last act of a Shakespeare play, Chorus 4 lowers the energy level of the climactic Chorus 3, bringing the solo to a satisfying close (Figure 10.7.9). The music
opens by developing the quartal idea introduced in the last eight bars of Chorus 3.
(Jazz players pride themselves on this sort of ﬂexible phrasing, in which the improvised motives blur the tune’s section boundaries.) The subtle process of variation in
these measures is illustrated in Figure 10.7.10: we begin by moving straight up and
down the inverted stack of fourths F-Bf-C-F. Evans then varies the gesture’s contour and rhythm, playing a series of “down by step, up by third” motions along the
“scale” Fs-B-Cs-[Fs]. He repeats this varied form a semitone lower in the “tonic”
stack of fourths. The fourth statement moves the pattern backward in time by one

26 I have my doubts about whether Evans meant to do this, though I feel uncomfortable betting against
his ingenuity.

Jazz

385

eighth note. Finally, the ﬁfth iteration recalls the beginning of the ﬁrst, though with
the triplet now displaced forward in time. The impression is of a kaleidoscopic
series of ever-changing variations, as the same basic elements are recombined in
new ways.
A relatively simple descending line in mm. 134–136 leads to an idea whose overt
bluesiness recalls the very beginning of the solo. Figure 10.7.11 shows how Evans
plays with this musical idea in these next few measures: the second statement shifts
the pattern upward so that it starts on Fn rather than Dn—transposing the motive
up by step along the non-octave repeating scale (D4, F4, Bf4, Df5, Ef5, E5). He also
compresses the third note so the repetitions occur on weak eighth notes. The third
statement uses the same pitches and rhythms as the second, but begins an eighth
note later, so that the repeated notes are now on the beat again. (Note that these
two phrases also vary the number of repeated notes.) Once more, the impression is

Figure 10.7.9
The fourth
chorus of Evans’
solo.

386

history and analysis
Figure 10.7.10 Motivic development at the
opening of the fourth chorus.

Figure 10.7.11
Development of
the bluesy motif.

of a dazzling process of continuous musical variation, wherein the same basic elements are constantly reconﬁgured—as if you could never step twice into the same
musical river.
The B section begins with a series of chromatically ﬁlled-in major thirds; these
ascend by minor third while the harmonies descend by ﬁfth (Aø7, D7, G7). Figure
10.7.12 interprets the underlying musical logic: in the lower staves, we ﬁnd augmented
triads descending semitonally over descending ﬁfths harmonies as in mm. 17–24 and
82–83. Evans, not content to use this stock pattern for a third time, hits upon a clever
variation: instead of moving down by semitone from one augmented triad to the
next, he moves up by minor third—producing the same series of augmented triads,
but now in an ascending fashion. This spontaneous stroke of music-theoretical inspiration exploits two different kinds of substitution: tritone substitution, which allows
semitonally descending augmented triads to accompany dominant seventh chords
descending by ﬁfth, and what might be called “major-third substitution” (deriving
from the augmented triad’s threefold symmetry), which allows Evans to replace aug-

Jazz

387
Figure 10.7.12
With augmented
triads, ascending
minor thirds
and descending
semitones
produce the
same sequence of
chords.

mented triads that descend by semitone with augmented triads that ascend by minor
third.27
The rest of the phrase is more typical, using scales and arpeggios to outline the
underlying harmonies. The solo ends by returning to the bluesy idea of m. 137, doubling its repeated notes at the major third, evoking Stravinsky as much as the blues
proper. Evans ends his solo by developing the last two notes of this gesture, falling
chromatically to A-Cs. Noticing the waning intensity, Philly Joe Jones stops drumming in preparation for the bass solo.
These sorts of relationships would be interesting if they were found in a piece
of composed music, carefully constructed over weeks or months. But their appearance in such a rhythmically complex improvisation is truly remarkable. Many classical musicians, I suspect, would be hard pressed simply to keep time with Evans’
rhythm section—indeed, it can be hard enough to follow the form while listening to
the record. (Philly Joe Jones, with his dotted half-note polyrhythms, certainly doesn’t
help!) That Evans is able to do so, while spontaneously developing a coherent musical statement, must be counted an act of genuine virtuosity. Whether we look at the
large-scale form of the piece, with its recurrent motives and organic formal development, or at small-scale processes of variation, the improvisation seems logical, clear,
and carefully constructed. This is not simply a virtuosity of the body but of the mind
as well—the spontaneous expression of a deep understanding of the fundamental
principles of twentieth-century tonal composition.

10.8

jazz as modernist synthesis

Arnold Schoenberg and Walter Piston both observed that theirs was an age marked
by the proliferation of styles.28 Like many of their contemporaries, they despaired
of trying to synthesize these diverse trends into a coherent body of knowledge,
27 It is interesting to compare this passage to the opening of Radiohead’s “Just,” where the triads C–Ef–
D–F support a melodic octatonic scale. Radiohead’s progression can be understood as an ascending minorthird pattern (C–Ef–Fs–A) that has been transformed by a major-third substitution (Fs®D) which changes
an ascending minor third into a descending semitone. (After this substitution the ascending minor thirds
continue apace.) The Fs®D substitution preserves the chord tone Fs, so that the octatonic scale sounds the
root of the ﬁrst two chords and the third of the second two. In Evans’ solo, descending augmented triads
become ascending minor-third augmented triads; in Radiohead’s song, ascending minor-third major triads
instead descend by semitone. Underlying both procedures is the same fundamental geometry.
28 See Piston 1941 and Schoenberg 1975.

388

history and analysis

explaining that they were too close to the developments they surveyed. (Indeed, it was
precisely Piston’s despair that gave rise to modern American pedagogy, centering on
the “common practice period” of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.) Instead,
both prophesied that there would come a time in which the various developments of
the early twentieth century would be clariﬁed, coalescing into a coherent musical language. I ﬁnd it marvelous to reﬂect that these prognostications were essentially correct. For there is a late twentieth-century musical language that synthesizes many of
the developments of nineteenth and early twentieth-century music, including chromatic voice leading, quartal harmony, polychords, impressionist scales, and polytonality. This musical language has been codiﬁed in textbooks, is taught at (some)
conservatories, and can be heard on any given night in New York, Riga, Dubrovnik,
Tokyo, and throughout much of the rest of the world.
Of course, Schoenberg and Piston would have been shocked to see the form in
which their prophecies were realized. First, the synthesis was not achieved by the
inheritors of the European notated tradition—composers of string quartets and symphonies, trained in the best conservatories and having access to the ﬁnest orchestras
and concert halls. Instead the language was forged by improvising musicians, many
poor and African American, who carved an alternative musical tradition out of the
materials afforded by popular culture. Second, the modernist synthesis did not take
the form of a robust alternative to tonality: instead, it created a hybrid style that incorporates modernist devices while continuing to exploit functionally tonal ideas. For
the contemporary jazz musician, chromatic voice leading, octatonic scales, quartal
harmonies, and polychords are just more grist for the tonal mill. Figure 10.8.1 shows
that a simple jazz ii–V–I is an accretion of musical techniques formed over the ages:
at its core, we have a ii–V–I schema dating from the time of Monteverdi; in the upper
voices of the piano’s right hand, we ﬁnd an efﬁcient chromatic voice leading between

Figure 10.8.1 A simple jazz progression incorporates techniques from the entire history of
tonality.

Jazz

third-related major triads (Ef, G, Bf)®(D, G, B), reminiscent of the progressions
that fascinated Schubert, Brahms, and Wagner. On top of this we ﬁnd scales characteristic of early twentieth-century modernism: an acoustic scale over the V chord,
and the lydian mode over the tonic chord. This routine passage, in other words, is a
musical synthesis literally centuries in the making, incorporating and domesticating
the ideas of previous revolutionary eras.
From an economic point of view, there are clear reasons why jazz musicians would
emphasize synthesis and shared musical practices. Notated music is a highly individualized business, created by composers who largely work alone. Jazz, as an inherently
social form of music making, is more fertile ground for constructing a genuinely
shared musical language: the constant formation and reformation of musical ensembles facilitates an exchange of musical ideas, and the necessity of playing together
forces musicians to agree on a set of common principles. As a result, innovations in
jazz tended to accumulate, forming an ever-growing common practice. Notated composers, on the other hand, are free to rethink musical syntax from the ground up. Not
surprisingly, then, twentieth-century concert music contains a multitude of highly
individual musical languages, stunning in their diversity, but sometimes completely
disconnected from one another.
Ultimately, this economic difference allowed jazz musicians to act as custodians
of a tradition of advanced tonal thinking, bridging the gap between the tonality of
Debussy and Ravel, and that of Louis Andreissen, Steve Reich, and John Adams. To
composers who grew up during the modernist ascendancy—a time when atonality
was in fashion and tonality was occasionally dismissed as a remnant of the past—jazz
must have provided a beacon of hope, an example of a sophisticated tonal language
that drew on the past, yet went beyond it in signiﬁcant ways. For these composers,
jazz would have provided a major source, if not the major source, for ideas about how
to compose in a distinctively modern and tonal style. Certainly this was true in my
own case: it was pieces like Bill Evans’ “Oleo” (as well as the music of Art Tatum, John
Coltrane, and Miles Davis) that convinced me that tonality had continued to develop
and grow throughout the twentieth century, unnoticed by ofﬁcial academic culture.
And I learned as much about the mechanics of tonal harmony from jazz theorists like
Mehegan and Levine, as I did from the atonal composers who taught me about Bach
and Schubert.
Today, of course, both tonality and jazz have made some inroads into elite musical culture. Nevertheless, it remains true that jazz continues to occupy a subordinate
position in American music theory and music education (Figure 10.8.2). Students
continue to receive music degrees from major American universities without ever
engaging seriously with jazz. It is possible that this represents only the intrinsic difﬁculties of teaching non-notated music, exacerbated by a serious case of institutional
inertia: for a long time, jazz education was an oral tradition, and there were few good
written resources to be found. (Furthermore, even under the best of circumstances,
academic institutions are like ocean liners, requiring a long time to turn around.)
But it is also possible that the current status of jazz reﬂects, at least in some ways,
the legacy of decades of systematic bias. It is sobering to think that many of the most

389

390

history and analysis
Figure 10.8.2 According to online databases of academic journals, jazz plays a relatively
minor role in contemporary music scholarship. For example, just a handful of articles
mention tritone substitution, whereas thousands mention serial music.

Search Subject
Arnold Schoenberg
John Cage
“serial music” or serialism
Duke Ellington
John Coltrane
tritone substitution

Hits
JSTOR
RILM
2421
2545
2368
1448
2688
2433
1227
354
453
210
15
3

important jazz innovations occurred during a time when it was still illegal, in some
parts of this country, for people of different races to marry. Given this, it is perhaps
not surprising that a musical style that married African and European approaches
might have had difﬁculty making inroads into university curricula. One can only
hope that the recent election of the ﬁrst African-American president of the United
States foreshadows a future, however distant, in which irrational barriers may mean
less than they once did, and in which we can start to appreciate the profound connections between jazz and other musical styles.

Conclusion
Imagine yourself as a European composer at the beginning of the twentieth century,
when the world was changing at an unimaginable pace. The decreasing cost of travel
had made it possible to bring, say, a gamelan to Paris, or to mount strangely terrifying
exhibitions of “primitive” art. Unprecedented scientiﬁc and technological discoveries were expanding your sense of what was possible: suddenly, images and sounds
could be preserved for posterity, information could be transmitted instantaneously
across vast distances, and the very distinction between space and time was in question. Under the circumstances, it would be perverse not to wonder whether there
could be musical analogues to this revolutionary ferment. Surely, there were some
features of Western music that were just conventions—parochial habits that went
unchallenged simply because no one had ever thought to challenge them. Perhaps
the V–I cadence was one of these, or the use of familiar meters, or even the notion of
consonance itself. . . .
Composers, in other words, faced the broadly scientiﬁc problem of determining which features of musical language were arbitrary and which were rooted more
ﬁrmly in our biology or unchangeable cultural habits. Different musicians responded
in different ways, arraying themselves along the spectrum from extreme conservatives
(almost in denial about the changes sweeping the world) to utopian radicals (who in
retrospect seem somewhat naive about humanity’s appetite for musical revolution).1
For a time, music really was “experimental,” as composers drew and redrew the line
between what would be different and what would remain the same. The problem is
that in music, unlike science, “experiments” rarely produce unequivocal answers: it
is entirely likely that a particular compositional style—be it impressionism, atonality, or bebop—will attract some adherents while repulsing others. And so, a century
later, we are still struggling with the aftershocks of the modernist explosion. Rather
than reaching consensus on the fundamental mechanisms of musical coherence, the
musical world has split into distinct and sometimes hostile camps. For every musician who thinks that tonality is a thing of the past, there is another who thinks that
atonality was a vast and horrible mistake—the musical analogue, as Milan Kundera
once wrote, of the Dictatorship of the Proletariat.

1 Interestingly, music theorists like Riemann and Schenker tended toward the conservative end of the
spectrum, insisting on the naturalness of traditional Western music well into the twentieth century.

392

conclusion

This situation is exacerbated by the fact that music occupies an intermediate position in our psychic economy. It is possible to splash paint relatively haphazardly on
canvas without creating something that is truly noxious—at worst, the result will
be bland but inoffensive, a kind of apocalyptic wallpaper. By contrast, imagine the
situation of the avant-garde cook who simply combines all possible tastes in the way
Jackson Pollock splashed paint. (Please note that I am not limiting myself to food
tastes!) It’s safe to say that the culinary avant-gardist would have to close up shop
relatively quickly, and that even the most diehard aesthetes would give Aleatoric Eatery a pass. Somewhere between these two extremes lies the situation of the avantgarde composer, who faces an audience less tolerant than the audience for paintings,
but more tolerant than the audience for food. It is quite possible to develop a taste
for atonal music, and as a result there are more fans of atonal music than there will
ever be for Atonal Food. But at the same time, developing a taste for atonality often
involves a signiﬁcant investment of time, and it is not for everybody—meaning that
avant-garde music will never be as popular as avant-garde painting. Atonality is neither so abrasive as to die out completely, nor so attractive as to achieve widespread
acceptance.2
My initial motivation in writing this book was to try to imagine a time in which
the aftershocks of modernism were no longer so keenly felt, and in which we could
begin to glimpse rudimentary answers to the old modernist questions. To my mind,
the ﬁve properties of Chapter 1 are fairly basic to the Western conception of musical coherence and not likely to be supplanted soon: for the foreseeable future, the
majority of successful Western music will continue to exploit acoustic consonance,
small melodic motions, consistent harmonies, clear tonal centers, and identiﬁable
macroharmonies. (Whether this is a matter of biology, deep cultural inertia, or some
combination of the two is practically speaking not that important.) And this in turn
means that familiar chords and scales—overdetermined and multiply optimized as
they are—will continue to play a central role in our musical life. Thus the goal of Part
I, to provide a conceptual framework for composers who are less interested in replacing tonality than in devising new tonal styles. I like to think of the ﬁve features as basic
ﬂavors that can be combined and recombined endlessly—as if the composer were a
chef attempting to create new musical dishes with the same basic set of ingredients.
From a purely theoretical perspective, the important point is that it is extremely
difﬁcult to satisfy all ﬁve features simultaneously. This can be seen by considering the
continuous geometrical spaces in Chapter 3. To combine harmonic consistency and
conjunct melodic motion is to utilize short-distance line segments between structurally similar chords, and this is possible only if we exploit some unusual feature
of the geometry: either the global “twist” by which opposite faces are identiﬁed, or

2 There is also the fact that painters sell one-of-a-kind commodities which often appreciate in value,
whereas composers (like cooks) sell repeatable experiences and depend for their proﬁts on a high volume
of sales. This results in a tragicomic disparity between avant-garde painters and composers: while it is
almost de rigueur for successful visual artists to buy their own palaces and islands, even the most successful
atonal composers typically need to augment their modest compositional income by teaching.

Conclusion

the boundaries that act like mirrors. (These two possibilities can be associated with
traditional tonality and 1960s “micropolyphony,” respectively.) But there are other,
more subtle forms of constraint as well, leading us to expect that composers would
naturally gravitate toward scales that (for example) contain many consonances while
also dividing the octave nearly evenly. In this sense, tonality is not one among an
inﬁnitude of habitable planets, all easily accessible by short rocket ﬂight; instead, it
is much closer to being the only habitable planet that we have discovered so far. And
just as we have an interest in conserving the ecology of this, our only habitable planet,
so too might we have an interest in protecting the sophisticated tonal languages that
manage to survive in today’s unfriendly economic climate.
This is not to say that there is nothing new under the sun, or that the music of
the future is doomed to repeat the procedures of the past. Over the course of the
book, I have described a number of new ideas—including individual T-relatedness,
near symmetry, pitch-class circulation, global macroharmonic proﬁles, chord lattices,
interscalar transposition, and so on—that naturally suggest directions for further
musical exploration. Previous composers have explored these ideas in a fairly intuitive and unsystematic manner. My hope is that a deeper theoretical understanding
will open new compositional doors, suggesting new ways in which we might transmute the basic materials of tonality into something rich and strange. (Even the simple
harmonic “grammar” of §7.1 is potential grist for the twenty-ﬁrst-century compositional mill, providing a way to tweak or automate or parody the ancient procedures of
functional tonality.) And while I had initially envisioned an entire chapter describing
the potential compositional applications of these ideas, I eventually decided against
this. For it seemed to me that readers might prefer to discover for themselves how
to use these new concepts to create new music. And I thought that I myself might
prefer to be surprised by what readers come up with, rather than pushing them to
walk along the paths that I had already made.
As I said, my initial goal in writing this book was to explore basic theoretical and
compositional issues. But during the course of my thinking, I gradually began to realize that my ﬁve features could also provide a helpful framework for understanding
the development of Western music. The narrative sketched in Chapter 6—and ﬂeshed
out by the rest of Part II—suggests a reasonably systematic progression wherein composers repeatedly grappled with the problems and opportunities bequeathed to them
by their predecessors. Increasing interest in three- and four-voice composition led
to triadic harmony, which eventually paved the way for the functional conventions
of the classical era. The gradual standardization of major and minor modes led to
an increased emphasis on chromatic transposition, which eventually underwrote
the expanded modal vocabulary of twentieth-century tonality. Nineteenth-century
chromatic voice leading led to more chromatic macroharmonies, resulting in a split
between atonal composers who followed the vector of increasing chromaticism to
its logical conclusion, and scalar composers who ameliorated chromaticism with the
three scalar techniques of Chapter 9.
My hope is that these sorts of ideas might inspire theorists and historians to do
more careful and detailed work. My chief goal has been to introduce (or reframe)

393

394

conclusion

basic theoretical concepts such as voice leading, pitch-class intervals, chord similarity,
key distance, scale, mode, centricity, and so on. I have provided some hints about how
we might use these concepts, both in traditional analysis and in statistical investigations of larger trends. But in a book such as this, it is impossible to consider these
issues in anything like the detail that they deserve. Forced to play the dual role of tool
salesman and carpenter, I have left you with a frame rather than a completed house.
Consequently, there is more to be said about the varieties of nineteenth-century chromaticism, or the various statistical approaches to musical analysis, or really any of the
historical topics broached in this book. Hopefully, readers will see this as an invitation
to future work, rather than a defect of the book as it stands.
To my mind, the most novel feature of my historical narrative concerns the transition from the nineteenth to the twentieth century. I am fascinated by the thought
that, amid the fog and confusion of recent history, it is just possible to discern the
outlines of a genuine common practice, stretching from impressionism through jazz
to contemporary postminimalism. This common practice fuses nineteenth-century
voice leading with a distinctively twentieth-century interest in scales, combining a
ﬂexible attitude toward centricity with a serious concern for macroharmony. I do
not want to suggest that this is the only twentieth-century music worth paying attention to, but for me it forms a kind of central core, the twentieth century’s most
obvious contribution to elementary mechanisms of tonality. Particularly interesting
here is the thought that jazz, rather than being some marginal offshoot of classical
music, is actually more continuous with early twentieth-century tonality than many
forms of more avant-garde music. Thus my claim that the history of twentiethcentury tonality runs straight through jazz: we cannot possibly hope to understand
the development of notated tonal music without understanding its relation to nonnotated styles.
This brings me to my ﬁnal point. I began by suggesting that early twentiethcentury composers faced the difﬁcult problem of determining which aspects of
musical practice might be changed and which were more deeply ingrained. Twenty-ﬁrst-century composers confront a very different challenge. In the past, notated
composers had a monopoly on high-culture respectability, since notation was virtually the only way to preserve and transmit one’s music. Over the last hundred
years, however, the primary means of musical dissemination has shifted from scores
to recordings. And while the notated tradition was conducting its experiments in
musical coherence, alienating audience members in the process, jazz and rock were
becoming increasingly sophisticated, to the point where they now challenge the
status of notated music. New instruments—the electric guitar, the synthesizer, the
drum set—changed our sonic frame of reference, so that there is now something
archaic about the very sound of string quartet or orchestra. The upshot is that young
composers not only have to answer the metaphysical questions of their modernist
ancestors, but also have to ﬁgure out how notated music ﬁts into this new cultural
context. They need to think about what it means to write string quartets in the world
of Metallica—or, failing that, to establish how best to marry the strengths of notation to the raw power of the electric guitar.

Conclusion

This, then, is contemporary composers’ biggest challenge: to rebuild interest on
the part of audiences who are largely indifferent to avant gardism, who think that
notated music begins and ends with the classics, and who in any case care more about
jazz, rock, rap, and electronica. The task is to show that notation—and more generally, a certain kind of sophisticated musical thinking—has something to contribute
to contemporary culture. I myself believe that this is possible, and that there is music
waiting to be written that combines the intellectuality of Bach (or Debussy) with the
raw energy of Coltrane (or The Pixies or Einstürzende Neubauten). I would love to
think that something in this book had inspired some young musician to grapple with
this challenge, perhaps by exploring some of the ideas I have described. But failing
that, it would be enough to say something useful about the deep questions of tonality
and atonality, still with us a century after the advent of modern music.

395

This page intentionally left blank

appendix a

Measuring Voice-Leading Size
My view is that measures of voice leading should depend only on the distance moved
by each voice. Mathematically, we take the absolute value of the difference between
the initial and ﬁnal pitches: thus the distance from C4 to D4 is |60 – 62| or 2, while the
distance from Cμ4 to C5 is |60.5 – 72| or 11.5. (In some cases, we might want to measure relative to a scale, but we will ignore that complication as it does not change the
underlying mathematics.) When several voices move simultaneously, then a measure
of voice-leading distance should depend only on the collection of distances moved by
each voice. For instance, the ﬁrst voice leading in Figure A1 moves its three voices by
two, zero, and zero semitones, while the second moves its voices by one, one, and one
semitones.1 A measure of voice-leading size therefore needs to tell us whether the collection {2, 0, 0} is larger or smaller than {1, 1, 1}. We can assume that larger motions in
any individual voice do not result in smaller overall voice leadings; thus the collection
{6, 3, 1} should be at least as large as {4, 3, 1}, since six is greater than four.
Unfortunately, as mentioned in Chapter 2, it is
Figure A1 The ﬁrst voice
not obvious how to compare collections. One pos- leading moves one note by
sibility is to compare their largest element, in which two semitones, while the
case {2, 0, 0} is larger than {1, 1, 1} (since 2 > 1). (I second moves three notes by
call this the “largest-distance metric.”) Another pos- one semitone each.
sibility is to add the distances in the two collections,
in which case the ﬁrst (total distance = 2) is smaller
than the second (total distance = 3). (This is sometimes called the “taxicab metric.”) Yet a third possibility is to treat the set of distances as determining
the coordinates of a line segment in Euclidean space,
with the length of the line segment representing the
size of the collection. Here again, the ﬁrst collection is larger than the second, since
the line segment (2, 0, 0) is 2 units long, whereas (1, 1, 1) is only 3 units long.
(This is called the “Euclidean metric.”2)
Since each of our methods is in itself perfectly reasonable, we have no reason to
choose one rather than another. Faced with this embarrassment of riches, we could

1 Note that the distance is always a positive number and does not depend on whether the voice moves
up or down.
2 The formula for computing distance in n-dimensional Euclidean space is x12 + x22 + ... + x n 2 .

398

appendix a

arbitrarily choose one and hope for the best. (This is what music theorists have traditionally done.3) Alternatively, we might note that there are some facts about which
“reasonable” metrics should agree: surely, for example, no reasonable metric can treat
the voice leading (C, G)®(Fs, Cs), in which both voices move by tritone, as being
smaller than (C, G)®(Cs, Fs), in which the voices move by semitone!4 This suggests
the strategy of trying to demarcate the “zone of agreement” among reasonable metrics. In the best-case scenario, we might ﬁnd that all of the claims we would like to
make are valid for all reasonable metrics—and thus there is no need to choose one
rather than another. Less optimistically, we might ﬁnd that we occasionally need to
select a method of measuring voice leading; but by charting the “zone of agreement,”
we will at least be able to see where particular choices lie in the space of reasonable
alternatives.
This is the strategy I follow here. I propose that any method of measuring voice
leading is acceptable, as long as it does not have the counterintuitive consequence that
“voice crossings” make a voice leading smaller (Figure 2.7.2).5 It is actually quite easy
to formulate this principle mathematically: if a metric is not to favor voice crossings,
then it must treat the collection of distances {x1 + c, x2, . . . , xn} as being at least as large
as {x1, x2 + c, . . . , xn}, whenever x1 > x2 and c ³ 0. Furthermore, {x1, x2 + c, . . . , xn} should
be at least as large as {x1, x2, . . . , xn}. Intuitively, this means that the metric should not
prefer an uneven distribution of distances, such as {4, 0, 0} over a more even distribution, such as {1, 1, 2}. This well-known mathematical principle can be stated in
a number of equivalent ways.6 Originating in early twentieth-century economics, it
is called the submajorization partial order, and it appears in an extraordinarily wide
range of applications.7 The principle determines a “partial order” because it provides
a way to compare some but not all collections of numbers. For instance, it tells us that
{1, 1} can be no larger than {2, 0}, but it does not tell us anything about the relative
sizes of {3, 3} and {4, 1}.
Figure A2 uses the Möbius strip to illustrate the geometry underlying this
approach. The arrows in the upper left show that the musical “no-crossings principle” is equivalent to the geometrical principle that voice leadings bouncing off the
mirror (which contain crossings) should never be shorter than those that directly

3 See, for example, Straus (2003), who chooses the taxicab metric, and Callender (2004), who chooses
Euclidean distance. For early (and somewhat vague) discussions of voice leading size, see Masson 1697/1969,
Hostinský 1879, and Schoenberg 1975.
4 To be clear, there may be some notions of distance according to which, say, G is closer to C than Cs is,
but I claim that these alternatives measure something other than voice-leading distance.
5 Composers regularly employ voice crossings, but there is no reason to think that in doing so they are
reducing voice-leading size.
6 For instance, here is a not obviously equivalent formulation: given two voice leadings A and B, A is
no larger than B if the largest distance moved by any single voice in A is less than or equal to the largest
distance moved by any voice in B, and if the sum of the largest two distances in A is less than or equal to the
sum of the largest two distances in B, and if the sum of the largest three distances in A is less than or equal
to the sum of the largest three distances in B, and so on.
7 See Marshall and Olkin 1979, and Hall and Tymoczko 2007.

Appendix A
Figure A2 Two connections between geometry and voice-leading distance. (Möbius strip,
upper left) To say that voice crossings never make a voice leading smaller is to say that the
two edges of this triangle are not shorter than the third. Since the voice leading b contains
a crossing, it bounces off the mirror boundary. The “uncrossed” alternative (a) forms the
triangle’s third edge. According to all reasonable measures of voice-leading size, the uncrossed
voice leading in a is no larger than the crossed voice leading in b. (Möbius strip, lower right)
The ﬁgure provides a geometrical illustration of the submajorization partial order. All voice
leadings in the inner diamond are smaller than (C, G)®(D, F). All voice leadings outside
the shaded area are larger. The shaded area represents the zone of acceptable disagreement
among reasonable metrics.

connect their endpoints.8 (This, in turn, is related to what mathematicians call “the
triangle inequality.”) In the lower right, I show how the no-crossings principle gives
us a method of comparing some, but not all, voice leadings. The vertical arrow corresponds to the voice leading (C, G)®(D, F). The inner diamond determines the voice
leadings that, according to any reasonable metric, must be at least as small as this one.
The outer white space contains voice leadings that must be at least as large as the vertical arrow. The shaded area, meanwhile, represents the zone of acceptable disagreement; arrows that terminate in this area may reasonably be considered to be either

8 Any voice leading with a crossing in pitch space is represented by a line segment that bounces off the
mirror boundary at the point where two voices cross.

399

400

appendix a

smaller or larger than (C, G)®(D, F).9 If we are interested in making comparisons
between similar-sized voice leadings we therefore need to choose a speciﬁc metric,
but when comparing very different voice leadings we often do not: for instance, we
can say that the arrow (C, G)®(B, D) on Figure A2 is at least as large as the two other
arrows originating at the same point for any reasonable metric whatsoever.
It turns out that reasonable metrics agree about a surprisingly large number of
musically interesting facts. For instance, they agree that more-even chords in general have smaller voice leadings to their various transpositions.10 They also agree that
“inversionally symmetrical” voice leadings are particularly small: suppose A®B is a
voice leading such as (C, E, G)®(B, E, Gs), in which, for every voice that moves up by
x semitones, there is also a voice that moves down by x semitones; reasonable metrics
will all agree that A®B is at least as small as any other individually T-related voice
leading A®Tx(B). From this it follows that, for any reasonable metric, major triads
can be connected by minimal voice leading when they are related by major third, and
dominant seventh chords can be connected by minimal voice leading when they are
related by minor third or tritone. (In other words, reasonable metrics agree about the
importance of the major-third and minor-third systems.) Thus we need not always
select one voice-leading metric from among the many equally plausible alternatives:
in many cases, we can assume only that our voice-leading metric is a “reasonable” one
obeying the submajorization partial order.11
It bears repeating that my distinction between “reasonable” and “unreasonable”
metrics applies only when we are interested in measuring voice-leading size. In other
contexts, there are other conceptions of musical distance that we might want to consider. For example, we might sometimes want to consider G4 to be particularly close
to C3, since the upper note is the lower note’s third harmonic.12 Although this is a
legitimate measure of musical distance, it cannot be considered a measure of voiceleading size, as I use the term: voice-leading size has to do with how far the hands move
on the piano keyboard from one chord to another. It is, in other words, a measure of the
aggregate effort needed to move along a speciﬁc path between two musical “places.”
This quantity is known to be relevant to listeners’ psychology, determining our ability
to separate notes into individual melodic streams.13 And it is this quantity, rather than
the other distances considered above, that composers seem to try to minimize as they
move from one chord to another.

9 Strictly speaking, this is true only of voice leadings that do not touch the edges; once a voice leading
passes into the exterior white region it is necessarily larger than the vertical arrow.
10 See Tymoczko 2006. Here I am considering only bijective voice leadings.
11 This principle is general enough that it can plausibly be attributed to composers’ individual psychology: it is certainly hard to imagine that a composer would think that the voice leading (C, G)®(B, D) on
Figure A2 is smaller than (C, G)®(D, F). By contrast, it is much harder to imagine that, say, Mozart used
the largest-distance metric rather than the taxicab metric.
12 Or we might consider the chord {C, Cs, E, Fs} to be close to {C, Df, Ef, G}, since they contain the
same collection of intervals (Tymoczko 2008c); in still other cases, we might measure distance by counting
how many voices are moving.
13 See Huron 2001. Wessel 1979 contains an important caveat.

appendix b

Chord Geometry: A More Technical Look
This appendix offers a more technical description of the higher dimensional chord
spaces. My goal is to provide enough information to allow you to work with the spaces
directly, either by hand or using a computer. My treatment will presuppose only elementary mathematics, explaining technical terms (such as “fundamental domain”
and “quotient space”) along the way. However, I will not shy away from messy details
omitted from the main text.
Musically, a pitch can be represented by a number, as discussed in §2.1. An ordered
sequence of n pitches is therefore represented by an ordered sequence of n numbers,
or in mathematical parlance an “n-tuple.” (Chapter 2 refers to these n-tuples as “basic
musical objects.”) Geometrically, an n-tuple determines a point in inﬁnite n-dimensional Cartesian space, or “ordered pitch space.” To generate the space of unordered
sequences of pitch classes, we need to “fold” this space to eliminate octave and order
information. (Mathematicians would say that this folding produces a quotient of the
original space.) In other words, we move from an inﬁnite, periodic “wallpaper space”
to the ﬁnite space representing one of its individual tiles (§3.2). In three dimensions
we obtain the tile by gluing together all points such as (x1, x2, x3), (x2, x3, x1), and (x2, x1,
x3), which represent different ways of ordering the same pitches, as well as all points
such as (x1, x2, x3) and (x1 + 12, x2, x3), in which the same pitch classes appear in different octaves.
The easiest way to approach this process is to ﬁnd a region of the original space
that contains exactly one point for each unordered set of n pitch classes. This region,
by itself, will not have any interesting mathematical or topological qualities: as a portion of plain-vanilla Euclidean space, it will be completely unremarkable, just like
the space from which it is drawn. (Mathematicians would say that this region is a
fundamental domain, which is not yet a quotient space.) Our region becomes mathematically interesting only when we ascribe unusual properties to its boundaries: for
instance, when we assert that some points act like mirrors, or are glued together in
various ways. We make these assertions because we would like to use the region to
model distances or trajectories in the original, inﬁnite space—much as we used the
single tile of wallpaper to record the ant’s progress in §3.2.
This distinction between a fundamental domain (a region of ordinary Euclidean
space) and a quotient space (a more topologically exotic space) is worth illustrating.
Figure B1a depicts the inﬁnite, one-dimensional line containing single pitches. To
convert this into a space of pitch classes, we need to glue together all octave-related

402

appendix b

pitches x and x + 12. We begin by constructing a region of the original space containing one point for every pitch class. This is an ordinary line segment such as that in
Figure B1b, consisting of all points greater than or equal to zero, and less than 12.
(Note that our ﬁgure does not include the point 12, since it represents the same pitch
class as zero; however, it contains every point less than 12, including points inﬁnitesimally close to 12.) Because this is just a line segment, there is no reason (yet!) to say
that the points at different ends are close together. It is only when we start to use the
space to represent distances or trajectories in our original pitch space that we notice
that it its endpoints are related: for instance, the motion shown in Figure B1c disappears off the right edge of our line segment to reappear on the left. This tells us that
the two edges of the line segment should be glued together, and that two points near

Figure B1 (a) Pitch space is a line. (b) The region 0 £ x < 12 contains one point for
every pitch class. (c) The line segment 59®64 disappears off the right edge of our region,
reappearing on the left. (d) This tells us that we should attach the right edge to the left,
forming a quotient space. We can represent this quotient space as a circle in two dimensions.
Alternatively, we could simply add a new point, 12, to the right edge of our space and declare
it to be the same as the point at the left edge.

Appendix B

opposite ends are actually close together. We can express this visually by bending the
line segment, producing the familiar pitch-class circle shown in Figure B1d. Alternatively, we could simply add the point 12 to the right edge, declaring it to be the same
as the point 0 on the left.1
Our goal, then, is to determine how to identify a region of n-dimensional Euclidean space containing one point for every unordered set of n pitch classes.2 To do
this, we can choose the region containing all and only those chords whose pitches
(1) are in nondescending order, (2) span no more than an octave, and (3) together
sum to a number less than 12 and greater than or equal to zero.3 Clearly, by reordering and octave transposing, we can transform any sequence into one that meets the
ﬁrst two criteria: for instance, we can turn (G4, C3, E5) into (C4, E4, G4), which is in
nondescending order and spans no more than an octave. However, the pitches (C4,
E4, G4) do not meet the third criterion, since the numbers (60, 64, 67) sum to 191.
Observe, though, that we can reduce their sum by 12 by transposing the last note
down by octave and moving it to the front of the list. (In Chapter 4 we describe this
process as transposition by one descending step along the “scale” C-E-G.) The resulting sequence, (G3, C4, E4), sums to 179 (or 191 – 12), while still meeting the other
criteria. By repeating this process, therefore, we can eventually bring the sum into the
range 0 £ x < 12.4
Our region is therefore bounded by the following mathematical inequalities:
x1 £ x2 £ . . . £ xn £ x1 + 12

(B.1)

0 £ x1 + x2+ x3 + . . . + xn < 12

(B.2)

Equation B.1 says that the pitches are in nondescending order, spanning no more
than an octave. Equation B.2 says that the sum of the pitches is greater than or equal
to zero, and less than 12. Together, these inequalities determine a region of inﬁnite
n-dimensional Cartesian space, in which there is exactly one point for every collection
of n unordered pitch classes. Of course, points in this region still represent ordered
pitch sequences, and not chords proper; in this sense the region, like a single tile of
wallpaper, is a kind of steppingstone between our original “ordered pitch space” and
the topologically complex “unordered chord space” we are trying to construct.
Before I try to explain what this region looks like, I should note that in some
sense, complicated mathematics is unnecessary. For if we wanted to, we could simply program a computer to display the lower dimensional chord spaces directly.
There are numerous computer graphics packages that allow users to draw in two- or

1 In fact, this might be preferable since it shows that our quotient space is intrinsically one-dimensional;
the circular representation may falsely suggest that the space has two dimensions.
2 There will actually be many different regions satisfying this criterion, of varying shapes; in what follows, I will describe a region that is particularly useful.
3 I use “nondescending” rather than “ascending” because I want to include chords that have pitch duplications, such as (C4, C4, C4, E4).
4 This process will never run afoul of the other two constraints, since the original ordering spans no
more than an octave.

403

404

appendix b

three-dimensional space; using the algorithm in Figure B2, we can transform any
arbitrary ordered pitch sequence into a point lying in our region, and can thus graph
arbitrary chords in the space. Furthermore, as explained in Chapters 2 and 3, we can
graph voice leadings simply by imagining that each voice glides smoothly from its
origin to the destination. (A computer can be programmed to provide the illusion
of a smooth glide by taking discrete steps that are too small for the eye to follow.) At
each stage along the glide, we project the current point into our fundamental region.
Were we to do this, we would immediately see the shapes in Figures 3.3.1 and 3.8.2.
Furthermore, as we plotted various voice leadings on the ﬁgure, we would ﬁnd that
our algorithm automatically accounts for the space’s “exotic” boundary points: some
boundaries would act like mirrors, while others would seem to be glued together.
(That is, we would sometimes see a trajectories disappear off one part of the ﬁgure to
reappear on another.) For someone who is not comfortable with geometry or abstract
mathematics, or for someone who does not recognize what shapes Eqs. B.1 and B.2
correspond to, this sort of direct, intuitive hands-on exploration may perhaps be the
easiest way to proceed.
However, my job here is to try to explain—in a principled way—how to understand the two sets of inequalities. In preparation for this task, I will review several
elementary musico-geometrical facts.
Fact 1. Transposition is represented by adding a constant to every note in
a chord: (x1 + t, x2 + t, . . . , xn + t) is the transposition of (x1, x2, . . . , xn) by
t semitones (§2.1).
Fact 2. Geometrically, adding t to every note in a chord corresponds to moving
in parallel to the “unit diagonal” that connects (0, 0, . . . , 0) to (1, 1, . . . , 1)
(Figure B3).

Figure B2 An algorithm for moving any ordered pitch set into the fundamental region
deﬁned by equations (1) and (2).

Appendix B

(a, b)

po

sit

Figure B3 Transposition is
represented by motion parallel to
the line stretching from (0, 0) to
(1, 1). The planes perpendicular
to this line contain chords
summing to a constant value.

ns

(1, 1)

io

0

n

irs to
pa ing
ns m
ai m
nt su
co hes
tc
pi

of

second note

Fact 3. The equation x1 + x2 . . . xn = c determines a higher dimensional
analogue to the plane—a “hyperplane”—perpendicular to the unit diagonal
described in Fact 2 (Figure B3).5
Fact 4. There is exactly one transposition of any ordered pitch sequence
with elements that sum to any particular value. The number t = (c − x1 − x2
− . . . − xn)/n is the unique transposition such that (x1 + t, x2 + t, . . . , xn +
t) sums to c. Geometrically, this means that there is a unique way to move
any point p parallel to the unit diagonal until it reaches an arbitrary plane
perpendicular to that diagonal (Figure B3).

tra

(a/2 – b/2, b/2 – a/2)
(0, 0)

first note

Armed with these facts, let us return to our two equations:
x1 £ x2 £ . . . £ xn £ x1 + 12

(B.1)

0 £ x1 + x2+ x3 + . . . + xn < 12

(B.2)

Fact 3 tells us that Eq. B.2 determines a collection of hyperplanes perpendicular to
the line connecting (0, 0, 0, . . . , 0) to (1, 1, 1 . . . , 1), with sums in the range 0 £ c < 12.
By Fact 2, these hyperplanes are related by transposition.6 Next, we observe that if any

5 The term “hyperplane” refers to a ﬂat Euclidean space with one fewer dimension than the n-dimensional space in which it resides. To see that the equation x1 + x2 + . . . + xn = c determines a hyperplane, it
helps to know that any linear equation a1x1 + a2x2 + . . . + anxn = c, with the ai all real numbers, determines
a hyperplane. (Intuitively, we can freely choose n − 1 of the n coordinates, with the ﬁnal coordinate being
determined by our earlier choices.) To see that the plane is perpendicular to the line connecting (0, 0, . . . ,
0) to (1, 1, . . . , 1) recall that two vectors are perpendicular when x • y = 0. (Here “•” is the dot product of
linear algebra: x1 y1 + x2 y 2 + . . . + xn y n .) That is, (x1, x2, . . . , xn) • (1, 1, . . . , 1) = 0, or x1 + x2 + . . . xn = 0. Thus
the (n − 1)-dimensional plane x1 + x2 + . . . xn = 0 contains vectors perpendicular to the vector (1, 1, . . . , 1).
The expression (x1, x2, . . . , xn) • (1, 1, . . . , 1) = c, or x1 + x2 + . . . xn = c, identiﬁes the hyperplane that is c units
away along the line connecting (0, 0, . . . , 0) to (1, 1, . . . , 1).
6 If two of our hyperplanes sum to c1 and c2, then they are related by (c2 − c1)/n semitone transposition,
with n being the size of the chord.

405

406

appendix b

ordered pitch sequence satisﬁes the ﬁrst set of inequalities (Eq. B.1), then so do all its
transpositions. (This is just to say that if an ordered pitch sequence is in nondescending order spanning less than an octave, then its transpositions are, too.) It follows
that Eq. B.1 determines the same shape in each of the cross sections x1 + x2 . . . + xn = c.
The space of musical chords is therefore some sort of prism: the inequalities x1 £ x2
£ . . . £ xn £ x1 + 12 determine the shape of the cross section, while the equation x1 + x2
+ x3 + . . . + xn = c identiﬁes the particular cross section containing pitch sequences
summing to c.
The next problem is to determine the shape of the cross section. We begin by
reviewing the deﬁnition of a “simplex”—an n-dimensional ﬁgure bounded by the
lines interconnecting n + 1 vertices.7 (A simplex is so-called because it is, in some
sense, the “simplest” n-dimensional ﬁgure, with the minimal number of vertices.) In
two dimensions, the simplex’s three vertices determine a triangle. In three dimensions, the four vertices determine a tetrahedron. Mathematicians sometimes use the
term “the standard simplex” to refer to the simplex bounded by the endpoints of the
basis vectors in n-dimensional Cartesian space. Figure B4 shows that the basis vectors
in two-dimensional space deﬁne a one-dimensional simplex stretching from (0, 1) to
(1, 0); the three basis vectors in three-dimensional space determine a simplex stretching from (1, 0, 0) to (0, 1, 0) to (0, 0, 1). (The higher dimensional ﬁgures, although
harder to visualize, are analogous.) Every point in these two simplexes is represented
by coordinates that are all nonnegative and sum to one. For this reason, these simplexes are important in applications in which a total quantity of “stuff ” is divided up
into a ﬁxed number of parts: for example, the one-dimensional simplex in Figure B4
might be used to represent the result of an election featuring two candidates, while
the two-dimensional simplex might be used for a three-party election.

Figure B4 The “standard simplex” in two-dimensional space is a one-dimensional
line segment (i.e. a one-dimensional simplex) stretching from (1, 0) to (0, 1); in three
dimensional space, it is a two-dimensional triangle (two-dimensional simplex) bounded by
(1, 0, 0), (0, 1, 0), and (0, 0, 1). The standard simplex contains all points with nonnegative
coordinates summing to 1.

y

y
z

(0, 1)

(0, 1, 0)

(0, 0, 1)

x
(1, 0)

x
(1, 0, 0)

7 Strictly speaking, the vertices must be “afﬁnely independent”—that is, that there should be no c-dimensional plane containing more than c + 1 of the points.

Appendix B

Now a mathematician would immediately recognize that the equation x1 £ x2
£ . . . £ xn £ x1 + 12 determines a simplex in the hyperplane x1 + x2 + x3 + . . . + xn =
c. There are a number of ways to see why this is so.8 Perhaps the most instructive is
to note that there is a close relation between our equations and the standard simplex described in the previous paragraph. To see why, note that we can rewrite the
inequalities x1 £ x2 £ . . . £ xn £ x1 + 12 as
xi – xi–1 ³ 0 for 1 < i £ n
x1 + 12 – xn ³ 0
Since xi − xi − 1 is the interval from note xi − 1 to xi , our new inequalities simply say that
the intervals between adjacent notes in the sequence are all nondescending, including
the “wraparound” interval from the last note, xn, to the note an octave above the ﬁrst,
x1 + 12. Furthermore, these n positive numbers must sum to 12, since they begin with
x1 and end with x1 + 12. Dividing by 12 therefore gives us the coordinates of a point
in the standard simplex.9 Conversely, for any point in the standard simplex, we can
multiply its coordinates by 12 and construct a pitch sequence with those numbers as
its consecutive intervals. According to Fact 4, there will be one and only one transposition of this sequence lying in the hyperplane x1 + x2 + x3 + . . . + xn = c.10 We conclude
that there is a “coordinate transformation” sending our original simplex, in Figure B5 The coordinate transformation
which numbers represent pitches, into from pitch-class space, in which coordinates
the standard simplex, in which the represent numbers, to interval space, in which
they represent intervals.
numbers represent intervals, as measured in fractions of an octave (Figure
Original
New
B5). Mathematicians will recognize
Coordinate
Coordinate
that this coordinate change is an “afﬁne
x1
(x2 – x1)/12
transformation,” which means that it
(x3 – x2)/12
x2
transforms one simplex into another.
…
…
It follows that our original inequalities
11
xn
(x1 + 12 – xn)/12
determine a simplex as well.
8 The simplest is to note that each of the inequalities xi £ xj carves the space into two halves, bounded
by the hyperplane x i = x j . If n such half-spaces determine a ﬁnite region in (n − 1)-dimensional space, then
that region is bounded by n hyperplanes, which is just to say that it is a simplex.
9 For example, beginning with the pitch sequence (60, 64, 67) we can construct the interval sequence
(4, 3, 5) representing the interval from 60 to 64, from 64 to 67, and from 67 to the note an octave above 60.
Dividing by 12 gives us (4/12, 3/12, 5/12) which is a point on the standard simplex.
10 For instance, we multiply (½, ½, 0) by 12 to obtain the sequence of intervals (6, 6, 0). We then
construct a sequence of pitches whose successive notes are separated by these intervals, for instance (Fs2,
C3, Fs3) or (42, 48, 54). These values sum to 144; transposing down by four octaves gives (−6, 0, 6), which
sums to zero.
11 Suppose x and y are two points that the coordinate transformation sends to x' and y'. An afﬁne
transformation sends the point x + b(y − x) to the point x' + b(y' − x'), thus transforming a line in the
original space into a line in the second. (It is easily checked that the coordinate transformation in Figure
B5 is afﬁne.) Algebraically, afﬁne transformations represent the new coordinates as linear functions of the
old coordinates—e.g. functions like x1' = ax1 + bx2 + c, which do not involve higher powers of the original
variables x1 and x2.

407

408

appendix b

We conclude, therefore, that our fundamental region is a prism whose face is a
simplex. The lower face is determined by the equations
x1 + x2 + x3 + . . . + xn = 0 and x1 £ x2 £ . . . £ xn £ x1 + 12
This simplex is “extruded” along the line connecting (0, 0, . . . , 0) to (1, 1, . . . , 1), a process that corresponds musically to transposing upward, and algebraically to increasing the sum of the chords in the cross section
x1 + x2 + x3 + . . . + xn = c and x1 £ x2 £ . . . £ xn £ x1 + 12,
with the parameter c varying from 0 to 12. Each layer of the prism contains pitch
sequences with a different sum; we can transpose until the sum is equal to 12, at
which point we return to the chords that appear on the sum-zero face.
Fact 4 tells us that any ordered pitch sequence satisfying Eq. B.1 has exactly one
transposition in each cross section of the space. This means that no two ordered
pitch sequences in the same cross section are transpositionally related. However, the
cross sections will contain sequences that are transpositionally related when we ignore
octave and order. For suppose (x1, x2, . . . , xn) satisﬁes Eqs. B.1 and B.2. Then,
(x2 – 12/n, x3 – 12/n, . . . , xn – 12/n, x1 + 12 – 12/n)
will as well. (Those of you who have read Chapter 4 will note that this operation
combines a chromatic transposition by –12/n semitones with a scalar transposition
by one ascending step.12) As ordered pitch sequences, these are not transpositionally related, but if we disregard octave and order, they are.13 Thus, given an n-note
sequence meeting our criteria, we can easily construct another by moving the ﬁrst
note of the sequence to the end, adding 12 to it, and subtracting 12/n from every note
in the resulting sequence. For example, starting with (0, 4, 7), we generate (4 − 12/3,
7 − 12/3, 12 − 12/3) or (0, 3, 8). Repeating this procedure gives (3 − 4, 8 − 4, 12 − 4)
or (−1, 4, 8). A ﬁnal repetition returns us to (0, 4, 7), where we began. Musically, the
sequences (0, 4, 7), (0, 3, 8), and (−1, 4, 8) represent C major, Af major, and E major
triads, each in a different mode or registral inversion: (0, 4, 7) is a C major chord
whose ﬁrst note is its root, (0, 3, 8) is an Af major chord starting on its third, and (−1,
4, 8) is an E major chord starting with its ﬁfth.14 In general, every n-note chord type
will appear in each cross section n times, in each of its modes.
To determine the vertices of our cross section, we can exploit the relation with the
standard simplex. In three dimensions, the standard simplex is bounded by the points
(1, 0, 0), (0, 1, 0), and (0, 0, 1), which will correspond to the vertices of our cross section. Multiplying by 12 transforms these numbers into the interval sequences (12, 0, 0),

12 That is, it sends (x1, x2, . . . , xn) to (x2, . . . , xn, x1 + 12), transposing up by one scale step, and then subtracts 12/n from these coordinates, transposing chromatically downward by 12/n.
13 If we ignore octave and order (x1, x2, . . . , xn) is the same as (x2, . . . , xn, x1 + 12). Subtracting 12/n from
each number transposes the chord downward.
14 Remember that to ﬁnd the pitch class to which a number belongs, add or subtract 12 until it lies in
the range 0 £ x < 12. Thus the number −1 refers to the pitch class B.

Appendix B

409

(0, 12, 0), and (0, 0, 12). Each determines a unique sequence of pitches on the face that
sums to 0: (−8, 4, 4), (−4, −4, 8), and (0, 0, 0), or in scientiﬁc pitch notation (E–2, E–1,
E–1), (Gs–2, Gs–2, Gs–1), and (C–1, C–1, C–1). In other words, they represent the three
“modes” of the “scale” containing just one pitch class (Figure B6). The same procedure
of course works in other dimensions: the boundaries of the cross section can always be
determined by ﬁnding the pitch sequences summing to zero, and whose one-step scalar
intervals are (12, 0, . . . , 0), (0, 12, 0, . . . , 0), (0, 0, 12, . . . , 0), . . . , and (0, 0, . . . , 0, 12).

Two Notes Three Notes Four Notes
Five Notes
(0, 0)
(0, 0, 0)
(0, 0, 0, 0)
(0, 0, 0, 0, 0)
(–6, 6)
(–4, –4, 8) (–3, –3, –3, 9) (–2.4, –2.4, –2.4, –2.4, 9.6)
(–8, 4, 4)
(–6, –6, 6, 6) (–4.8, –4.8, –4.8, 7.2, 7.2)
(–9, 3, 3, 3)
(–7.2, –7.2, 4.8, 4.8, 4.8)
(–9.6, 2.4, 2.4, 2.4, 2.4)

The ﬁnal step is to understand the “strange” points on the boundary of our region.
We begin by considering how to attach the sum-zero face at one edge of the prism to
the opposite, sum-12 face.15 Suppose that (x1, x2, . . . , xn) lies on the face of the prism
summing to zero. Recall that the following chords all lie on the same face.
A1 = (x1, x2, . . . , xn)
A2 = (x2 – 12/n, x3 – 12/n, . . . , xn – 12/n, x1 + 12 – 12/n)
A3 = (x3 – 24/n, x4 – 24/n, . . . , xn – 24/n, x1 + 12 – 24/n, x2 + 12 – 24/n)
.
.
.
An = (xn – 12 + 12/n, x1 + 12/n, . . . , xn–1 + 12/n)
If we transpose these chords up by 12/n semitones, we obtain a series of chords that
sum to 12:
A1¢ = (x1 + 12/n, x2 + 12/n, . . . , xn + 12/n)
A2¢ = (x2, x3, . . . , xn, x1 + 12)
A3¢ = (x3 – 12/n, x4 – 12/n, . . . , xn – 12/n, x1 + 12 – 12/n, x2 + 12 – 12/n)
.
.
.
An¢ = (xn – 12 + 24/n, x1 + 24/n, . . . , xn–1 + 24/n)

15 Note that we have excluded this sum-12 face from our fundamental domain, since it contains the
same chords as the sum-0 face. However, when we are constructing the quotient space, we need to think
about how to attach various points on the boundaries. As in Figure B1d, we therefore add extra points,
declaring them to be “the same” as some that we have already included.

Figure B6
The vertices of
the zero-sum
cross section
in various
dimensions.

410

appendix b

As ordered pitch sequences, A1¢ is the transposition of A1, A2¢ is the transposition of A2,
and so on. But when we disregard octave and order, then A1 and A2¢ are the same chord,
as are A2 and A3¢, A3 and A4¢, etc. Therefore we need to imagine that the sum-zero face
of the prism should be attached to the opposite (sum-12) face with a “twist.” This
twist acts as a cyclic permutation of the simplex’s vertices, connecting Ai to A¢i + 1.
Finally, we consider the boundary points such as (x, y, y), which contain pitch
duplications. Consider a point in the interior of our simplex, such as (x1, x2 − c, x2
+ c), with c some small positive number. As c goes to zero, the point (x1, x2 − c, x2 +
c) approaches (x1, x2, x2), moving in a line toward the boundary of the cross section.
When c becomes negative, the ordered pitch sequence (x1, x2 − c, x2 + c) lies outside
of our fundamental region, since the second number is now greater than the third.
According to the algorithm in Figure B2, then, we need to reorder the sequence so
that it returns to our region. This reordering returns us to a point on the line segment
along which we have just been traveling, since (x1, x2 − (−c), x2 + (–c) ) is a reordering
of (x1, x2 − c, x2 + c). It follows that the boundaries containing pitch duplications act
like mirrors: a point moving directly toward the boundary is “reﬂected” backward
along its approaching trajectory.16
Putting it all together then, the space of n-note chords is an n-dimensional prism
whose simplicial (“simplex-shaped”) faces are glued together with a twist, and whose
remaining boundaries act like mirrors. By attributing this behavior to our boundary points, we have ﬁnally managed to convert our fundamental region—an unremarkable portion of ordinary Cartesian space—into a quotient space (or orbifold),
an exotic mathematical space with a nontrivial topology. Mathematicians would
describe our quotient space as “the n-torus modulo the symmetric group that acts
on n elements”—symbolically, Tn/Sn. Here, Tn is the mathematical symbol for the
n-torus, the space of ordered pitch-class sequences; Sn refers to the collection of operations that reorder n elements; and the division symbol instructs us to glue together
points related by the operations that follow. Thus the mathematical symbol “Tn/Sn”
means “the space that results when you start with ordered pitch-class sequences and
disregard order.” As discussed in Chapter 3, this is something very much like the space
of chords as musicians ordinarily conceive of them.17
Readers are now prepared to plot voice leadings in the space. To do this, we must
augment the algorithm in Figure B2 with two additional rules. First, when transposing or reordering the notes in a voice leading, we must always do so uniformly,
applying the same operations to both chords: if we transpose the ﬁrst note in the ﬁrst
chord up by octave, then we must transpose the ﬁrst note in the second chord up by
octave as well; similarly, if we exchange the ﬁrst and second notes in the ﬁrst chord,

16 This argument considers trajectories moving perpendicular toward the boundary. More general trajectories can be decomposed into a perpendicular and parallel components; the argument can then be
applied to the perpendicular component.
17 Of course, musicians typically consider (C, C, E, G) to be the same as (C, E, G). When modeling voice
leading, however, we often do not want to do this, as it can disrupt the relationship between distance and
voice-leading size. See Callender, Quinn, and Tymoczko 2008.

Appendix B

then we must do the same in the second. Second, we may sometimes ﬁnd that we can
move a line segment into our fundamental domain only by breaking it into pieces.
For example, suppose we would like to plot the voice leading (C4, Ef4, Gf4)®(Ef4,
Gf4, C5), or (60, 63, 66)®(63, 66, 72), which shifts the C diminished chord up by
one scale step. To get the sum of the ﬁrst chord’s notes to lie between 0 and 12, we
must transpose down by ﬁve octaves; this means we need to transpose the second
chord down by ﬁve octaves as well, producing (0, 3, 6)®(3, 6, 12). Here we encounter a problem. The ﬁrst part of this line segment—from (0, 3, 6) to just before (1, 4,
7)—lies within our region, since its chords sum to less than 12. However, the rest of
the line segment—(1, 4, 7)®(3, 6, 12)—sums to 12 or more. We therefore split the
voice leading into two parts: (0, 3, 6)®(1, 4, 7) and (1, 4, 7)®(3, 6, 12). To move the
second part of the voice leading into our fundamental region, we lower the ﬁnal note
in each chord by 12 and move it to the front of the list. (Once again, we do this uniformly, applying the same transposition and reordering to both chords.) This gives
us (−5, 1, 4)®(0, 3, 6), which is a line segment that begins on the lowest (sum-zero)
face of the prism and moves to (0, 3, 6). Our voice leading (C4, Ef4, Gf4)®(Ef4,
Gf4, C5) therefore disappears off the top face of the fundamental region, reappearing
on the bottom. A little experimentation will show that any one-step ascending scalar
transposition, in any chord space of any dimension, moves off the top face to reappear on the bottom in a very similar way.
The fundamental idea here—and it is both simple and profound—is that ordinary numbers provide a natural and musically meaningful set of geometrical coordinates, with points representing chords and line segments representing voice leadings.
Any sequence of numbers can be understood as an ordered list of pitches, while any
pair of (equal-length) sequences can be understood as a voice leading in pitch space.
When we disregard octave and order information, we are restricting our attention
to a region of Cartesian space deﬁned by Eqs. B.1 and B.2 above. This involves moving arbitrary points and line segments into our region. If we do this carefully and
thoughtfully, we realize that the boundaries of this region have special properties.
In other words, we make the transition from regions of ordinary Euclidean space to
quotient spaces proper.18

18 Note that it is often possible to work with the original Cartesian coordinates: it is obvious that the
voice leading (60, 64, 67)®(64, 60, 67) exchanges two notes, and hence bounces off a mirror boundary,
and that (60, 64, 67, 70)®(64, 67, 70, 72) is an ascending one-step scalar transposition, and hence is represented by a path that disappears off the sum-12 face to reappear on the sum-zero face, returning to its
starting point. After a little practice, you will start to feel comfortable with statements such as “there is a
tritone halfway between (C4, G4) and (Cs4, Fs4)”—and even with more difﬁcult tasks, such as imagining
the cross section of an arbitrary voice leading in three-note chord space.

411

appendix c

Discrete Voice-Leading Lattices
In recent decades, music theorists have produced a number of graphs representing
voice-leading relationships. Often, these graphs seem to imply something like the following methodology. First, one selects some interesting domain of chords and some
interesting set of voice-leading relationships among them. (For example, semitonal
voice leading among major, minor, and augmented triads.) Second, one constructs a
graph representing all of the voice-leading relationships among all of the objects in
question. Third, one interprets the resulting graph as providing a measure of distance
between the objects it contains. Thus, for example, one might use the graph to analyze music that moves between nonadjacent chords, or claim that larger leaps on the
graph are musically disfavored in some way.
However, this third step involves a subtle logical leap. For while the method generates
graphs whose local structure is perfectly clear, it does not follow that the graphs’ global
structure is equally meaningful. Consider, for example, the familiar Tonnetz—invented
by Leonhard Euler, made famous by Hugo Riemann, and resurrected by contemporary
theorists such as Lewin, Hyer, and Cohn (Figure C1).1 Two triads are adjacent on the
Tonnetz if they can be linked by what Cohn calls “parsimonious” voice leading, voice
leading in which a single voice moves, and it moves by just one or two semitones. However, there is no similarly intuitive way to characterize larger distances in the space. On
the Tonnetz, C major is two units away from F major but three units from F minor—
even though it takes just two semitones to move from C major to F minor, and three
to move from C major to F major (Figure C2). (This is precisely why F minor so often
appears as a passing chord between F major and C major.) It follows that we cannot use
the Tonnetz to model the ubiquitous IV–iv–I progression, in which the two-semitone
motion 6^ ®^5 is broken into the semitonal steps 6^ ®f^6®^5. More generally, it shows
that Tonnetz distances do not correspond to voice-leading distances. (Nor do they correspond to common tone distances: both F minor and Ef minor are three Tonnetz steps
away from C major, even though C major and F minor have one common tone, while
C major and Ef minor have none.) Indeed, it is an open question whether there is any
intuitive notion of musical distance that is being modeled here.2
1 For a history of the Tonnetz, see Mooney 1996. For a general discussion of recent work featuring various analogous discrete lattices, see Cohn 1998a.
2 Tymoczko 2009a notes that the Tonnetz may capture an acoustic conception of distance, according to
which C3 is particularly close to its second overtone G4; the point here is that this is very different from
voice-leading or common-tone distance.

Appendix C
Figure C1 Two versions of the Tonnetz. In (a) points represent notes, and chords are
represented by triangles. In (b), points represent chords, and hexagons represent single notes.
(For example, the hexagon containing C and f can be associated with the note C, common to
all six of its triads.)

A surprising number of discrete music-theoretical graphs suffer from similar
problems. For example, the graph in Figure C3 shows single-semitone voice leadings
among diminished, dominant, French sixth, and half-diminished seventh chords.3
While it would be entirely appropriate to use it to analyze a passage that moves by single-semitone voice leading between these chords, it is problematic to use it to model
voice-leading distance between nonadjacent chords: the graph contains no two-step
path between C7 and Aø7, even though the chords can be connected by two-semitone
voice leading. For another example, consider Figure C4a, which represents single
semitone voice-leading among major thirds and perfect fourths. On this graph, {C, F}

3 This graph is quite similar to Douthett and Steinbach’s “Power Towers” (1998).

413

414

appendix c
Figure C2 (a) On the Tonnetz, F major (triangle 3) is closer to C major (triangle 1) than F minor
(triangle 4) is. Consequently, the voice leading (C, E, G)®(C, F, A) is represented as a two-step
motion, while it takes at least three steps to represent (C, E, G)®(C, F, Af). (b) In actual music,
however, F minor frequently appears as a passing chord between F major and C major.

Figure C3 A graph of single-semitone voice-leading relations among diminished, dominant,
half-diminished and French sixth chords. On the graph it takes four steps to get from C7 to
Aø7, even though the chords can be connected by two single-semitone shifts.

Appendix C
Figure C4 (a) A graph of single-semitone voice-leading relations between major thirds and
perfect fourths. (b) Since it does not contain tritones, it cannot represent voice leadings such
as (C, F)®(B, Fs), which move vertically across the center of the space.

and {Fs, B} are twelve steps apart, even though the minimal voice leading between
them moves each voice by just a semitone. Once again, local voice-leading concerns
give rise to a graph whose global distances are difﬁcult to interpret.
This last example provides a key to understanding what is going on. Figure C4b
embeds the circular graph within the Möbius strip representing two-note chords,
showing that one can move from {C, F} to {B, Fs} across the center of the larger
space. We cannot take advantage of this shortcut if we stay on the discrete lattice,
because the lattice forces us to go “the long way around”—off one side of the strip
and onto the other. A little thought will show that these sorts of voice-leading “shortcuts” always pass through chords dividing the octave at least as evenly as those we
happen to be interested in. (This is obvious in two-note chord space and less than
obvious in higher dimensions; but the general principle holds there as well.) This
leads to a very useful rule of thumb: in general, we should expect that a faithful representation of voice-leading possibilities will contain whatever chords we are interested in, as well as all the chords that divide the octave at least as evenly as those chords.
Thus if we are interested in voice leading among major thirds and perfect fourths, we
should also include tritones. This is precisely why the lattices in §3.11 are all reliable:
they include the most even chords in any given scale, and hence faithfully represent
voice-leading distances.
More generally, we can specify criteria ensuring that a graph’s global structure
faithfully represents voice-leading distances:
1.

Every edge on the graph should represent voice leading in which a single
voice moves by a single scale step or chromatic semitone (a condition violated
by the Tonnetz).

415

416

appendix c

2.

3.
4.

5.

For any two of its chords, the graph should contain all the interscalar
transpositions between them (§4.9). This implies that the graph should not
present the appearance of multiple disjoint segments in a cross section of the
space of all chords, a condition violated by Figure C4b.
The chords on the graph should all have the same size.4
The paths representing these interscalar transpositions should not involve
ascending and descending motion in the same voice (a condition violated by
the Tonnetz and Figure C3 above).
The graph should not contain any multisets.

It is relatively easy to see that any graph satisfying these three requirements will faithfully reﬂect voice-leading distances, even between nonadjacent chords: condition 2
implies that the graph contains the shortest voice leading between any of its chords
(§4.9); condition 1 implies that edges have unit voice-leading length; and condition 3
implies that the edges representing an interscalar transposition do not cancel each
other out.5 The ﬁve requirements are satisﬁed by all of the lattices in §3.11.
Of course, geometry can also provide a deeper perspective on these “faithful” voiceleading graphs. For instance, Douthett and Steinbach’s “Cube Dance” (Figure C5a).

Figure C5 Douthett and Steinbach’s “Cube Dance” (a) and the lattice at the center of threenote chord space (b).

4 For discussion of the problems arising when graphs combine chords of different sizes, see Callender,
Quinn, and Tymoczko 2008 and Tymoczko 2010.
5 Note that if we are measuring paths by counting the number of edges they contain, then we are using
the “taxicab” metric of voice-leading size.

Appendix C

is virtually identical to the lattice at the center of three-note chord space, and was
discovered almost a decade before the continuous spaces of Chapter 3. However,
it turns out that we can extract much more information from the graph when we
understand how it is embedded within the continuous space. For example, geometry
tells us that the graph represents all and only the strongly crossing-free voice leadings
between its chords; that the three spatial axes correspond to motion in the three
musical voices; that these spatial axes can only be deﬁned locally, since the ﬁgure has
a global topological twist; and that two paths on the ﬁgure represent the same voice
leading if they have the same “winding number” (that is, if they take the same number of clockwise or counterclockwise steps). All of which shows that the geometrical
perspective can do more than just reveal that some graphs faithfully represent voice
leading; it can also help us use these graphs in a more sophisticated and musical
fashion.

417

appendix d

The Interscalar Interval Matrix
Chapter 4 noted that strongly crossing-free voice leadings can be decomposed into
chromatic and interscalar transpositions. As it happens, there is a useful mathematical way to represent this idea. Figure D1 depicts what I call an interscalar interval
matrix, representing the four interscalar transpositions that take a half-diminished
seventh chord to a dominant seventh chord with the same root. The numbers in
the matrix are paths in pitch-class space, showing how far and in what direction
each note moves. To combine these scalar transpositions with chromatic transpositions, we simply add a constant value to the relevant matrix row. For instance,
0, 1, 1, 0
® (C, E,G,Bf),
the ﬁrst row represents the voice leading (C,Ef, Gf,Bf) ¾¾¾¾
which sends the root of the C half-diminished chord to the root of the C dominant seventh chord; by subtracting one from the values (0, 1, 1, 0), we get (−1, 0,
-1, 0, 0, -1
0, −1), representing the voice leading (C, Ef, Gf, Bf) ¾¾¾¾
® (B, Ds, Fs, A). In
effect, we have transposed the second chord down by chromatic semitone, from C7
to B7. (The two voice leadings are individually T-related since they differ only by
the transposition of their second chord.) Every strongly crossing-free (four-voice)
voice leading from half-diminished to dominant seventh can be obtained by adding
some constant to some row of the interscalar interval matrix: for example, to obtain
0,0, -1, -1
(C, Ef, Gf, Bf) ¾¾¾¾
® (C, Ef, F, A), subtract seven from the values in the third
row. This is equivalent to combining interscalar transposition upward by two steps
with chromatic transposition downward by seven semitones.
With a little practice, we can learn to “read” these matrices, seeing at a glance the
voice-leading possibilities between all the transpositions of any two chord types. For
example, suppose we want to ﬁnd the most efﬁcient voice leading between C halfdiminished and A dominant seventh. Our matrix contains voice leadings that send
a half-diminished chord to the dominant seventh with the same root. Since we want
a voice leading that moves the root down by third, we will be subtracting three from
the numbers in some row of the matrix.1 To ﬁnd the ascending scalar transposition
that most nearly offsets descending chromatic transposition by three semitones, we

1 Note that the matrix contains ascending scalar transpositions, which we will be attempting to neutralize with descending chromatic transpositions; hence we transpose by subtracting three rather than by
adding nine.

Appendix D
Figure D1 (a) The rows of this matrix correspond to the voice leadings in (b). All of the
strongly crossing-free (four-voice) voice leadings from half-diminished to dominant seventh
can be derived by adding a constant number to some row of this matrix. For example, to
combine interscalar transposition up by two steps with chromatic transposition downward by
seven semitones, subtract 7 from the values in the third row of the matrix, as illustrated by (c).

simply look for the row of the matrix whose values come closest to three. This is
clearly the second row: subtracting three from these values gives (1, 1, 1, −1), repre1, 1, 1, - 1
® (Cs, E, G, A).2
senting (C, Ef, Gf, Bf) ¾¾¾¾
After a bit of time, this sort of computation becomes automatic; one virtually starts
1, 1, 1, - 1
to see the voice leading (C, Ef, Gf, Bf) ¾¾¾¾
® (Cs, E, G, A) directly in the matrix
in Figure D1. To test yourself, try to use the matrix to identify the most efﬁcient voice
leading from a C half-diminished chord to an Ef dominant seventh chord.3 Then use

2 Interscalar interval matrices provide another way to understand the relationship between near evenness and efﬁcient voice leading: for two nearly even chords, the rows of the interscalar interval matrix will
all be very close to a constant value, which means that the interscalar transpositions and chromatic transpositions will nearly cancel each other out. Hence we can ﬁnd reasonably efﬁcient voice leadings between
that chord and all of its various transpositions.
3 To do this, simply subtract nine from the row of the matrix whose values are closest to nine. (Again,
we want to combine a descending chromatic transposition with an ascending scalar transpositions in the
matrix, and hence will be subtracting nine rather than adding three to some row.) In this case, the relevant
row is the last one: subtracting nine from the values in the fourth row gives us (1, 0, 1, 0), representing
1,0,1,0
(C, Ef, Gf, Bf) ¾¾¾
® (Df, Ef, G, Bf).

419

420

appendix d

it to ﬁnd the minimal voice leading that maps the root of the half-diminished chord
onto the ﬁfth of some dominant seventh.4
Analogous matrices can be constructed for any pair of chords, using the following
algorithm5:
1.
2.

3.

Assign scale degree numbers to the two scales A and B.
Arrange chord A in pitch space in ascending scale degree order (i.e. with the
ﬁrst scale degree at the bottom and the last scale degree at the top) such that
the top and bottom notes are no more than an octave apart. Arrange chord B
similarly.
Write down the voice leading that maps the lowest note of A to the lowest
note of B, the second-lowest note of A to the second-lowest note of B, and
so on. Write this voice leading as a pitch-class voice leading of the form
x1 , x2 ,..., xn
® (b1 , b2 , . . . , bn ) (§2.5). The numbers above the
(a1 , a2 , . . . , an ) ¾¾¾¾¾
arrow are the ﬁrst row of the interscalar interval matrix.6

Figure D2 Constructing the interscalar interval matrix from (C, D, E, F, G, A, B) to
(C, D, E, Fs, G, A, Bf). The resulting matrix is shown in Figure D3.

4 Here, we begin with the third row of the matrix (which maps root to ﬁfth) and ask what chromatic
transposition comes closest to neutralizing these values. There are two equally good possibilities: subtracting six gives us a two-semitone voice leading from Cø7 to Fs7, while subtracting seven gives us a twosemitone voice leading from Cø7 to F7.
5 It is assumed that A and B have the same number of notes. One can always add “doublings” to the
smaller chord so that it has the same number of notes as the larger chord. However, there are multiple
ways to do this.
6 Or more mathematically: the numbers are obtained by subtracting the pitches of B componentwise
from those of A.

Appendix D

4.
5.

Transpose the lowest note of B up by octave and move it to the end of the
sequence, replacing (b1, b2, …, bn) with (b2, b3, …, bn, b1 + 12).
Repeat steps 3–4 to obtain the second row of the interscalar interval
matrix. Continue repeating until the chord B has been transposed upward
by octave.

Figure D2 generates the interscalar interval matrix that takes the C diatonic
scale to the C acoustic scale. Note that the result is affected both by how we assign
scale degrees to the two chords, and by how we arranged them register. For example, suppose we had numbered the C acoustic scale so that D was its ﬁrst scale
degree, and arranged it in register so that it began 10 semitones below middle C:
(D3, E3, Fs3, G3, A3, Bf3, C4). This would yield an interscalar interval matrix
whose ﬁrst row is (−10, −10, −10, −10, −10, −11, −11) rather than (0, 0, 0, 1, 0,
0, −1). Figure D3 compares the matrix that results with the matrix we originally
generated: each row of Figure D3b is either identical to a row in Figure D3a, or can
be obtained from one by subtracting 12. In principle, the difference between these
two matrices is immaterial; they contain the same information and can be used in
more or less the same way. However, it is in practice easier to work with the matrix
in Figure D3a.
In the special case where the second chord is the same as the ﬁrst, then we have a
scalar (rather than an interscalar) interval matrix. One can construct these matrices
in exactly the same way, though we should always label the scale degrees so that the
ﬁrst row of the matrix contains only zeros. Figure D4 generates the scalar interval
matrix that takes the dominant seventh chord to itself. Its four rows correspond to
the voice leadings at the bottom of the ﬁgure.
Again, the matrix can be used to represent every combination of scalar and chromatic transpositions. For example, to combine scalar transposition by ascending step
with chromatic transposition downward by three semitones, subtract three from the
1,0,0, -1
® (Cs, E, G, A).
second row of the matrix, giving (C, E, G, Bf) ¾¾¾

Figure D3 Two equivalent interscalar interval matrices. Each of the ﬁrst six rows in the right
matrix can be obtained by subtracting twelve from the next row down in the left matrix. The
last row of the right matrix is identical to the ﬁrst row of the left.

421

422

appendix d
Figure D4 The four voice leadings corresponding to the four rows of the scalar interval
matrix that takes (C, E, G, Bf) to itself.

0,0,0,0
(C, E, G, Bf) ¾¾¾
® (C, E, G, Bf)
4,3,3,2
(C, E, G, B f) ¾¾¾
® (E, G, Bf, C)
7,6,5,6
(C, E, G, Bf) ¾¾¾
® (G, Bf, C, E)
10,8,9,9
(C, E, G, Bf) ¾¾¾
® (Bf, C, E, G)

The key point is that these scale-theoretic ideas provide another way to think
about the geometrical spaces described in Chapter 3. Consider Figure D5, which
reproduces the cross section of three-note chord space (§3.8). The line segments
on the ﬁgure represent the three paths connecting 047 to a minor triad without
touching the boundary: (0, 4, 7)®(0, 3, 7), (0, 4, 7)®(0, 5, 8), and (0, 4, 7)®(0, 4,
9). Each line segment corresponds to a different category of interscalar transposition between major and minor triads. The ﬁrst, (0, 4, 7)®(0, 3, 7), links root to
root; the second, (0, 4, 7)®(0, 5, 8), links root to ﬁfth; and the third, (0, 4, 7)®(0,
4, 9), links root to third. In fact, there is a very close connection between the idea of
isolating the purely contrary component of a voice leading and the techniques we
are discussing here: roughly speaking, the interscalar transposition corresponds to
the pure contrary component of a crossing-free voice leading, while the chromatic
transposition corresponds to the pure parallel component.7 What is particularly
useful about the scalar approach is that it can be applied to large chords, without requiring that we try to visualize higher dimensional geometry. The interscalar

7 More precisely: each of the strongly crossing-free, purely contrary voice leadings between chord A
and a chord transpositionally related to B involves a distinct interscalar transposition. By focusing on pure
contrary voice leadings or interscalar transpositions, we select one voice leading from among a class of
individually T-related voice leadings, using it as the representative of that larger class.

Appendix D
Figure D5 The cross section of three-note chord space contains three line segments that
connect 047 to a minor triad without touching the boundary (a). Each corresponds to a
different interscalar transposition between major and minor triads (b).

interval matrix thus provides a kind of “road map” of chord space, displaying the
most commonly traveled routes between any two points. In many cases, the language of interscalar transpositions is considerably more intuitive than its higher
dimensional, geometrical equivalent. I ﬁnd it wonderful that these two languages—
one heavily geometrical, the other more recognizably musical—are essentially saying the same thing.

423

appendix e

Scale, Macroharmony, and Lerdahl’s
“Basic Space”
In some ways, Fred Lerdahl and I have very different approaches to music theory. Lerdahl postulates a kind of lossless listening in which ordinary people typically recover all of the details in a musical score; I emphasize the importance of
information loss in music perception. Lerdahl is strongly inﬂuenced by Schenker,
believing that entire tonal pieces can be described by giant, recursive “tree structures” analogous to those found in linguistics; I am skeptical of these approaches,
preferring to emphasize local harmonic norms such as “IV goes to ii but not vice
versa.” (Lerdahl does not discuss harmonic norms in Tonal Pitch Space, leading me
to suspect that he does not consider them to be particularly important.1) Finally,
Lerdahl is primarily concerned with modeling cognitive structures in the listener’s
mind, whereas I am interested in how contemporary musicians might think about
composing music.
Nevertheless, there are some ways in which our views are rather similar. On
a very general level, Lerdahl and I both present theoretical models that seek to
integrate the local (“chordal”) and larger (“scalar”) levels. Furthermore, we use
very similar graphs to represent “centricity” or pitch prominence. Figure E1 presents a five-tiered pitch-class profile that is very similar to what Lerdahl calls the
“basic space” for the key of C major; indeed, to the casual observer they are virtually indistinguishable. There are, however, two subtle but important differences
between our figures. First, Lerdahl uses his graphs to represent not just macroharmony and centricity, but also music’s scalar structure. And second, Lerdahl’s
basic space does double duty, representing both global harmonic stability and
the local harmonic expectations associated with being on the tonic chord in a
particular key.
Let’s consider these points in more detail. Lerdahl’s basic space encodes the claim
that listeners hear tonal melodies relative to ﬁve melodic “alphabets”: the chromatic
scale (level e), diatonic scale (level d), the triad (level c), the perfect ﬁfth (level b), and
the unison (level a). By contrast, the pitch-class proﬁles in Chapter 5 represent only

1 He also suggests (2001, p. 215) that terms like “tonic” and “dominant” can be translated into statements
about “prolongational position,” a position that seems to court monism (§7.6).

Appendix E
Figure E1 A ﬁve-tiered pitch-class proﬁle for the key of C major (a) and Fred
Lerdahl’s “basic space” (b).

the stability of individual notes, and do not reﬂect anything about music’s melodic
or scalar structure. I think this is an advantage of my approach. Lerdahl is surely correct to assert that traditionally tonal melodies are often interpreted relative to his ﬁve
melodic alphabets, but I am not sure that they always or necessarily are. Figure E2a
presents the end of the Chopin “black-key” etude. Intuitively, I would imagine that
listeners interpret this passage relative to the pentatonic scale, which does not constitute a distinct layer of Lerdahl’s space. The same is true of Figures E2b–c, which also
feature melodic pentatonic scales. To me, these examples strongly suggest that tonal
music sometimes uses a pentatonic “melodic alphabet”—one that is not included in
Lerdahl’s basic space.
The deep issue here, it seems to me, is that scale, macroharmony, and centricity
are in principle independent, even though they are often linked in practice. This is
precisely what allows a musician like Chopin to use pentatonic melodies to articulate
pitch-class proﬁles like the one in Figure E1a. From the contemporary composer’s
perspective, or from the standpoint of the theorist interested in charting the full
space of tonal possibilities, Lerdahl’s basic space is therefore too conﬁning, precisely
because it forces us into a relatively traditional understanding of the relation between
scale, macroharmony, centricity. By separating scale from macroharmony, we sever
the link between pitch-class proﬁles and melodic alphabets, thereby allowing ourselves to consider more ambiguous proﬁles such as that in Figure 5.6.12.
Lerdahl also means for his basic space to play two similar but related roles: it
represents both the global stability of notes within a key and also the local stability
of notes relative to a sounding tonic chord. In its ﬁrst role, the basic space expresses

425

426

appendix e
Figure E2 Pentatonic scales playing a prominent melodic role at the conclusion of Chopin’s
Op. 10 No. 5 (a), in Dvorák’s Op. 96 “American” Quartet (b), and at the opening of McCoy
Tyner’s solo on “Pursuance” (c).

thoughts like “in the key of C major, C is the most important pitch, then G, then E,
then the remaining white notes, then the black notes—no matter what chord is actually sounding.” In its second role, the basic space expresses sentiments like “when I am
hearing a C major chord in the key of C major, the C is the most stable note because
it is the root of the chord I am hearing, then G, because it is the ﬁfth of the chord that
I am hearing, then E, then the white notes, because they belong to the main scale of
the key I am in.” Lerdahl not unreasonably assumes that these two kinds of stability
should correspond: the global importance of notes relative to a key should reﬂect the
local stability of notes when the tonic chord is sounding.
But in many modern tonal styles, this requirement is inappropriate. For example,
a contemporary jazz pianist might regularly play the tonic chord of an F blues as a
stack of fourths F-Bf-Ef (Figure E3). Relative to this particular voicing of the tonic

Appendix E

F7 chord, the Bf might be conceived as more stable than the A—in fact, a melodic
A played over this voicing will produce a distinctive “bite” since it forms a semitone
with the Bf in the harmony. However, it would be odd to interpret this local chord
voicing as upsetting the global stability of notes in the key: jazz musicians conceive
of voicings as ﬂexible things that can be altered and changed spontaneously, without
restructuring the key itself. (The chord voicing does not, for example, destroy the
sense that Bf is attracted melodically to A.) Here, then, the stability of notes within
the key diverges from the local stability of notes when the tonic chord is sounding.2

Figure E3 The opening of Chick Corea’s solo on “Matrix,” from Now he sings, now he sobs
(transcribed by Bill Dobbins in Corea 1988). In jazz, the global harmonic stability of notes
need not correspond to their local stability over tonic chords: Corea often plays F-Bf-Ef for
the F7 chord, but this does not mean that Bf is globally more stable than A.

Of course, Lerdahl’s theory is optimized for the purpose of modeling listeners’
responses to classical music, in which these complications typically do not arise. My
points should therefore be taken as obstacles to extending Lerdahl’s methods to other
styles, rather than intrinsic problems within its own domain. It is also important to
reiterate that Lerdahl and I are pursuing fundamentally different aims: unlike Lerdahl, I am not trying to develop an accurate quantitative model of listeners’ responses
to the classical style in particular; instead, my goal is to develop more general representations that can help musicians think about a much wider range of tonal styles,
including those of the past hundred years. To this end, I want more ﬂexible tools that
are sensitive to the ways in which macroharmony, scale, and centricity can sometimes
diverge.

2 Jazz is ﬁlled with examples of this phenomenon—as when improvisers play the lydian mode over the
tonic triad (Chapter 10).

427

appendix f

Some Study Questions, Problems, and Activities
chapter 1
1.
2.

Compose a short etude, about a minute long, exploring one or more
combinations of the ﬁve features.
Write a simple melody exploiting a small voice leading between two closely
related scales.

chapter 2
1.
2.

3.

Using the formulas in §2.3, show that transposition and inversion are
distance-preserving functions (requires basic algebra).
Using the formulas in §2.3, show that every inversion leaves some pitch
unchanged and moves every other point by twice the distance to this “ﬁxed
point” (requires basic algebra).
Determine which (if any) combination of O, P, T, I, and C is required to
transform
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

4.
5.

(C4, E4, G4) into (A3, Cs5, E3)
(C4, E4, G4) into (Ef3, G4, C3, Ef2)
(C4, Ef4, G4, Bf4) into (Bf4, G4, G4, Ef4, C4)
(C4, D4, Ef4) into (A3, Fs2, G5)
(C4, D4, F4) into (B5, A5, Fs5)
(C4, E4, F4) into (G4, Fs4, D4, C4)

Choose a Bach chorale and write the voice leadings in the ﬁrst measure as
shown in Figure 2.7.1. Ignore nonharmonic tones.
How (if at all) are the following pitch-class space voice leadings related?
a. (C, E, G)®(Bf, Ef, G) and (C, Ef, G)®(C, E, A)
b. (C, E, G, Bf)®(B, E, Gs, B) and (C, Ef, Gf, A)®(C, E, G, G)
c. (C, E, G)®(C, E, A) and (E, G, C)®(E, A, C)
d. (Fs, A, C, E)®(Fs, A, C, D) and (D, F, Af, C)®(Ds, Fs, A, B)
e. (C, E, G, Bf)®(C, Ef, F, A) and (Fs, A, C, D)®(Fs, Af, C, Ef)

Appendix F

f.
g.
6.

Find a symmetrical chord that is very close to the following chords and
describe its symmetries. Construct a voice leading that exploits the near
symmetries of the chords below.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

7.
8.

(C, D, E, F, G, A, B)®(D, E, F, G, A, B, C) and (C, D, E, F, G,
A, B)®(C, D, Ef, F, G, A, Bf)
(C, E, G)®(C, E, Gs) and (C, Ef, G)®(C, Ef, Gf)

{E, G, B, Ds}
{C, E, G, Bf}
{C, F, Fs}
{C, Cs, D, Fs}
{C, D, Ef, F, G, Af, B}

Nearly even chords are also nearly inversionally symmetrical. Why? What
about chords whose notes are clustered very close together?
Compose a small musical etude that exploits the near symmetries of some
chord.

chapter 3
1.

Make several copies of the two-note Möbius strip (Figure 3.3.1), and draw
the following voice leadings:
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

2.

3.

4.

(Ef4, Af4)®(Ef4, Bf4)
(Ef4, Af4)®(Bf3, Ef4)
(Ef4, Af4)®(Ef4, Bf3)
(Ef4, Af4)®(Ef3, Bf4)
(C4, E4)®(A3, F4)
(Af3, Bf3)®(A3, G3)

On the two-note Möbius strip, choose two major thirds and draw two
different generalized line segments between them, neither of which touches
the mirror boundary. In ordinary musical notation, write voice leadings
corresponding to these two paths.
On the two-note Möbius strip, choose two major thirds and draw two
generalized line segments between them: one bouncing off the lower mirror
boundary and one bouncing off the upper mirror boundary. Write voice
leadings in pitch space corresponding to these two paths.
On the triangular cross section of three-note chord space (Figure 3.8.6),
represent the pure contrary component of the following voice leadings:
a.
b.
c.

(C, E, G)®(B, E, G)
(C, G, E)®(C, Af, F)
(C, F, Af)®(C, Ef, A)

429

430

appendix f

d. (C, Df, G)®(Df, C, G)
-7,1, -2
e. (G, B, D) ¾¾¾
® (C, C, C)
f. (A, C, E)®(Af, C, F)®(G, B, F)
5.

6.

7.
8.

9.

10.

On the triangular cross section of three-note chord space, choose a point
representing a minor triad. Draw the three line segments that connect this
point to major triads without touching the mirror boundary. Then come up
with diatonic voice leadings (i.e. voice leadings between chords belonging to
the same diatonic scale) whose “purely contrary” component is represented
by these line segments.
The chord {A, Cs, F, Fs} has two notes clustered together, and there is one
efﬁcient voice leading that permutes the clustered notes; the chord {A, D,
Ds, E} has three notes clustered close together, and there are ﬁve efﬁcient
voice leadings that permute the clustered notes. Explain this geometrically,
in terms of the chords’ positions in the cross section of four-dimensional
chord space. What about a chord like {A, Bf, B, C}?
Locate the inversionally symmetrical set classes in the cross section of threedimensional space.
Write out a new Möbius strip, labeling only the points contained in
seven-note equal temperament. (You can identify scale degrees using
the letters A through G, but note that this scale is not the familiar major
scale—it divides the octave into seven completely equal parts, rather than
having steps of two different sizes.) Compare the cross sections of this
space to those of the chromatic Möbius strip. Are there any interesting
differences?
(Advanced) Chapter 2 showed that the chord (B, C, E, Fs) is near its tritone
transposition. Explain this fact using the geometry of four-note chord space.
Hint: consider the two-dimensional “slice” of the space containing all chords
with both C and Fs. What does this slice look like? How is the voice leading
(C, E, Fs, B)®(C, F, Gf, Bf) represented in it?
(Advanced) Consider the slice of four-note chord space containing chords
that can be decomposed into two perfect fourths. What does it look like?
What voice leadings does it depict? How does this slice differ from the
slice containing chords that can be decomposed into a perfect fourth and
a major third? Optional: use this space to analyze a passage from Bartók’s
“Fourths,” no. 131 in the Mikrokosmos.

chapter 4
1.

2.

What is the smallest (three-voice) voice leading between the D minor and
E major triads if you measure distance according to the A harmonic minor
scale? What if you measure distance according to the chromatic scale?
Compose a brief etude using one of the scales described in §4.4.

Appendix F

3.

Figure F1, at the end of this appendix, contains several unlabeled graphs.
Select the appropriate graph and label the chords described in the following
list. In each case, measure distances using scale steps. Consult §3.11 for help.
a.
b.
c.
d.

The most even two-note chords in the acoustic scale
The most even two-note chords in the octatonic scale
The most even three-note chords in the hexatonic scale
The most even four-note chords in the octatonic scale (Note: you
may need to use multiple copies of the graph to do this
completely.)
e. The “generalized circle of ﬁfths” at the center of four-note diatonic
space. (That is, the one-dimensional space representing voice-leading
relations among the most even type of four-note diatonic chord.)
f. The two-dimensional graph representing the two most even types of
four-note diatonic chords.
g. The three-dimensional analogue of the graph in the previous problem,
containing four types of nearly even diatonic chords.
h. The most even four-note chords in the chromatic scale (don’t look back
at Chapter 3).
4.

Using Appendix D, construct the scalar interval matrix for
a.
b.
c.

5.

Use the scalar interval matrices from the previous problem to ﬁnd the most
efﬁcient voice leading between
a.
b.
c.

6.

7.

8.

the major triad considered as an object in chromatic space
the triad considered as an object in diatonic space
the acoustic scale

two major triads in chromatic space
two triads in diatonic space
two acoustic scales

Write the most efﬁcient (three-voice) voice leadings from a C major triad
to each of the twelve minor triads and catalogue them according to which
interscalar transposition is used.
Choose a sequence of ﬁve diatonic, acoustic, and harmonic scales that are
related by efﬁcient voice leading. Now chart this sequence on both the scale
lattice (Figure 4.6.1) and the alchemistical diagram (Figure 4.6.5). Use this
opportunity to familiarize yourself with the alchemistical diagram.
(Very advanced) Consider any single-step voice leading between two chords
belonging to the same scale. This voice leading deﬁnes a unique single-step
voice leading between the complements of those chords. (The complement
of a chord relative to a scale contains all the notes of the scale not in the
chord.) For instance, the diatonic voice leading (C, E, G)®(C, E, A) deﬁnes a
complementary voice leading among seventh chords (B, D, F, A)®(B, D, F, G).

431

432

appendix f

9.

This seems to show that the lattices representing complementary chords are
structurally similar, even though they have different dimension. (For instance,
the space representing diatonic triads has three dimensions, whereas that
representing diatonic seventh chords has four dimensions.) Explain.
Explain why the scales discussed in §4.4 have a compact appearance on the
Tonnetz (Figure C1a).

chapter 5
1.

Use pitch-class proﬁles to imagine one or more “generalized keys” and write
a short etude in this “key.”

chapter 7
1.
2.

3.

4.
5.

Identify the appearances of the 3 + 1 and “nonfactorizable” schemas in some
phrase of a Bach chorale.
(Advanced) Consider the nonfactorizable voice leading (C, C, E, G)
®(A, C, F, F). Show that this voice leading exploits the fact that the major
triad is near the tritone. (Hint: show that the size of the voice leading can
be continuously shrunk to zero by moving E and G closer to Fs (in the
ﬁrst chord) and A and C closer to B (in the second), while also changing
the transpositional relationship between the triads from ﬁve semitones to
six.) Can you ﬁnd analogues to this voice leading that use other three-note
chords?
(Advanced) Now consider the voice leading (C, C, E, G)®(B, D, F, F). What
near symmetries of the triad does this voice leading exploit? How can it be
shrunk to zero? Can you ﬁnd analogues to this voice leading that use other
three-note chords? (Hint: consider the triad as an object in diatonic space.)
(More advanced) Provide a similar analysis of the voice leading
(C, C, E, G)®(B, D, D, G).
Show that every instance of the “nonfactorizable” schema falls into one of
the cases considered in the previous three questions.

chapter 8
1.

Analyze the development section of the ﬁrst movement of Dvorak’s New
World Symphony, paying attention to the role of the major-third and minorthird systems.

Appendix F

chapter 9
1.

Analyze Debussy’s prelude “Les tierces alternées” (Book II, no. 11), paying
particular attention to scales.

chapter 10
1.

Transcribe and analyze a jazz solo.

Figure F1 Unlabeled graphs that can be used to represent voice leading relations among
various sorts of chords.

433

Figure F1 (Continued)

references

Agmon, Eytan. 1989. “A Mathematical Model of the Diatonic System.” Journal of Music Theory
33(1): 1–25.
Agmon, Eytan. 1991. “Linear Transformations Between Cyclically Generated Chords.” Musikometrika 46(3): 15–40.
Agmon, Eytan. 1995. “Functional Harmony Revisited: A Prototype-Theoretic Approach.”
Music Theory Spectrum 17(2): 196–214.
Agmon, Eytan. 1996. “Conventional Harmonic Wisdom and the Scope of Schenkerian Theory:
A Reply to John Rothgeb.” Music Theory Online 2(3).
Aldwell, Edward and Carl Schachter. [1969] 2002. Harmony and Voice Leading, 3rd ed. Belmont:
Wadsworth.
Antokoletz, Elliott. 1984. The Music of Béla Bartók. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Antokoletz, Elliott. 1993. “Transformations of a Special Non-Diatonic Mode in TwentiethCentury Music: Bartók, Stravinsky, Scriabin, and Albrecht.” Music Analysis 12(1): 25–45.
Babbitt, Milton. 1958. “Who Cares if You Listen?” High Fidelity 8(2): 38–40.
Babbitt, Milton. 1962. “Twelve-Tone Rhythmic Structure and the Electronic Medium.” Perspectives of New Music 1(1): 49–79.
Bach, Carl Philipp Emanuel. [1753/1762] 1949. Essay on the True Art of Playing Keyboard
Instruments. Ed. and trans. William J. Mitchell. New York: Norton.
Barnett, Gregory. 1998. “Modal Theory, Church Keys, and the Sonata at the End of the Seventeenth Century.” Journal of the American Musicological Society 51(2): 245–281.
Bartók, Béla. 1976. Essays. Ed. Benjamin Suchoff. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Beach, David. 1974. “The Origins of Harmonic Analysis.” Journal of Music Theory 18(2): 274–230.
Beach, David. 1983. “Schenker’s Theories: A Pedagogical View.” In Aspects of Schenkerian Theory, ed. David Beach, 1–38. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Berger, Arthur. 1963. “Problems of Pitch Organization in Stravinsky.” Perspectives of New Music
2(1): 11–42.
Berry, Wallace. 1976. Structural Functions in Music. New York: Dover.
Biamonte, Nicole. 2008. “Augmented-Sixth Chords vs. Tritone Substitutes.” Music Theory
Online 14(2).
Blum, Fred. 1959. “Another Look at the Montpellier Organum Treatise.” Musica Disciplina 13:
15–24.
Boretz, Benjamin. 1972. “Meta-Variations, Part IV: Analytic Fallout (1).” Perspectives of New
Music 11(1): 146–223.
Bregman, Albert. 1990. Auditory Scene Analysis: The Perceptual Organization of Sound. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Brown, Matthew. 2005. Explaining Tonality. Rochester: University of Rochester Press.
Buelow, George. 1992. Thorough-Bass Accompaniment According to Johann David Heinichen.
Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.

436

References
Burns, Edward M. 1999. “Intervals, Scales and Tuning.” In Psychology of Music, 2nd ed., ed.
Diana Deutsch, 215–264. San Diego: Academic Press.
Caballero, Carlo. 2004. “Multimodality in Fauré.” Paper presented to the joint meeting of the
Society for Music Theory and American Musicological Society, Seattle, Washington.
Cadwallader, Allen and David Gagne. 1998. Analysis of Tonal Music: A Schenkerian Approach.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Callender, Clifton. 1998. “Voice-Leading Parsimony in the Music of Alexander Scriabin.” Journal of Music Theory 42(2): 219–233.
Callender, Clifton. 2004. “Continuous Transformations.” Music Theory Online 10(3).
Callender, Clifton. 2007. “Interactions of the Lamento Motif and Jazz Harmonies in György
Ligeti’s Arc-en-ciel.” Intégral 21: 41–77.
Callender, Clifton, Ian Quinn, and Dmitri Tymoczko. 2008. “Generalized Voice Leading Spaces.”
Science 320: 346–348.
Callender, Clifton, and Nancy Rogers. 2006. “Judgments of Distance between Trichords.” In
Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Music Perception and Cognition, eds.
Mario Baroni, Anna Rita Addessi, Roberto Caterina, and Marco Costa, 1686–1691. Bologna:
The Society for Music Perception and Cognition.
Caplin, William. 1998. Classical Form: A Theory of Formal Functions for the Instrumental Music
of Haydn, Mozart, and Beethoven. New York: Oxford University Press.
Cariani, Peter. 2001. “Temporal Codes, Timing Nets, and Music Perception.” Journal of New
Music Research 30(2): 107–135.
Carey, Norman and David Clampitt. 1989. “Aspects of Well-Formed Scales.” Music Theory
Spectrum 11(2): 187–206.
Carpenter, Ellon. 1995. “Russian Theorists on Modality in Shostakovich’s Music.” In Shostakovich Studies, ed. David Fanning, 76–112. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Clark, Suzannah. 2002. “Schubert, Theory and Analysis.” Music Analysis 21(2): 209–243.
Clough, John and Jack Douthett. 1991. “Maximally Even Sets.” Journal of Music Theory 35:
93–173.
Clough, John, Nora Engebretsen, and Jonathan Kochavi. 1999. “Scales, Sets, and Interval Cycles:
A Taxonomy.” Music Theory Spectrum 21(1): 74–104.
Clough, John and Gerald Myerson. 1985. “Variety and Multiplicity in Diatonic Systems.” Journal of Music Theory 29(2): 249–270.
Cohn, Richard. 1991. “Bartók’s Octatonic Strategies: A Motivic Approach.” Journal of the American Musicological Society 44: 262–300.
Cohn, Richard. 1992a. “The Autonomy of Motives in Schenkerian Accounts of Tonal Music.”
Music Theory Spectrum 14(2): 150–170.
Cohn, Richard. 1992b. “Transpositional Combination of Beat-Class Sets in Steve Reich’s PhaseShifting Music.” Perspectives of New Music 30(2): 146–177.
Cohn, Richard. 1996. “Maximally Smooth Cycles, Hexatonic Systems, and the Analysis of LateRomantic Triadic Progressions.” Music Analysis 15(1): 9–40.
Cohn, Richard. 1997. “Neo-Riemannian Operations, Parsimonious Trichords, and their ‘Tonnetz’ Representations.” Journal of Music Theory 41(1): 1–66.
Cohn, Richard. 1998a. “Introduction to Neo-Riemannian Theory: A Survey and a Historical
Perspective.” Journal of Music Theory 42(2): 167–180.
Cohn, Richard. 1998b. “Square Dances with Cubes.” Journal of Music Theory 42(2): 283–296.
Cohn, Richard. 1999. “As Wonderful as Star Clusters: Instruments for Gazing at Tonality in
Schubert.” Nineteenth-Century Music 22(3): 213–232.

References
Cohn, Richard. 2000. “Weitzmann’s Regions, My Cycles, and Douthett’s Dancing Cubes.” Music
Theory Spectrum 22(1): 89–103.
Cohn, Richard. 2003. A Tetrahedral Model of Tetrachordal Voice-Leading Space. Music Theory
Online 9(4).
Cohn, Richard. 2007. “Review of Fred Lerdahl’s Tonal Pitch Space.” Music Theory Spectrum
29(1): 101–114.
Corea, Chick. 1988. Now He Sings, Now He Sobs. Transcr. Bill Dobbins. Rottenberg: Advance
Music.
Cook, Nicholas. 1987. “The Perception of Large-Scale Tonal Closure.” Music Perception 5(2): 197–205.
Cook, Nicholas. 1994. “Music and Psychology: A Mutual Regard?” In Musical Perceptions, ed.
Rita Aiello and John Sloboda, 64–95. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cook, Robert. 2005. “Parsimony and Extravagance.” Journal of Music Theory 49(1): 109–140.
Crocker, Richard. 1962. “Discant, Counterpoint, and Harmony.” Journal of the American Musicological Society 15(1): 1–21.
Crowder, Robert, J. Steven Reznick, and Stacey L. Rosenkrantz. 1991. “Perception of the Major/Minor
Distinction: V. Preferences among Infants.” Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society 29: 187–188.
Dahlhaus, Carl. 1990. Studies in the Origins of Harmonic Tonality. Trans. Robert Gjerdingen.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
De La Grange, Henry-Louis. 1973. Mahler. New York: Doubleday.
Deutsch, Diana and John Feroe. 1981. “The Internal Representation of Pitch Sequences in
Tonal Music.” Psychological Review 88: 503–522.
Diamond, Jared. 1997. Guns, Germs, and Steel. New York: Norton.
Douthett, Jack and Peter Steinbach. 1998. “Parsimonious Graphs: A Study in Parsimony, Contextual Transformations, and Modes of Limited Transposition.” Journal of Music Theory
42(2): 241–263.
Dowling, W. Jay and Dane L. Harwood. 1986. Music Cognition. San Diego: Academic Press.
Dubiel, Joseph. 1997. “What’s the Use of the Twelve-Tone System?” Perspectives of New Music
35(2): 33–51.
Dufﬁn, Ross. 2006. How Equal Temperament Ruined Harmony (and Why You Should Care).
New York: Norton.
Fétis, François-Joseph. [1840] 1994. Esquisse de l’Histoire de l’Harmony. Trans. Mary Arlin.
Stuyvesant: Pendragon.
Feynman, Richard. 1994. The Character of Physical Law. New York: Modern Library.
Forte, Allen. 1955. Contemporary Tone Structures. New York: Columbia University Press.
Forte, Allen. 1973. The Structure of Atonal Music. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Forte, Allen. 1987. “Liszt’s Experimental Music and the Music of the Early Twentieth Century.”
Nineteenth-Century Music 10: 209–228.
Forte, Allen. 1990. “Musorgsky as Modernist: The Phantasmic Episode in Boris Godunov.”
Music Analysis 9: 3–45.
Forte, Allen. 1991. “Debussy and the Octatonic.” Music Analysis 10: 125–169.
Frankenhauser, Gabe. 2008. “Flat Primary Triads, Harmonic Refraction, and the Harmonic
Idiom of Shostakovich and Prokoﬁev.” In Musical Currents from the Left Coast, eds. Jack Boss
and Bruce Quaglia. Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.
Fuller, Ramon. 1975. “A Structuralist Approach to the Diatonic Scale.” Journal of Music Theory
19(2): 182–210.
Gann, Kyle. 2006. Music Downtown: Writings from the Village Voice. Berkeley: University of
California Press.

437

438

References
Gauldin, Robert. 1997. Harmonic Practice in Tonal Music. New York: Norton.
Gervais, Françoise. 1971. “Etude Comparée des Langues Harmoniques de Fauré et de Debussy.”
La Revue Musicale 272–273: 3–152, 7–131.
Gjerdingen, Robert. 2007. Music in the Galant Style. New York: Oxford University Press.
Golab, Marceij. 1995. Chopins harmonik: Chromatik in ihrer Beziehung zur Tonalität. Köln: Bela Verlag.
Gut, Serge. 1976. “La Notion de Consonance Chez les Théoriciens du Moyen Age.” Acta Musicologica 48(1): 20–44.
Hall, Rachel. 2009. “Geometrical models for modulation in Arab music.” Paper presented to the
national meeting of the Society for Music Theory, Montreal.
Hall, Rachel, and Dmitri Tymoczko. 2007. “Poverty and polyphony: a connection between
music and economics.” Paper presented to the 2007 Bridges Conference on Mathematical
Connections in Art, Music, and Science, Donostia, Spain.
Hansen, Finn. 1996. “The Tristan Chord Is Nothing but a Tritone Substitution of the Characteristic Subdominant.” In Jan Maegaard Festschrift, ed. Mogens Andersen, Niels Bo Foltmann, and Claus Røllum-Larsen, 165–183. Copenhagen: Engstrom and Sodring.
Harrison, Daniel. 1994. Harmonic Function in Tonal Music: A Renewed Dualist Theory and an
Account of Its Precedents. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Harrison, Daniel. 1995. “Supplement to the Theory of Augmented-Sixth Chords.” Music Theory Spectrum 17(2): 170–195.
Harrison, Daniel. 2003. “Rosalia, Aloysius, and Arcangelo: A Genealogy of the Sequence.” Journal of Music Theory 47: 225–272.
Helmholtz, Hermann von. [1863] 1954. On the Sensation of Tone. New York: Dover.
Herresthal, Harald. 2005. “Edvard Grieg und Frankreich: Zur Grieg-Rezeption.” MusikKonzepte 127: 23–44.
Hindemith, Paul. [1937] 1984. The Craft of Musical Composition, vol. 1. Trans. Arthur Mendel.
London: Schott.
Holloway, Robin. 1982. Debussy and Wagner. New York: Da Capo.
Hook, Julian. 2007a. “Cross-Type Transformations and the Path Consistency Condition.” Music
Theory Spectrum 29(1): 1–39.
Hook, Julian. 2007b. “Enharmonic Systems: A Theory of Key Signatures, Enharmonic Equivalence, and Diatonicism.” Journal of Mathematics and Music 1: 99–120.
Hook, Julian. 2008. “Signature Transformations.” In Music Theory and Mathematics: Chords,
Collections, and Transformations, eds. Jack Douthett, Martha M. Hyde, and Charles J. Smith,
137–160. Rochester: University of Rochester Press.
Hostinský, Ottokar. 1879. Die Lehre von den musikalischen Klangen. Prague: H. Dominicus.
Howat, Roy. 1983. Debussy in Proportion. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Hulse, Stewart H., Daniel J. Bernard, and Richard F. Braaten. 1995. “Auditory Discrimination
of Chord-Based Spectral Structures by European Starlings (Sturnus vulgaris).” Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General 124: 409–423.
Huovinen, Erkki. 2002. Pitch-Class Constellations: Studies in the Perception of Tonal Centricity.
Turku: Acta Musicologica Fennica.
Huron, David. 1994. “Interval-Class Content in Equally-Tempered Pitch-Class Sets: Common
Scales Exhibit Optimum Tonal Consonance.” Music Perception 11(3): 289–305.
Huron, David. 2001. “Tone and Voice: A Derivation of the Rules of Voice-Leading from Perceptual Principles.” Music Perception 19(1): 1–64.
Huron, David. 2007. Sweet Expectation: Music and the Psychology of Expectation. Cambridge:
MIT Press.

References
Hyer, Brian. 2002. “Tonality.” In The Cambridge History of Western Music Theory, ed. Thomas
Christensen, 726–752. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Isacoff, Stuart. 2001. Temperament: The Idea That Solved Music’s Greatest Riddle. New York:
Knopf.
Izumi, A. 2000. “Japanese Monkeys Perceive Sensory Consonance of Chords.” Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 108: 3073–3078.
Joseph, Charles. 1978. “Architectural Control in Josquin’s Tu pauperum refugium.” College
Music Symposium 18: 189–195.
Judd, Cristle Collins. 2006. Reading Renaissance Music Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kallberg, Jeffrey. 1985. “Chopin’s Last Style.” Journal of the American Musicological Society
38(2): 264–315.
Kaye, Philip. 1989. The “Contenance Angloise” in Perspective: A Study of Consonance and Dissonance in Continental Music, c. 1380–1440. New York: Garland.
Kindermann, William and Harold Krebs, eds. 1996. The Second Practice of Nineteenth Century
Tonality. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Kopp, David. 1997. “Pentatonic Organization in Two Piano Pieces of Debussy.” Journal of Music
Theory 41(2): 261–287.
Kopp, David. 2002. Chromatic Transformations in Nineteenth-Century Music. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Kostka, Stefan and Dorothy Payne. 2003. Tonal Harmony, 4th ed. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Krumhansl, Carol. 1990. Cognitive Foundations of Musical Pitch. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Krumhansl, Carol. 2004. “The Cognition of Tonality: As We Know it Today.” Journal of New
Music Research 33(3): 253–268.
Krumhansl, Carol L. and Mark A. Schmuckler. 1986. “Key-Finding in Music: An Algorithm
Based on Pattern Matching to Tonal Hierarchies.” Paper presented to the 19th annual Mathematical Psychology Meeting, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Krumhansl, Carol L. and Roger Shepard. 1979. “Quantiﬁcation of the Hierarchy of Tonal Functions within a Diatonic Context.” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance 5: 579–594.
Kurth, Ernst. 1920. Romantische Harmonik und ihre Krise in Wagners ‘Tristan.’ Berlin: Max
Hesses Verlag.
Larson, Steve. 1992. “Scale-Degree Function: Cognition Research and Its Application to AuralSkills Pedagogy.” CRCC technical report no. 67. Bloomington: Indiana University, Center for
Research on Concepts and Cognition.
Lendvai, Erno. 1971. Béla Bartók: An Analysis of His Music. London: Kahn & Averill.
Lerdahl, Fred. 1988. “Cognitive Constraints on Compositional Systems.” In Generative Processes in Music, ed. John Sloboda, 231–259. New York: Oxford University Press.
Lerdahl, Fred. 2001. Tonal Pitch Space. New York: Oxford University Press.
Lester, Joel. 1974. “Root-Position and Inverted Triads in Theory around 1600.” Journal of the
American Musicological Society 27(1): 110–119.
Lester, Joel. 1992. Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Levine, Mark. 1989. The Jazz Piano Book. Petaluma: Sher Music.
Lewin, David. 1987. Generalized Musical Intervals and Transformations. New Haven: Yale University Press.

439

440

References
Lewin, David. 1998. “Some Ideas about Voice-Leading between PCSets.” Journal of Music Theory 42(1): 15–72.
Lowinsky, Edward. 1961. Tonality and Atonality in Sixteenth-Century Music. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Marshall, Albert and Ingram Olkin. 1979. Inequalities: Theory of Majorization and Its Applications. New York: Academic Press.
Marvin, Elizabeth West and Alexander Brinkman. 1999. “The Effect of Modulation and Formal
Manipulation on Perception of Tonic Closure by Expert Listeners.” Music Perception 16(4):
389–408.
Masson, Charles. [1697] 1969. Nouveau Traité des Regles pour la Composition de la Musique.
New York: Da Capo.
Mathieu, William. 1997. The Harmonic Experience: Tonal Harmony from its Natural Origins to
Its Modern Expression. Rochester, Vt.: Inner Traditions.
Mazzola, Guerino, et al. 2002. The Topos of Music. Basel: Birkhauser.
McDermott, Josh, and Marc Hauser. 2005. “The Origins of Music: Innateness, Uniqueness, and
Evolution.” Music Perception 23(1): 29–59.
McGowan, James. 2005. “Dynamic Consonance in Selected Piano Performances of Tonal Jazz.”
PhD diss., Eastman School of Music.
Meeus, Nicolas. 2000. “Toward a Post-Schoenbergian Grammar of Tonal and Pre-tonal Harmonic Progressions.” Music Theory Online 6(1).
Miller, George. 1956. “The Magical Number, Seven Plus or Minus Two.” The Psychological
Review 63(2): 81–97.
Mitchell, William. 1962. “The Study of Chromaticism.” Journal of Music Theory 5: 2–31.
Mitchell, William. 1973. “The Tristan Prelude: Techniques and Structure.” Music Forum 1:
162–203.
Mooney, Kevin. 1996. “The ‘Table of Relations’ and Music Psychology in Hugo Riemann’s Harmonic Theory.” PhD diss., Columbia University.
Morris, Patrick. 1987. “Steve Reich and Debussy: Some Connexions.” Tempo 160: 8–14.
Morris, Robert. 1998. “Voice-Leading Spaces.” Music Theory Spectrum 20(2): 175–208.
Morton, David. 1976. The Traditional Music of Thailand. Berkeley: University of California
Press.
Narmour, Eugene. 1990. The Analysis and Cognition of Basic Melodic Structures: The Implication-Realization Model. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Norman, Philip. 1945. A Quantitative Study of Harmonic Similarities in Certain Speciﬁed Works
of Bach, Beethoven, and Wagner. Boston: Carl Fischer.
Norton, Richard. 1984. Tonality in Western Culture. University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press.
O’donnell, Roy. 1974. “Syntactic Differences between Speech and Writing.” American Speech
49(1–2): 102–110.
Parks, Richard. 1976. “Voice Leading and Chromatic Harmony in the Music of Chopin.”
Journal of Music Theory 20(2): 189–214.
Parks, Richard. 1989. The Music of Claude Debussy. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Patel, Aniruddh. 2008. Music, Language, and the Brain. New York: Oxford University Press.
Patrick, James. 1983. “Al Tinney, Monroe’s Uptown House, and the Emergence of Modern Jazz
in Harlem.” Annual Review of Jazz Studies 2: 150–179.
Perle, George. 1984. “Scriabin’s Self-Analyses.” Music Analysis 3: 101–122.
Perle, George. 1996. The Listening Composer. Berkeley: University of California Press.

References
Piston, Walter. 1941. Harmony. New York: Norton.
Pople, Anthony. 2001. “Styles and Languages at the Turn of the Century.” In The Cambridge
History of Nineteenth-Century Music, ed. Jim Samson, 601–620. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Powers, Harold. 1958. “Mode and Raga.” The Musical Quarterly 44(4): 448–460.
Powers, Harold. 1981. “Tonal Types and Modal Categories in Renaissance Polyphony.” Journal
of the American Musicological Society 34(3): 428–470.
Powers, Harold. 1992. “Is Mode Real? Pietro Aron, the Octenary System, and Polyphony.” Basler
Jahrbuch für Historische Musikpraxis 16: 9–52.
Pressing, Jeff. 1978. “Towards an Understanding of Scales in Jazz.” Jazz Research 9: 25–35.
Pressing, Jeff. 1982. “Pitch Class Set Structures in Contemporary Jazz.” Jazz Research 14: 133–72.
Pressing, Jeff. 1983. “Cognitive Isomorphisms Between Pitch and Rhythm in World Musics:
West Africa, the Balkans and Western Tonality.” Studies in Music 17: 38–61.
Proctor, Gregory. 1978. “Technical Bases of Nineteenth-Century Chromaticism.” PhD diss.,
Princeton University.
Quinn, Ian. 1996. “Fuzzy Transposition of Pitch Sets.” Paper presented to the national meeting
of the Society for Music Theory, Baton Rouge, Louisiana.
Quinn, Ian. 2001. “Listening to Similarity Relations.” Perspectives of New Music 39(2):
108–158.
Quinn, Ian. 2002. “Foundations of Steve Reich’s Later Harmonic Practice: The Variations and
Tehilim.” Paper presented to the national meeting of the Society for Music Theory, Columbus, Ohio.
Quinn, Ian. 2005. “Harmonic Function without Primary Triads.” Paper presented to the
national meeting of the Society for Music Theory, Boston, Massachusetts.
Quinn, Ian. 2006. “General Equal-Tempered Harmony.” Perspectives of New Music 44(2): 5–60.
Quinn, Ian. 2007. “General Equal-Tempered Harmony: Part II.” Perspectives of New Music
45(1): 6–65.
Raffman, Diana. 2003. “Is Twelve-Tone Music Artistically Defective?” Midwest Studies in Philosophy 27: 69–87.
Rahn, Jay. 1991. “Coordination of Interval Sizes in Seven-Tone Collections.” Journal of Music
Theory 35(1–2): 33–60.
Rameau, Jean Paul. [1722] 1971. Treatise on Harmony. Trans. Philip Gossett. New York: Dover.
Randel, Don. 1971. “Emerging Triadic Tonality in the Fifteenth Century.” The Musical Quarterly 57(1): 73–86.
Raphael, Christopher and Joshua Stoddard. 2004. “Functional Harmonic Analysis Using
Probabilistic Models.” Computer Music Journal 28(3): 45–52.
Rappaport, David. 2006. “Musical Scales, Integer Partitions, Necklaces, and Polygons.” Proceedings of the 2006 Bridges Conference on Mathematical Connections in Art, Music, and Science,
ed. Reza Sarhangi and John Sharp, 595–598. St. Albans: Tarquin.
Reti, Rudolf. 1958. Tonality Atonality Pantonality. London: Rockliff.
Ricci, Adam. 2004. “A Theory of the Harmonic Sequence.” PhD diss., Eastman School of
Music.
Riemann, Hugo. 1893. Vereinfachte Harmonielehre. London: Augener.
Riley, Matthew. 2004. “The ‘Harmonic Major’ Mode in Nineteenth-Century Theory and Practice.” Music Analysis 23(1): 1–26.
Rivera, Benito. 1979. “Harmonic Theory in Musical Treatises of the Late Fifteenth and Early
Sixteenth Centuries.” Music Theory Spectrum 1: 80–95.

441

442

References
Roeder, John. 1984. “A Theory of Voice Leading for Atonal Music.” PhD diss., Yale University.
Roeder, John. 1987. “A Geometric Representation of Pitch-Class Series.” Perspectives of New
Music 25(1–2): 362–409.
Roeder, John. 1994. “Voice-leading as Transformation.” In Musical Transformation and Musical Intuition: Eleven Essays in Honor of David Lewin, ed. Raphael Atlas and Michael Cherlin,
41-58. Roxbury: Ovenbird.
Rothstein, William. 1992. “The True Principles of Harmony: Or, Schulz, Schenker, and the Stufe.”
Paper presented to the Second International Schenker Symposium, New York, New York.
Russ, Michael. 2007. “Some Observations on PM,N Relations Between Set Classes.” Music Analysis 26(1–2): 111–158.
Russell, George. 1959. The Lydian Chromatic Concept of Tonal Organization for Improvisation.
Brookline: Concept.
Russom, Philip Wade. 1985. “A Theory of Pitch of Pitch Organization for the Early Music of
Maurice Ravel.” PhD diss., Yale University.
Sadai, Yizhak. 1980. Harmony in Its Systemic and Phenomenological Aspects. Jerusalem: Yanetz.
Salzer, Felix. [1952] 1982. Structural Hearing. New York: Dover.
Salzer, Felix and Carl Schachter. [1969] 1989. Counterpoint in Composition. New York: Dover.
Samson, Jim. 1977. Music in Transition: A Study of Tonal Expansion and Atonality, 1900–1920.
New York: Norton.
Santa, Matthew. 1999. “Deﬁning Modular Transformations.” Music Theory Spectrum 21(2):
200–229.
Schachter, Carl. 1994. “The Prelude in E Minor Op. 28 No. 4: Autograph Sources and Interpretation.” Chopin Studies 2: 161–182.
Schenker, Heinrich. 1930. Das Meisterwerk in der Musik, vol. 3. Munich: Drei Masken Verlag.
Schenker, Heinrich. [1935] 1956. Der freie Satz. Ed. Oswald Jonas. Vienna: Universal.
Schenker, Heinrich. 1996. The Masterwork in Music: Volume 2, 1926: A Yearbook. Ed. William
Drabkin. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Schenker, Heinrich. 1997. The Masterwork in Music: Volume 3, 1930: A Yearbook. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Schenker, Heinrich. 2001. Free Composition. Hillsdale: Pendragon.
Schoenberg, Arnold. [1954] 1969. Structural Functions of Harmony. Ed. Leonard Stein.
New York: Norton.
Schoenberg, Arnold. [1950] 1975. Style and Idea: Selected Writings of Arnold Schoenberg. Ed.
Leonard Stein, trans. Leo Black. New York: St. Martins Press.
Schoenberg, Arnold. [1911] 1983. Theory of Harmony. Berkeley: University of California
Press.
Sethares, William. 1999. Tuning, Timbre, Spectrum, Scale. New York: Springer.
Simms, Bryan. 1975. “Choron, Fétis, and the Theory of Tonality.” Journal of Music Theory
19(1): 112–138.
Slonimsky, Nicolas. [1937] 1994. Music Since 1900. New York: Schirmer.
Smith, Charles. 1986. “The Functional Extravagance of Chromatic Chords.” Music Theory Spectrum 8: 94–139.
Starr, Daniel and Robert Morris. 1977. “A General Theory of Combinatoriality and the Aggregate (Part I).” Perspectives of New Music 16(1): 3–35.
Stein, Beverly. 2002. “Carissimi’s Tonal System and the Function of Transposition in the Expansion of Tonality.” The Journal of Musicology 19(2): 264–305.
Strickland, Edward. 2000. Minimalism: Origins. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

References
Straus, Joseph. 2003. “Uniformity, Balance, and Smoothness in Atonal Voice Leading.” Music
Theory Spectrum 25(2): 305–352.
Straus, Joseph. 2005. Introduction to Post-Tonal Theory. Upper Saddle River: Pearson Prentice
Hall.
Stuckenschmidt, Hans Heinz. 1965. “Debussy or Berg? The Mystery of a Chord Progression.”
The Musical Quarterly 51(3): 453–459.
Sutcliffe, W. Dean. 1996. “Grieg’s Fifth: The Linguistic Battleground of ‘Klokkeklang.’ ” The
Musical Quarterly 80(1): 161–181.
Taruskin, Richard. 1985. “Chernomor to Kashchei: Harmonic Sorcery; or, Stravinsky’s ‘Angle.’”
Journal of the American Musicological Society 38: 262–300.
Taruskin, Richard. 1987. “Chez Petrouchka: Harmony and Tonality Chez Stravinsky.” Nineteenth Century Music 10: 265–286.
Taruskin, Richard. 1996. Stravinsky and the Russian Traditions. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Taruskin, Richard. 2005. The Oxford History of Western Music. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Taube, Heinrich. 1999. “Automatic Tonal Analysis: Toward the Implementation of a Music
Theory Workbench.” Computer Music Journal 23(4): 18–32.
Temperley, David. 2007. Music and Probability. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Terhardt, Ernst. 1974. “Pitch, Consonance, and Harmony.” Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America 55: 1061–1069.
Thomson, William. 1991. Schoenberg’s Error. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Thomson, William. 1999. Tonality in Music: A General Theory. San Marino: Everett Books.
Trainor, Laurel J. and Becky M. Heinmiller. 1998. “The Development of Evaluative Responses
to Music: Infants Prefer to Listen to Consonance over Dissonance.” Infant Behavior and
Development 21: 77–88.
Trainor, Laurel J., Christine D. Tsang, and Vivian H. W. Cheung. 2002. “Preference for Sensory
Consonance in 2- and 4-Month-Old Infants.” Music Perception 20: 187–194.
Tramo, Mark Jude, Peter Cariani, Cris Koh, Nikos Makris, and Louis Braida. 2005. “Neurophysiology and Neuroanatomy of Pitch Perception: Auditory Cortex.” Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences 1060: 148–174.
Tymoczko, Dmitri. 1997. “The Consecutive-Semitone Constraint on Scalar Structure: A Link
Between Impressionism and Jazz.” Integral 11: 135–179.
Tymoczko, Dmitri. 2002. “Stravinsky and the Octatonic: A Reconsideration.” Music Theory
Spectrum 24(1): 68–102.
Tymoczko, Dmitri. 2003a. “Octatonicism Reconsidered Again.” Music Theory Spectrum 25(1):
185–202.
Tymoczko, Dmitri. 2003b. “Progressions Fondamentales, Functions, Degrés: une Grammaire
de l’Harmonie Tonale Élémentaire.” Musurgia 10(3–4): 35–64.
Tymoczko, Dmitri. [2007] 2004. “Scale Networks in Debussy.” Journal of Music Theory
48(2): 215–292.
Tymoczko, Dmitri. 2005. “Voice Leadings as Generalized Key Signatures.” Music Theory Online
11(4).
Tymoczko, Dmitri. 2006. “The Geometry of Musical Chords.” Science 313: 72–74.
Tymoczko, Dmitri. 2007. “Recasting K-nets.” Music Theory Online 13(3).
Tymoczko, Dmitri. 2008a. “Lewin, Intervals, and Transformations: A Response to Hook.” Music
Theory Spectrum 30(1): 164–168.

443

444

References
Tymoczko, Dmitri. 2008b. “Scale Theory, Serial Theory, and Voice Leading.” Music Analysis
27(1): 1–49.
Tymoczko, Dmitri. [2010] 2008c. “Set-Class Similarity, Voice Leading, and the Fourier Transform.” Journal of Music Theory 52(2): 251–272.
Tymoczko, Dmitri. 2009a. “Three Conceptions of Musical Distance.” In Mathematics and
Computation in Music, eds. Elaine Chew, Adrian Childs, and Ching-Hua Chuan, 258–273.
Heidelberg: Springer.
Tymoczko, Dmitri. [2010] 2009b. “Generalizing Musical Intervals.” Journal of Music Theory
53(2): 227–254.
Tymoczko, Dmitri. 2010. “Geometrical Methods in Recent Music Theory.” Music Theory Online
16(1).
Tymoczko, Dmitri. Forthcoming. “Dualism and the Beholder’s Eye.” In Riemann Perspectives,
ed. Alex Rehding and Ed Gollin. New York: Oxford.
van der Merwe, Peter. 1989. Origins of the Popular Style. New York: Oxford.
van den Toorn, Pieter. 1983. The Music of Igor Stravinsky. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Vos, Piet and Jim Troost. 1989. “Ascending and Descending Melodic Intervals: Statistical Findings and Their Perceptual Relevance.” Music Perception 6: 383–396.
Weeks, Jeffrey. 2002. The Shape of Space. New York: Marcel Dekker.
Weitzmann, Carl Friedrich. 1853. Der übermässige Dreiklang. Berlin: T. Trautweinschen.
Weitzmann, Carl Friedrich. 1860. “Erklärende Erläuterung und musikalisch-theoretische
Begründung der durch die neuesten Kunstschöpfungen bewirkten Umgestaltung und
Weiterbildung der Harmonik,” Neue Zeitschrift für Musik 52: 1–3, 9–12, 17–20, 29–31, 37–39,
45–46, 53–54, 65–66, 73–75.
Wessel, David. 1979. “Timbre Space as a Musical Control Structure.” Computer Music Journal
3(2): 45–52.
Whittall, Arnold. 1975. “Tonality and the Whole-Tone Scale in the Music of Debussy.” The
Music Review 36: 261–271.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. 1953. Philosophical Investigations. Trans. G. E. M. Anscombe. Oxford:
Basil Blackwell.
Wright, Anthony A., Jacquelyne J. Rivera, Stewart H. Hulse, Melissa Shyan, and Julie Neiworth.
2000. “Music Perception and Octave Generalization in Rhesus Monkeys.” Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 129: 291–307.
Yasser, Joseph. 1975. Theory of Evolving Tonality. New York: Da Capo.
Zentner, Marcel R. and Jerome Kagan. 1996. “Perception of Music by Infants.” Nature 383: 29.
Zentner, Marcel R. and Jerome Kagan. 1998. “Infants’ Perception of Consonance and Dissonance in Music.” Infant Behavior and Development 21: 483–492.
Zimmerman, Daniel. 2002. Families Without Clusters in the Early Works of Sergei Prokoﬁev. PhD
diss., University of Chicago.

index

Ad Organum Faciendum, Allelujia Justus et Palma,
76–77, 113, 197–200
Adams, John, 140, 188, 191, 223, 352, 389
Nixon in China, 320
Aldwell, Edward, 218n26, 232n13
Alteration, chordal, §10.4, 160, 217–224, 232, 242,
268–275, 282, 326–332, 336–338, 341, 349,
356, 377–378, 384, 388
Andreissen, Louis, 389
Atonality, §5.8, 3, 7–10, 21, 24–25, 52, 127, 154,
160–163, 177–180, 225, 272, 306–307, 345,
351, 389, 391–395
Augmented sixth, §8.2, 106, 219, 222, 229n10,
268–270, 276–279, 291, 300, 303, 363–365
Augmented triad, 21, 53–55, 60, 85–87, 104–106,
125, 217–218, 221, 271, 329, 342, 371, 382,
386–387, 412,
“Avoid” notes, 354–357, 365–366
Babbitt, Milton, 24n25, 25, 26n28, 185–186, 188,
190, 335n24
Bach, Carl Philipp Emanuel, 238
Bach, Johann Sebastian, 24, 168–169, 208, 211,
228–230, 233, 237, 378, 389, 395
Art of Fugue, BWV 1080, 244
Brandenburg Concerto III, BWV
1038, 234
Chorales, 97n28, 207, 225–230
Auf, auf, mein Herz, und du mein ganzer Sinn,
BWV 268, 228
Ein’ feste Burg ist unser Gott, BWV 80, 213–214
Für Freuden laßt uns springen, BWV 313, 282
Herr Christ, der ein’ge Gott’s sohn, BWV 96, 212
Nun lob’ mein’ Seel’ den Herren, BWV 389, 50
O Herzensangst, BWV 400, 49
Duetto, BWV 803, 228
Goldberg Variations, BWV 988, 234
Mass in B minor, BWV 232, 245, 291n24
Two-Part Inventions
D minor, BWV 775, 142
F major, BWV 779, 158–159, 234
Bb major, BWV 785, 240
Well-Tempered Clavier, 169, 249–252
Book I: D major, BWV 851, 240; F minor,
BWV 857, 244
Book II: G major, BWV 884, 245; A minor,
BWV 889, 33–34; Ab major, BWV 886,
242–243
Baroque, 23, 97, 160, 195, 198, 225, 241, 249,
262–263, 281

Bartók, Béla, 14n18, 186, 189, 191, 357–359
Battlestar Galactica, 321
Beatles, 3
“Glass Onion,” 99
“Help!,” 346–347
Sergeant Pepper, 225
Bebop, 291n23, 349, 391
Beethoven, Ludwig van, 23–25, 258n34
Sonatas, 249–251
F major, Op. 2, No. 1, 270n4
C minor, Op. 10, No. 1, 265
D major, Op. 28, 227n3
Eb major, Op. 31, No. 3, 48
F major, Op. 54, 48n26, 282n14, 291–292
Bb major, Op. 106, 160
Berg, Alban, 371n21
Blues, 272n5, 274, 349, 355, 374, 378, 385–387,
426
Boulez, Pierre, 25
Brahms, Johannes, §8.3, 268, 303, 307, 389
Four Pieces, Op. 119, 234
Intermezzo, Op. 76, No. 4, 47–48, 277–278;
Op. 116, No. 5, 77–79
Piano Concerto, Op. 83, 272–276
Piano Quartet, Op. 60, 87–88, 113
Piano Quintet, Op. 34, 245
Six Pieces, Op. 118, 160
Brown, Matthew, 3n1, 256n42
Bryars, Gavin, 188
Cadence, 168, 198, 201, 207–209, 270, 391
Cadwallader, Allen, 259–260
Cage, John, 3, 25, 390
Callender, Clifton, 36n13, 42n20, 50n28, 65n1,
77n12, 89n20, 112n45, 126n18, 133n26,
231n11, 287n21, 336n25, 298n3, 410n17,
416n4
Cardinality change, 36–45, 102
Centricity, §5.6–5.7, 4, 7, 11, 15–16, 25–28, 154,
179–183, 188n31, 190–191, 198, 201, 212,
264, 306–307, 348, 394, 424–427
See also Pitch-class space
Chart of the regions, 246–247, 252
Chopin, Frédéric, §8.4, 3, 21, 97–102, 187,
214–216, 219–220, 225, 299, 301, 303, 314,
328–329, 332, 425
Etudes
Op. 10, 161; No. 2, 161; No. 5, 312–313, 426;
No. 6, 161
Op. 25, 161

446

Index
Chopin, Frédéric (continued)
Mazurkas
Op. 6, No. 1, 290
Op. 7, No. 2, 290
Op. 41, No. 1, 312–313
Op. 68, No. 4, 27, 285–289, 291
Nocturnes
Op. 9, No. 1, 375; No. 2, 375
Op. 27, No. 1, 270; No. 2, 101, 290
Preludes
Op. 28, No.4, 27, 235, 268, 287–293, 299, 301,
304; No. 9, 218
Chord-ﬁrst composition, §9.2, 308, 313
ChordGeometries Software, 75n11
Chord space, 65, 105, 108–111, 220, 253, 363
two-dimensional, §3.3–3.4, 118, 198, 262, 362,
415, 423
three-dimensional, §3.8, 202–206, 255–257,
281–284, 416–417, 422–423
higher dimensional, §3.9, 103, 110–114, 117,
146, 190, 288, 291–295, 301–304, 317,
326n15, 329–331, 401–411
Chord type, 28, 36–40, 51–52, 65n1, 82–83, 90,
96, 119–120, 150–156, 164, 166, 182–188,
300, 307, 329n16, 408, 418
Chromaticism, §5.1–5.8, §6.6, §8.1–8.8, 21, 46,
52, 97–99, 116–120, 195, 224–225, 317–318,
332, 352, 371–372, 379, 382, 393–394,
Circle of ﬁfths, §7.5, 19, 108–112, 132–134, 205,
247, 333n23
Circle of thirds, §7.1–7.5, 19–20, 205–206, 342
Circular pitch-class space, §2.2–2.7, 53, 56, 64, 72,
112–114, 117–118, 147, 281, 402–403
Clark, Suzannah, 303, 341n30
Clementi, Muzio
Sonatas
Op. 25, No. 2, 141–142, 282n14; No. 6, 18
Clough, John, 60n34, 107n41, 117n2, 127n18
Cobain, Kurt, 99
Cohn, Richard, 5, 14, 26n29, 60n34, 64n40, 65n1,
85n18, 89n20, 126n18, 217n24, 264n41, 303,
305, 335,n24, 345n34, 412
Coltrane, John, 24, 195, 246, 358, 389–390, 395
“Giant Steps,” 164–167
Consonance, 198–203, 354n2, 391
acoustic, §2.10, 6–11, 25–28, 123, 181, 197, 264,
392
Copland, Aaron, 168
Corea, Chick
“Now he sings, now he sobs,” 427
Counterpoint, §1.3.1, §2.9, §6.2, §7.6, 64, 76, 79,
123, 191, 195–196, 201–205, 211n20, 212,
224–225, 231, 243, 268, 304–308, 314–315,
328, 378
Cycle
harmonic, 48, 210, 227–236, 260, 264–265,
284–287, 291
intervallic, 100n32, 107–111, 124–125, 253
Davis, Miles, 175–176, 223, 308, 357
“Freedom Jazz Dance,” 176, 349–350, 359, 389

Debussy, Claude, 16, 27, 140, 162–164, 168,
179–180, 188, 223, 252, 308, 320, 348–349,
351–352, 366n14, 371–372, 389, 395
“La ﬁlle aux cheveux de lin,” 128, 165–167
“Mouvement,” 136–137
Nocturnes, 139n29, 141, 143–144, 316–317,
355–356
Pélleas et Mélisande, 272–276
Prelude to “The Afternoon of a Faun,” 47–48,
318, 356, 373
Préludes, 161
“Des pas sur la neige,” 322–328, 340
“La danse de Puck,” 372–373
“Le vent dans la plaine,” 18–19
“Les collines d’Anacapri,” 311–312
“Voiles,” 155, 188
Six epigraphs antiques, 373
Decemberists, 282n14
“Here I Dreamt I was an Architect,” 128
Developing variation, 87
Dissonance, §2.10, 155, 178, 182, 190, 197, 201,
342, 377
Douthett, Jack, 85n18, 103n34, 107n41, 413n3,
416
Dufay, Guillaume, 203–204, 207–208, 237
Dvořák, Antonín
String Quartet, Op. 96, 426
Ellington, Duke, 224, 390
Equivalence classes, 35–36, 42n18,
Euler, Leonhard, 412
Evans, Bill, 5, 224, 352, 357
“Oleo,” 378–387, 389
“Turn Out the Stars,” 223
Even division of the octave, 62–63, 80, 123,
302–303
Extended common-practice, §6.1–6.8, 27, 186,
318, 339, 351, 388–389, 394
Fauré, Gabriel, 187
Pavane, 240
Fétis, François-Joseph, 3n1, 240
Feynman, Richard, 114
Folk music, 3, 187, 226, 347–348
Forte, Allen, 126n18, 164, 166, 182, 189n32
Fourier, Jean-Baptiste, 61–62
Franklin, Aretha, 283
Fuller, Roman, 179
Functional harmony, §6.4, §7.1–7.6, 187, 201, 210,
217, 222–223, 272, 276–283, 300–305, 341,
345, 354, 360, 366, 369, 376–377, 388, 393
See also Circle of thirds; Thirds-based grammar
Gagné, David, 259–260
Geometry, §3.1–3.13
coordinate, 71, 106n39, 397, 406–407, 411
cross-section, 73, 75n9, 81–97, 406–411,
416, 422
Euclidean, 65, 70n2, 72, 97n27, 106, 397–398,
401–405, 411
generalized triangle, 95–96

Index
line-segment, 66, 72–96, 134, 198–199, 392,
397–411, 422–423
matrix, 418–423
metric, 50, 97n27, 116, 121, 248n26, 397–400
Möbius strip, 19, 65, 69, 71 fn.3, 72–78,
81–86, 93, 108, 114, 117, 198–200, 224, 361,
398–399, 415
prism, 85–86, 93–96, 406
quotient space, 293, 401–403, 409n15
reﬂection, 33
simplex, 95, 406–410
tesseract, 106–107, 284–291, 331
translation, 33
See also Chart of the regions; ChordGeometries
software; Chord space; Circle of ﬁfths; Circle
of thirds; Tonnetz; Voice-leading, lattices
Gershwin, George, 349, 355, 378
Gesualdo, Carlo, 160, 188
Glass, Philip, 188, 320–322
Einstein on the Beach, 321
Gofﬁn, Gerry, and Carole King, 283
Goldilocks principle, 123, 208n16
Górecki, Henryk, 188
Goudimel, Claude, 237
Grieg, Edvard, 179n21, 316, 352
Holberg Suite, Op. 40, 257–258
Lyric Pieces
Op. 54, No. 1, “Shepherd’s Boy,” 186; No. 6,
“Bell Ringing,” 341–345
Op. 62, No. 5, “Vision,” 314–316
Op. 64, No. 4, “Salon,” 355
Hancock, Herbie, 175–176, 349–350
“Eye of the Hurricane,” 128
Harmonic consistency, 4–15, 25–28, 53, 60–64,
79–81, 123, 148, 181–197, 201–203, 212, 258,
264, 285, 392
Harrison, Daniel, 224n31, 238n21, 275n8, 256n7,
Haydn, Franz Joseph, 227n3, 249
Sonatas, 251, 279
E minor, Hob. XVI/34, 240
D major, Hob. XVI/42, 245
Eb major, Hob. XVI/49, 280
Helmholtz, Hermann von, 61n36, 62, 179n21
Hendrix, Jimi, 87, 284
Herbert, Victor
“The Serenade,” 292
Hindemith, Paul, 8, 189n32, 357, 359
Hyer, Brian, 3n1, 412
Impressionism, 3, 186, 317, 345, 351–352, 388,
391, 394
Improvisation, 285–289, 358, 365, 387
Inversion, 33–45, 56–61, 116, 126, 128, 166, 400
individually related, 45–47
nearly related, 52–3, 59, 61
pitch-space, 33n7
registral, 33n7, 408
scalar, 119–121
and sequences, 241–242
uniformly related, 45–47, 57–58

Janáček, Leoš, 223
“On an Overgrown Path,” Series II, No. 1,
326–329
Jarrett, Keith
“You and The Night and The Music,” 358–359
Jazz, §10.1–10.8, 3–4, 15, 52–55, 102, 140, 175, 181,
186–189, 213, 215, 223–225, 235, 246, 263,
269, 278, 289–291, 308, 338, 341, 345, 349–351
“fundamental theorem of,” 156
Josquin des Prez, 195, 202–204, 208, 237
“Magnus es tu, Domine,” 200–201, 206, 212, 225
Missa l’homme armé, 66–67
Keys, 156, 172–176, 181, 187–191, 212–221, 258,
374–377
distance, 195, 216, 226, 246–252, 312, 394
generalized, 16–17, 26, 154
Kopp, David, 303, 311n3
Krumhansl, Carol, 3n1, 170n13, 175n17, 246
Kundera, Milan, 391
Lachenmann, Helmut, 352
Lansky, Paul, 26n29, 320
Lassus, Orlande de, 148n38, 203–204, 208, 237
Lerdahl, Fred, 23n25, 24n27, 170n13, 172, 185,
185n27, 246, 259n36, 265n42, 303, 424–427
Lewin, David, 41n17, 42n20, 412
Ligeti, György, 7, 14n18, 53, 190–191, 342
Piano Concerto, 128
Lippius, Johannes, 196
Liszt, Franz
Années de pèlerinage, 186
Macroharmony, §1.1–1.5, §5.1–5.8, 121–130,
197, 200–201, 212, 214, 221, 264, 306–307,
342n33, 370, 384, 392–394, 424–427
consistency, 156, 164–169, 182
global proﬁle, 164–167, 190, 393
pitch-class circulation, 158–160, 184–185
pitch-class proﬁle, 171–182, 425
small-gap, 156–158
Mahler, Gustav, 191
Marsh, Wayne
“Smog Eyes,” 374
Mediant, 226, 282, 303–304
See also Circle of thirds; Thirds-based grammar
Messiaen, Olivier, 191, 351
modes, 210
Quartet for the End of Time, 189
Vingt regards sur l’enfant-Jésus, 189, 190
MIDI, 97n29, 148n37, 203n11, 249n28
Minimalism, 3, 4, 18, 26n29, 169, 172n15, 186,
223, 225, 267, 320
Mode mixture, 218n26–27, 268
Modulation, 17–19, 116, 129–132, 139, 160, 164,
187, 195–196, 212–216, 219, 224–225, 229n8,
246–252, 257–258, 264–266, 307–313,
332–333, 337–338
pivot chord, 300n30, 301
See also Chord-ﬁrst composition; Scale-ﬁrst
composition; Voice-leading

447

448

Index
Monteverdi, Claudio, 388
Morton, Jelly Roll
“Shreveport Stomp,” 292
Motion
conjunct, 4–14, 25–28, 183, 190, 197–198, 392
contrary, 66–67, 71–74, 77–85, 89–93, 96,
100–102, 113–114, 118, 153, 179, 197–198,
209, 360, 377, 422, 429–430
oblique, 66, 71, 80
parallel, 49, 66–67, 74, 79, 81–86, 90–91, 96,
100–102, 113, 118, 122–123, 148, 153, 197,
200–202, 206n14, 208–213, 225, 229n10,
230, 241, 246–248, 261, 296, 314, 319, 332,
335, 341, 422
root, 99–100, 208, 217n25, 227n3, 251, 289, 346
Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus, 24, 131, 188, 227n3,
243, 228–230, 242, 249, 251–252, 261–262,
400n11
“Ah, vous dirai-je, Maman,” K. 265, 259, 261
Fantasy, K. 475, 48, 101, 278n11
Sonatas, 97n28, 228–230, 240–242, 251, 262,
270n4,
C major, K. 279, 242, 260
F major, K. 280, 282
G major, K. 283, 129
A minor, K. 310, 160
F major, K. 533, 222
Symphonies
No. 40, K. 550, 290–292
No. 41, Jupiter, K. 551, 175
Mussorgsky, Modest, 187, 351
Nancarrow, Conlon, 7, 26n29, 342
Narmour, Eugene, 5 fn.3, 7n10
Neapolitan, 215, 268, 271
Neo-classicism, 168
Neo-romanticism, 186
Nirvana
“Heart-Shaped Box,” 98–100
Nyman, Michael, 223
The Piano
“The Mood that Passes Through You,” 318–319
Ockeghem, Johannes, 203–204, 207–208, 237
Octave shift, 38–45, 145
Omnibus progression, 101
OPTIC symmetries, 38–44, 116
See also Cardinality change; Inversion; Octave
shift; Permutation; Transposition
Palestrina, Giovanni Pierluigi da, 5, 188, 203–204,
207–208, 211, 224, 237
“Adoramus Te,” 148–149
Pope Marcellus Mass, 159–161
Pärt, Arvo, 3, 188
Partials, 61–62, 126n16,
Permutation, 36–45, 58–61, 190, 332
Philidor, François-André, 254
“Art of Modulation,” 257
Piston, Walter, 168, 224n31, 387–388

Pitch-class space, 28, 30–45, 53, 56–65, 71–75,
82–97, 102, 112–122, 144, 196, 305, 407, 418
See also Macroharmony
Pitch space, 33, 42–46, 63, 67–68, 144–145, 319,
399n8, 401–403, 411
Pollock, Jackson, 392
Polytonality, 16, 168, 172, 189–190, 332n19, 342,
344, 347n39, 348, 351, 374–378, 388
Powers, Harold, 7, 171n15, 172n16, 211n21
Probability, 24, 149, 176, 229–230
Proctor, Gregory, 182n23, 217n24, 302–303
Prokoﬁev, Sergei, 322
Five Poems of Anna Akhmatova, Op. 27,
137–140
Overture on Hebrew Themes, Op. 34, 320–321
Ten Pieces, Op. 12, 139n29
Quinn, Ian, 36n13, 42n20, 51n29, 65n1, 77n12,
112n45, 126n18, 226n2, 231n11, 336n25,
410n17, 416n4
Raffman, Diana, 185, 185n27,
Rameau, Jean-Philippe, 36, 196, 227n5, 258
Ravel, Maurice, 140, 181, 252, 345, 371–372, 389
Gaspard de la nuit, 309–311, 373
Jeux d’eau, 356
Le Tombeau de Couperin, 355–356, 364
Pavane pour une Infant Défunte, 356
String Quartet, 221–224
Reger, Max, 160, 188
Nine Pieces, Op. 129, 181–182
Variations and Fugue, Op. 73, 182
Reich, Steve, 26n29, 27, 102, 140, 144, 188, 223,
252, 308, 320, 342, 349, 351, 352, 389
City Life, 344–345
The Desert Music, 336–340, 355–356
Different Trains, 155, 356
New York Counterpoint, 331–326
Variations for Winds, Strings, and Keyboards,
144
Renaissance, §6.3, 3, 7, 15, 148n38, 172n16, 181,
195, 224–226, 237, 264
Riemann, Hugo, 46n23, 232n13, 258, 391n1, 412
Riley, Terry, 188
Rimsky-Korsakov, Nikolai, 126, 187
Roberts, Billy, 284
Rock, 3–4, 181, 186, 188, 211–213, 224–225, 263,
340–341, 346
Rogers, Richard
“The Sound of Music,” 116
Rollins, Sonny
“Oleo,” 378–379
Rothstein, William, 262
Salzer, Felix, 200n6, 213n23, 258n34
Satie, Erik, 160
Sonneries de la Rose + Croix, 165–167
Scalar distance, 117–120, 131,
Scale, §1.1–1.5, §4.1–4.10, §9.1–9.5, 365–369,
424–427

Index
acoustic, 126, 132–136, 140, 143, 186, 188,
222, 310, 312, 319, 325–326, 333–340, 345,
366–369, 371
blues, 349
chromatic, 15–16, 20, 29, 60n34, 104, 105n38,
115, 117, 188, 217
diatonic, 51, 101, 107, 112, 117, 126, 129,
135–140, 143, 168, 188, 217, 310, 312–313,
315, 325–326, 333–340, 343–345, 359–360,
369
gypsy, 117, 186, 222, 326–328, 369
harmonic major, 126, 132–135, 168, 188, 248,
310, 327–328, 367
harmonic minor, 126, 132–135, 168, 188, 248,
313, 327–328, 343, 369, 383
hexatonic, 104, 125, 134–136, 188, 369
interscalar interval matrix, 418–423
lattice, 111, 137, 213–214, 225, 248, 252–255,
309, 311, 325, 333–338, 343–344
lydian dominant, 366–373
major, 248–249, 319–320, 341
minor, 138, 168, 248–249, 319–320, 324, 330,
350
modes, 173, 187, 310, 313, 319, 323–324,
327–328, 330, 341–350, 365–371
non-octave repeating, 117n3
octatonic, 107, 117, 125, 134–140, 168, 188,
200, 223, 350, 366–369, 377, 383, 385
octave-repeating, 117–118, 123–124,
pentatonic, 60, 102, 117, 127, 188, 312,
359–360, 369, 426
polyscalar, 366, 374
uneven, 122
whole tone, 115, 117, 125, 134, 136, 188, 223,
313, 325–328, 333–340, 366–369
See also Voice-leading
Scale degrees, 119–121, 130–131, 141–146,
172–174, 269–272, 311, 314, 326, 330, 332,
337n27, 345, 354, 356n7, 362, 365, 374
Scale-ﬁrst composition, §9.3, 308, 313
Scale steps, 15, 104–115
Schachter, Carl, 200n6, 218n26, 232n13,
287n21
Schenker, Heinrich, §7.6, 18–19, 27, 179, 213,
213n23, 280, 391n1, 424
Schoenberg, Arnold, 10n15, 11n17, 16, 25, 40,
160, 179–183, 188–190, 227n5, 268, 303, 352,
387–390, 395n3
Erwartung, Op. 2, 272–282
Three Piano Pieces, Op. 11, 162–167, 182–185
Schubert, Franz Peter, 3, 27, 46, 87, 97, 99, 101,
188, 220, 225, 268, 280–283, 291n24, 320,
322, f341n30, 389
Quartett-Satz, D. 703, 283–284
Schwanengesang, D. 957, 272–276
Sonatas
D major, D. 850, 281, 302–304
Bb major, D. 960, 101, 312–313
String Quintet, D. 956, Op. posth., 219, 270
Schumann, Robert, 217, 225

Carnaval, Op. 9, 99–100, 214–216
Scriabin, Alexander, 186
Etudes, Op. 65, No. 3, 355
Poem of Ecstasy, Op. 54, 270–271
Preludes, Op. 48, No. 2, 308–309
Seger, Bob
“Turn the Page,” 339–341
Sequence, §7.3, 5–10, 37–49, 59, 87–88, 97n28,
102–107, 129, 139, 155, 183–185, 219, 227n3,
229–230, 244, 255, 265, 282–290, 336, 360,
384, 387, 401–411
ascending ﬁfths, 108–109, 279–280
descending ﬁfths, 236, 239, 243, 245, 291, 364,
371–373
descending third, descending ﬁfth, 239
descending thirds, 233–234, 238–239
down a third, up a step, 239–245, 278,
down two thirds, down a ﬁfth, 239–240
the eighteen diatonic sequences, 241
“Sequential tonality,” 241
Serialism, 26, 390
Set theory, 25–27, 71, 81n13, 86, 144, 190, 203,
401–411
multi-set, 40, 58, 72n4, 254n31, 416
set-class, 37–44, 51, 54, 59, 83, 89n20, 119–121,
158, 164, 166, 182, 368–369
subset, 127n19, 168, 275, 303, 309–313, 322,
341–349, 368
superset, 168
Shorter, Wayne, 175–176, 350
Shostakovich, Dmitri, 18, 102, 163–164, 181, 186,
188, 191, 252, 322, 338n28, 351, 376n22
Piano Quintet, Op. 57, 272
Preludes and Fugues, Op. 87, 161–162, 168–169,
321, 337
No. 4, 140–141
No. 7, 143–145
No. 13, 329–332
Sidestepping, 374–378, 383
Similarity relationships, 47–52, 112, 231–232, 394
Steinbach, Peter, 85n18, 103n34, 413n3, 416
Stockhausen, Karlheinz, 25, 190
Strauss, Johann, 351
Strauss, Richard, 181
Salome, 305
Till Eulenspiegel, 222, 270, 363–364
Stravinsky, Igor, 8, 18, 27, 137, 140, 163–164, 186,
189, 191, 322, 349, 357, 359, 387
Histoire du Soldat, 172–174, 343–345
Rite of Spring, 143, 155, 161–162, 168, 346–348
Substitution, 244, 298
third, 102, 232, 239n22, 242–245, 283, 289, 298,
319, 363, 386–387
tritone, 55, 102, 215, 269, 278, 289, 291,
298–299, 360–386, 390
Symmetry, 28, 35, 97, 102, 133, 227–229, 240, 250,
258n33, 281, 303, 307, 386
near, 15, 53–54, 58–59, 60n33, 190, 220, 281,
361, 393
See also OPTIC symmetries

449

450

Index
Tallis, Thomas, 203–204, 208, 237
Temperley, David, 23n25, 266n44, 354n5
ter Veldhuis, Jacob, 188
Thirds-based grammar, 226–230, 238
See also Circle of thirds; Sequences
Tinney, Al, 281n23
Tonality, §1.1–1.5, §7.1–7.6, 61, 131, 140, 154,
172–177, 180–185, 188–196, 210–213,
221–225, 272–280, 306–307, 349, 351, 365,
377, 388–395
See also Functional harmony
Tonnetz, 412–416
Transposition, §2.3–3.10
chromatic, 120n9, 121–122, 140–142, 150–153,
157, 187, 348, 393, 408, 418–422
individually related, 45–48, 83–85, 92, 150,
273–274, 278, 299–300, 364, 400, 418, 422n7
interscalar, 140–153, 296, 317, 326, 393, 416–423
scalar, 113, 119–123, 140–152, 157, 187, 203,
408, 411, 418–422
uniformly related, 45–46, 410–411
Tuning and temperament, 14, 20, 29, 51, 60, 63,
72n5, 73, 80, 86, 88, 90n21, 102–105, 101,
110, 117n4, 124–129, 132n25, 246–247 196,
359
Twelve-tone, 159, 183, 225, 305
Tymoczko, Dmitri
Cathedral, 178
Tyner, McCoy
“Passion Dance,” 376
“Pursuance,” 426
Varèse, Edgard, 3, 25
Vial, F.G., 246
Voice-leading
bijective, 133n26, 146n34, 400n10
and “cancelling out,” 151–152
chromatic, 21, 60n34, 124, 128, 292, 305, 372
conventions, 213
efﬁcient, 79–81, 139, 190, 200, 235, 295–297,
309, 313–314, 318, 381, 388
and guitar ﬁngerings, 207
lattices, 67–68, 74, 76, 78, 80, 82, 84, 88, 91–93,
98, 103–112, 136, 199, 248, 253–257, 273,

281, 284, 289, 291, 295, 311, 313, 317, 325,
329–330, 335, 339, 343, 345, 362, 399,
414–416
“left hand voicing,” 353–355
minimal, 52, 55, 146–152, 231, 235, 293,
347n39, 400, 415
near stepwise, 198–199
nonfactorizable, 236–238
and probability, 149
quartal voicing, 357–359, 388
and scales, 129, 135, 248–250, 310–311,
325–326, 328, 330, 335, 339, 343, 422
schemas, 273–277, 297–298, 353–357, 361–362,
388
semitonal, 46–47, 80, 87, 137, 287n21, 299, 308,
312, 314, 319, 325, 340n29, 347n39, 361–362,
373, 397, 412–415
single-step, 20, 103–104, 107–109, 118n5, 205,
231–232, 252–253, 414–415
“three plus one schema,” 204, 208, 236–238
voice crossing, 47n25, 50, 90, 92, 145–149, 206,
220, 236, 272–274, 293–297, 300, 398–399
voice exchange, 215, 259
voice transfer, 280
See also Modulation; Motion; Sequences;
Substitution
Wagner, Richard, 3, 21, 102, 181, 188, 303,
306–308, 317–318, 322, 389
Das Rheingold, 53, 101
Parsifal, 222
Tristan und Isolde, 27, 39, 47–48, 53, 58,
151–153, 160, 235, 268, 272–279, 291n24,
294–302, 305, 364
Weber, Gottfried, 246–248, 250, 252, 258
Webern, Anton, 25
Piano Variations, Op. 27, 159–163, 183
Weitzmann, Carl Friedrich, 85n18, 126, 217n24
Who, The
“I Can’t Explain,” 131, 339–341
Xenakis, Iannis, 3, 7, 25, 352
“You tell me your dream, I’ll tell you mine,” 217

