chapter 6

The Extended Common Practice
In the second half of the book, we’ll employ our theoretical apparatus to ask speciﬁc
analytical and historical questions. Chapter 6 uses the ﬁve components of tonality as
a framework for reinterpreting the history of Western music, suggesting that a number of broadly tonal styles use very similar compositional techniques. The remaining
chapters take up speciﬁc issues raised by this overarching narrative. Chapter 7 discusses the harmonic syntax of eighteenth-century tonality, using geometrical models
to investigate general questions about chord progressions, sequences, and key distances. Chapters 8, 9, and 10 are mostly analytical, focusing on chromatic harmony,
twentieth-century scalar music, and jazz. Here the point is to demonstrate that the
theoretical apparatus is useful for explicating speciﬁc pieces as well as more general
historical trends.
Ultimately, the goal of Part II is to argue that Western tonal music constitutes an
extended common practice stretching from the eleventh century to the present day. By
now, this thesis should not be too surprising: since the ﬁve components of tonality
constrain each other in interesting and nonobvious ways, composers who wish to
combine them have only a few alternatives at their disposal. The simple fact is that
many composers from before Josquin to after John Coltrane have wanted to combine
these features, and hence have struggled with a problem that has a relatively small
number of solutions. We should therefore expect that when we dig deep enough, we
will start to ﬁnd interesting similarities among their approaches.
Chapter 6 illustrates this point by considering brief passages from ﬁve very different musical styles. The ﬁrst is eleventh-century, two-voice note-against-note counterpoint—the earliest and most basic form of Western polyphony. The second illustrates
the vocal counterpoint of the Renaissance. The third exempliﬁes the functional harmony of the baroque and classical eras, and embodies two related innovations: the
establishment of purely harmonic conventions and the increasingly systematic use
of modulation. The fourth style highlights nineteenth-century composers’ growing
awareness of chords as objects in chromatic space, while the ﬁfth illustrates twentiethcentury approaches to nondiatonic scales. Since my goal is to argue that there are
similarities between these ﬁve very different kinds of music, my discussion will necessarily abstract away from numerous historical particulars. This is precisely why I consider brief passages, rather than entire pieces. I trust you will agree that my examples
capture the spirit of the genres they represent.

196

history and analysis

6.1

disclaimers

There are several ways in which my approach might strike some readers as being
anachronistic. First, I will generally model chords as unordered collections of pitch
classes, and counterpoint as voice leadings in pitch-class space. These ideas, though
originating in the theories of Lippius and Rameau, are more commonly associated with the twentieth century. It is therefore worth repeating that my goal is to
describe music in a way that is useful to contemporary musicians, rather than to
explain how earlier composers actually thought. I should also reiterate that the very
notion of “pitch class” involves a signiﬁcant degree of abstraction: every composer
in every era thinks carefully about octave, instrument, and register, distinguishing
perfect fourths from perfect ﬁfths and root position from second-inversion triads.
Were this a hands-on guide to composition, I would need to spend a great deal of
time considering the various ways pitch-class voice leadings can be embodied in
real music. However, my purpose here is to provide more general theoretical tools
for understanding tonality—and in this context, an abstract approach is perfectly
appropriate.
The other major point of anachronism is that I am not going to worry much
about tuning and intonation. These are, of course, major preoccupations of music
theory, and tuning systems have coevolved with harmony in fascinating ways:
just intonation, which permits acoustically pure thirds, burgeoned alongside the
development of triadic harmony; while more equal temperaments accompanied
the increasing use of distant modulations.1 That said, standard tuning systems are
in the grand scheme of things reasonably similar, and can all be represented by
very similar geometrical structures. To be sure, tuning colors music in important
ways and can make a real difference to our listening experience. But it does not
fundamentally affect the very general theoretical relationships that are our main
subject.
Finally, since this chapter surveys musical pieces spanning a millennium, it will
necessarily omit many details. Professional music historians, who devote their lives to
understanding history in all its marvelous speciﬁcity, will look in vain for the nuanced
discussions that are their stock-in-trade. They may even feel, at some points, that my
descriptions are uncomfortably close to the potted histories of introductory music
appreciation classes. I make no apologies for this. It seems to me that there are some
fairly systematic connections between Western styles, and that these connections have
often been ignored. Insofar as conventional scholarship de-emphasizes or disregards
these general facts—perhaps in something like the way that a ﬁsh ignores the water in
which it swims—then I think it is worthwhile to try to discuss them, even at the risk
of seeming somewhat naive.2

1 For nontechnical (and wildly different) introductions to this subject, see Isacoff 2001 and Dufﬁn
2006.
2 Here I am inspired by Jared Diamond (1997), who attempts to uncover broad geographical factors
that constrain and inﬂuence the progress of human history. My geography is abstract and mathematical.

The Extended Common Practice

6.2

two-voice medieval counterpoint

Figure 6.2.1 returns to the Allelujia Justus et Palma, ﬁrst published in the eleventhcentury treatise Ad Organum Faciendum (How to Write Counterpoint), and discussed
previously in §3.5. Although it stands at the very beginning of the Western polyphonic tradition, the piece clearly exempliﬁes a number of our ﬁve features.
1.

2.

3.

4.

Conjunct melodic motion. In general the voices move by step, with contrary
motion preferred to parallel motion. There are no prohibitions against
parallel ﬁfths or octaves.
Acoustic consonance. The Montpelier organum treatise, roughly
contemporaneous with Ad Organum Faciendum, considers steps, sevenths,
and tritones to be forbidden dissonances. Thirds and sixths are imperfect
consonances which can be used only in the middle of phrases; unisons,
fourths, and ﬁfths are perfect consonances which can be used anywhere.
This accurately describes the musical examples in Ad Organum Faciendum,
though that text does not discuss imperfect consonances.3
Harmonic consistency. There is no robust notion of harmonic consistency,
or “chord” in the modern sense. Instead, intervals are categorized by
consonance and dissonance.
Macroharmony. The lines move within an enriched diatonic system
containing seven and a half notes: C, D, E, F, G, A, and Bf/Bn. The last of
these is a ﬂexible note that exists in both a “soft” (Bf) and a “hard” (Bn)
form. These two forms do not intermix; one does not progress directly to
the other, and care is taken to avoid clashes between different note forms in

Figure 6.2.1 The Allelujia Justus et Palma from Ad Organum Faciendum. Open and closed
noteheads represent the two different musical voices.

3 See Blum 1959. Note that I mean to be including compound intervals in this list: thus, an octave and
a third (15 or 16 semitones) is an imperfect consonance, while an octave and a ﬁfth (19 semitones) is a
perfect consonance.

197

198

history and analysis

5.

different voices. The two ﬂavors of B allow composers to avoid the tritones
E-Bf and F-B.
Centricity. Cadences are articulated by contrary motion onto a unison or
octave, with one voice moving by step and the other moving by step or
third. By modern standards there is only a weak sense of centricity, and the
music often seems to ﬂoat freely in diatonic space.

No less than the music of the high Baroque, then, our simple medieval style requires
the simultaneous satisfaction of harmonic and contrapuntal constraints: the principal
harmonic constraint is that intervals must be consonant, with perfect consonances
predominating and imperfect consonances appearing more rarely; contrapuntally, the
main requirement is that the music should feature a pair of conjunct melodies, often
moving in contrary motion. Early medieval music-theory treatises attempt to help
composers satisfy both constraints, typically by listing useful progressions in mindnumbing detail—“when one part ascends a step, the other, beginning at the octave
above may descend two steps and be at the ﬁfth”; “when one part repeats a note, the
other, beginning at the fourth above, may ascend by step to the ﬁfth”; and so on.
Let us see if we can use two-note chord space to describe these principles more
efﬁciently. Figure 6.2.2 labels the consonances in our simpliﬁed medieval system,
using dark type for the perfect consonances and lighter type for imperfect consonances. Perfect consonances are linked by line segments when it is possible to connect them by stepwise voice leading, and by dotted line segments when they can
be connected by “near-stepwise” voice leading—that is, voice leading in which one
voice moves by step and the other by third. To a good ﬁrst approximation, learning
to compose in this style involves internalizing the structure of this graph: perfect

Figure 6.2.2 Perfect and imperfect consonances in our simpliﬁed medieval system, displayed
on the Möbius strip. Solid lines in the interior of the ﬁgure correspond to stepwise voice
leadings, while dashed lines show nearly stepwise voice leadings.

The Extended Common Practice

consonances account for about 90% of the intervals in the Allelujia, with the two
voices moving stepwise or near stepwise 70% of the time.4 These numbers suggest
that our Möbius strip does indeed encapsulate the basic compositional knowledge
possessed by early medieval composers, acting as a kind of musical “game board” on
which they plied their trade.
Figure 6.2.3 traces out the seventh phrase of the Allelujia on the game board. For
clarity, I have shifted the location of the left and right boundaries, and have omitted
the imperfect consonances.5 Five of the eight voice leadings use near-stepwise voice
leading to connect perfect fourths and unisons (or ﬁfths and octaves). This is much
clearer on the Möbius strip than in the musical notation; we can see at a glance that
the phrase largely consists of line segments connecting boundary points (octaves or
unisons) to the nearest perfect fourth/ﬁfth on the inside of the strip. The geometrical
representation also shows that the latter part of the phrase contains a hidden repetition
of the opening: the initial dyads (G, G)®(E, A)®(F, F) form a wedge on the lower left

Figure 6.2.3 (a) The seventh
phrase of the Allelujia Justus
et Palma, traced out on the
Möbius strip. (b) The phase
contains four “nearly stepwise”
voice leadings connecting a
perfect ﬁfth to an octave (or
perfect fourth to a unison).

4 Stepwise motion in both voices counts for about 30% of the progressions, while near-stepwise motion
adds another 40%; individually, each voice moves stepwise about 50% of the time.
5 As explained in §3.2 the placement of the left and right boundaries is arbitrary.

199

200

history and analysis
Figure 6.2.4
Octatonic organum.

of the Möbius strip, which is echoed by wedge (C, C)®(E, B)® . . . ®(D, D) above it.
(See also the brackets above the musical notation.) However, the repetition is interrupted by a pair of parallel ﬁfths that bring the music to {D, A} and {F, C}.
One might think the consonant quality of this music derives primarily from the
fact that it uses consonant intervals. But as we saw in Chapter 5, its placid sonic character is also a function of its macroharmony. Figure 6.2.4 illustrates this point with a
piece of “octatonic organum” that parodies the Allelujia’s opening phrase: though the
parody uses only consonant intervals, it is more suggestive of a black mass or satanic
ritual than medieval Christian piety. This demonstrates quite clearly that the appeal
of early music is as much a function of the macroharmony as of the vertical intervals
themselves—a lesson that suggests contemporary composers need to pay as much
attention to macroharmony as to harmony proper.

6.3

triads and the renaissance

Figure 6.3.1 presents the opening of “Tu pauperum refugium,” the second part of Josquin’s motet “Magnus es tu, Domine.”6 As in the Allelujia Justus et Palma, the music is
Figure 6.3.1
The opening
of Josquin’s
“Tu pauperum
refugium.”
Beneath the staff,
I have shown
how the music
contains a series
of efﬁcient
three-voice voice
leadings between
three-note
chords.

6 This piece was published anonymously in 1504, and has been attributed to both Finck and Josquin
(see Judd 2006). It has been analyzed by writers such as Salzer and Schachter (1989), Berry (1976), Joseph
(1978), and Judd (2006).

The Extended Common Practice

largely diatonic, using stepwise melodic motion to articulate consonant harmonies.
But there are also some fundamental differences between the styles.
Consonance and counterpoint. Parallel ﬁfths and octaves are no longer
used. Fourths over the bass typically resolve to thirds, as if they had been
reclassiﬁed as dissonances (Figure 6.3.2). However, fourths are tolerated
between upper voices, giving them an ambiguous status between consonance
and dissonance.7 Diminished triads sometimes appear in ﬁrst inversion,
even though they contain a dissonant tritone. As a result, Josquin’s music is
signiﬁcantly less austere than the earlier medieval style.
Harmonic consistency. The music creates a much stronger effect of harmonic
consistency, with fully 85% of the four-voice sonorities being triadic. The
occasional use of diminished chords reinforces the sense that triads are syntactical
objects: it is as if the diminished chord’s triadic status (i.e. its transpositional
relatedness to major and minor triads in diatonic space) trumps the fact that it
contains a dissonance. Although it might be anachronistic to treat every sonority
in the piece as representing an underlying triad, there seems to have been a move
toward this way of thinking. Certainly, one gets the impression that the transition
toward conceiving of triads as harmonic things-in-themselves is well underway.
Macroharmony and centricity. The music makes use of a wider range of accidentals,
occasionally producing mild macroharmonic change. Cadences are often
articulated by speciﬁc melodic and harmonic formulas, some of which anticipate
the V–I progressions of later music (Figure 6.3.2). To a modern ear, there is more
sense of a “tonal center” than in the medieval style. However, the music continues
to have a somewhat “ﬂoating” quality, and many passages are only weakly centered.
Figure 6.3.2 In Josquin’s music, fourths typically resolve to thirds (a), diminished triads
sometimes appear in ﬁrst inversion (b), and cadences sometimes anticipate the functional
harmony of later centuries (c).

7 The ambiguous status of the fourth is addressed by early ﬁfteenth-century theorists such as
Prosdocimus de Beldemandis (see Kaye 1989 and Gut 1976).

201

202

history and analysis

In the rest of this section I want to look more carefully at these differences, with the
goal of understanding how they might relate to the music-theoretical constraints discussed earlier.

6.3.1 Harmonic Consistency and the Rise
of Triads
The triadic quality of Josquin’s music can be traced, in part, to simple combinatorial facts about the diatonic scale. To see this, notice that it is almost impossible to
write three-voice counterpoint using only perfect consonances. This is illustrated in
Figure 6.3.3, which locates the perfect consonances in three-note chord space; chords
here are quite far apart, and only a few are connected by lines representing stepwise
voice leading. (In fact, there are only three ways to connect three-note perfect consonances by stepwise voice leading, and two of these produce parallel octaves.8) Readers
who try to compose under these conditions will quickly develop a renewed appreciation for imperfect consonances, which are virtually necessary for creating elegant
three-voice counterpoint.9
Now suppose that you would like to use three-note chords containing only perfect and imperfect consonances—that is, thirds, fourths, ﬁfths, sixths, and their

Figure 6.3.3 There are only a few three-note chords containing only perfect consonances,
and they are spread throughout three-note chord space (a). (Note that we are viewing chord
space from above, looking down through the triangular faces; compare the side view in
Figure 3.8.2, where the triangular faces are on the top and bottom.) As a result, there are only
a few ways to connect them with stepwise voice leadings (b), particularly if one wants to avoid
parallel octaves.

8 If we relax the requirement of stepwise motion, we obtain a few more options, but not enough for
compositional comfort.
9 There is some medieval music in which only the perfect consonances are stable. However, this music
typically utilizes a large number of unstable sonorities in metrically weak positions.

The Extended Common Practice

compounds. It turns out there are only two
possibilities: doubled consonances, containing multiple copies of some note, and triads, containing no doublings at all (Figure
6.3.4). The chords in the second category
are sonically richer than those in the ﬁrst,
simply by virtue of containing three distinct
pitch classes. But they are also related in
another way as well: considered as unordered sets of pitch classes, they are all related
by diatonic transposition. It follows that a relatively weak notion of harmonic consistency—the mere preference for triads over doubled consonances—automatically
generates a much stronger kind of consistency. To my mind this is a profound fact,
suggesting that harmonic consistency might arise as the unbidden byproduct of more
basic musical preferences: composers who favor three-pitch-class consonances,
purely on the basis of their richer note content, will inevitably use chords related by
scalar transposition.
In fact, a fondness for triadic harmonies is already evident in the three-voice compositions of the late fourteenth century.10 Figure 6.3.5 traces the development of this
norm throughout the following decades.11 In Dufay’s music, complete triads account
for about 46% of the three-voice chords and 78% of the four-voice chords—numbers
Figure 6.3.4 Doubled consonances (a)
and triads (b).

Figure 6.3.5 The percentage of consonant sonorities that are complete triads rather than
“doubled” intervals, by composer date of birth. The percentage is reasonably high throughout
the Renaissance, and increases over time.
four-voice chords

three-voice chords

100

Percent of total

80

60

40
20

0

1400

1420

Dufay
Ockeghem

1440

1460

Josquin

1480

1500

1520

Tallis

Lassus

Palestrina

10 See Crocker 1962, Rivera 1979, Kaye 1989.
11 The data in this section come from more than 150 MIDI ﬁles of four-voice Renaissance vocal music.

203

history and analysis

that increase to 72% and 97% in the music of Lassus.12 The ratio of four-voice to
three-voice chords increases as well, with three-voice sonorities being more prevalent
in Dufay and Ockeghem, and four-voice sonorities predominating later. Indeed, it
is likely that the desire for triadic harmonies explains this gradual standardization
of four-voice textures, since it is very difﬁcult to write three-voice music that consistently articulates complete triads, particularly if one wants to avoid second-inversion chords. A fourth voice allows for signiﬁcantly greater compositional freedom,
permitting composers to use complete triads while still leaving enough ﬂexibility to
write interesting melodic lines.

6.3.2 “3 + 1” Voice Leading
Four-voice textures would seem to pose a challenge for our geometrical approach,
since they require a four-dimensional space in which doublings are not perspicuously represented.13 Happily, a sizable proportion of Josquin’s voice leadings involve
what I call the 3 + 1 schema: here, three voices articulate a strongly crossing-free
voice leading between complete triads (§4.9), while a fourth voice adds doublings.
This fourth voice is typically the bass, which often leaps from root to root; the other
three voices are typically in close position and often move as efﬁciently as possible.
(See Figure 6.3.1, bottom staff.) Figure 6.3.6 shows that these “3 + 1” voice leadings
account for a signiﬁcant portion of the four-voice triadic voice leadings in a broad
sample of Renaissance music. These ﬁgures suggest that the eighteenth-century ten-

Figure 6.3.6 The percentage of four-voice triadic voice leadings that are factorizable in a
“3 + 1” manner, with three voices articulating strongly crossing-free voice leadings between
complete triads, arranged by composer birth year.
100

80

Percent of total

204

60

40
20

0

1400

1420

Dufay
Ockeghem

1440

1460

Josquin

1480

1500

1520

Tallis

Lassus

Palestrina

12 Because there are many more doubled consonances than complete triads, even the 50:50 ratio for
three-note chords suggests a preference for complete sonorities.
13 For example, in four-note space the chord {C, C, E, G} is somewhat distant from {C, E, G, G} (§3.12).

The Extended Common Practice

dency to conceive of harmony as “a bass line plus some relatively homogenous upper
voices”—exempliﬁed most clearly by ﬁgured-bass notation—might actually originate in the Renaissance.
It follows that we can often use three-note chord space to analyze four-part
Renaissance music: we simply focus on three of the voices, treating the fourth as
an “odd man out” subject to its own rules. Figure 6.3.7 locates the diatonic triads
in three-note chord space, with the lines indicating single-step voice leading. The
seven diatonic triads form a crooked chain running through the center of the space,
with the top chord connected to the bottom as explained in Chapter 3. In §3.11,
we described this circle of triads as being analogous to the diatonic circle of ﬁfths,
since it links a series of structurally similar chords by single-step voice leadings.
We now see that we can use it to model many of the voice leadings in Renaissance
counterpoint.
Suppose, for example, you would like to move three voices from C major to F
major. The most efﬁcient way to do this is to take two clockwise steps along the circle,
producing the voice leading (C, E, G)®(C, E, A)®(C, F, A) or (C, E, G)®(C, F, A).
Each clockwise move raises a single voice by step: the ﬁrst moves G to A, while the
second moves E to F (Figure 6.3.8). Alternatively, however, we can move from C to F
by taking ﬁve counterclockwise steps, producing (C, E, G)®(B, E, G)®(B, D, G)®(B,
D, F)®(A, D, F)®(A, C, F), or (C, E, G)®(A, C, F). Each counterclockwise move lowers one voice by step, yielding a voice leading whose voices descend by a total of ﬁve
steps. By taking one or more complete turns around the circle, we can generate other
voice leadings between C major and F major, all of which are strongly crossing free. In

Figure 6.3.7 The diatonic triads form a chain that runs through the center of three-note
chord space, with adjacent triads linked by single-step voice leading. (b) This “circle of thirds”
is analogous to the familiar circle of ﬁfth-related diatonic scales, and can be used to represent
any three-voice, strongly crossing-free voice leading between triads.

205

206
Figure 6.3.8
Two strongly
crossing-free
voice leadings
between C and F,
represented on
the circle.

history and analysis

fact, the circle models all possible
strongly crossing-free voice leadings between any two triads in the
C diatonic scale.
Figure 6.3.9a plots the opening
phrase of “Tu pauperum refugium”
as a series of paths in three-note
chord space. Figure 6.3.9b shows
how these voice leadings would
be represented on the circle; in
both views, the music takes the
most direct path between successive triads. This is characteristic of
the excerpt: indeed, of the twelve
numbered voice leadings on Figure
6.3.1, all but one takes the shortest path along the triadic circle.14
To give a sense of the utility of the
circle—and of the ubiquity of the voice leadings it represents—Figure 6.3.10 turns
to a style worlds apart from Josquin. Here we see that many common guitar ﬁngerings also articulate strongly crossing-free voice leadings in their upper voices. (Of
course, in pop music, efﬁcient voice leading results more from guitarists’ attempts to

Figure 6.3.9
Four voice
leadings from
the opening
of Josquin’s
“Tu pauperum
refugium”
plotted in threenote chord space
(a) and on the
diatonic circle of
thirds (b).

14 The exception is (D, F, A)®(B, E, Gs), which is less efﬁcient than (D, F, A)®(E, Gs, B). However,
the latter voice leading is unusable because it creates both parallel ﬁfths and a melodic augmented second.
Furthermore, it is actually less efﬁcient when considered as a voice leading in chromatic space—involving
seven semitones of motion as opposed to ﬁve.

The Extended Common Practice
Figure 6.3.10 (a−b)
Two common chord
progressions, as they
are often played on a
guitar. (c−d) The notes
produced by these
ﬁngering patterns. The
top three voices articulate
strongly crossing-free
voice leadings that can
be represented on the
triadic circle.

minimize their physical motions than from an explicit concern for polyphony.) The
distance between these two examples—one representing the high art of the Renaissance, the other representing the vernacular of our own time—suggests that our
triadic voice leadings feature in a very broad range of music.

6.3.3 Fourth Progressions and Cadences
We now turn to a feature of Renaissance practice that is not altogether obvious in the
brief Josquin excerpt. Figure 6.3.11 shows that root progressions by perfect fourth
and ﬁfth become increasingly prevalent from Josquin on: where the root progressions in Dufay and Ockeghem are about evenly divided between steps, thirds, and
fourths, fourths account for more than 50% of the progressions in Josquin and
almost 60% in Palestrina.15 This trend continues into the eighteenth century, reaching more than 70% in the Bach chorales. One possible explanation lies in the fact

15 Note that I am using use “fourth” to mean “fourth or ﬁfth or any of their compounds.” In constructing the graph I also eliminated progressions such as (C4, C4, E4, G4)®(C4, C4, E4, A4), which could be
interpreted as resulting from linear motion in the top voice; third progressions were counted only when
at least two voices change.

207

history and analysis

that these progressions make it particularly easy to harmonize stepwise melodies.
Figure 6.3.12 shows that if we start with a C major chord, with any of its notes in the
soprano, we can harmonize any melodic step with either the progression C major®F
major or C major®G major. By contrast, steps and thirds are not nearly so useful:
third progressions from a ﬁxed triad can harmonize only two stepwise motions; while
step progressions can easily lead to parallel ﬁfths and octaves.16 (To avoid these parallels, composers typically use chord inversions, or move the upper voices inefﬁciently.)
Figure 6.3.11 Root progressions by composer, with S = second, T = third, and F = fourth.
Over the course of the Renaissance, there is an increasing preference for fourth progressions,
a trend that continues into the classical tradition.
descending

ascending

70
60
Percent of total

208

50
40
30
20
10
0

STF
Dufay

STF

STF

Ockeghem Josquin

STF

Tallis

STF

STF

Palestrina Lassus

STF

Bach

Figure 6.3.12 Fourth progressions allow a composer to harmonize a wide range of stepwise
melodies in a “3 + 1” fashion, with the upper voices moving by strongly crossing-free voice
leadings and the bass moving from root to root. Root motions by second and third are
comparatively less ﬂexible, either because they do not harmonize many stepwise melodies or
because they can create forbidden parallels.

16 Common tones may also be a factor: step-related triads have no common tones, fourth-related triads
have one, and third-related triads have two. The Goldilocks Principle perhaps favors the middle option.

The Extended Common Practice

From this point of view, fourth progressions are particularly handy tools, being easy
to use while also providing a wealth of melodic options.
Of course, fourth progressions play a critical role at cadences, too. Recall from
§6.2 that medieval cadences often feature two voices converging by stepwise contrary
motion onto a unison or octave (Figure 6.3.13). Suppose we want to add a third
voice to this cadence, ending on either a triple unison C, or the open ﬁfth C-G-C.
(In particular, suppose we want the bass to sound the pitch class on which the voices
converge, so that the acoustic root of the chord reinforces the converging melodies.17)
One possible harmonization is shown in Figure 6.3.13b: with the Fs, this is a standard
medieval double leading-tone cadence; with the Fn, it suggests a tonal vii°6–I progression. (Another variant, with Bf and Df, produces a “phrygian cadence,” common in
both Renaissance and classical music.) A second option, shown in Figure 6.3.13d,
very closely resembles the V–I progression. When we examine four-voice harmonizations, the situation is even more dramatic, as virtually all the available options evoke
familiar cadences.18 Rather than being arbitrary conventions, then, these cadential
formulas may arise as relatively obvious solutions to the basic problem of harmonizing two converging stepwise voices.
We see, then, that Renaissance music involves two different kinds of fourth progressions. Within-phrase progressions have little or no cadential function and do
not necessarily create the sense of tension and release. In particular, these progressions typically feature 3 + 1 voice leading rather than the converging stepwise voices
of the cadential formulas (cf. the ﬁrst voice leading in Figure 6.3.1). By contrast,
Figure 6.3.13 (a) A basic medieval two-voice cadential pattern, in which two voices converge
onto an octave by stepwise motion. (b−c) Three-voice harmonizations producing a common
medieval cadence (with the Fs), a vii°6–I cadence (with the Fn), or a phrygian cadence
(with Fn and Df). (d) A three-voice harmonization resembling a V–I cadence. (e) A failed
harmonization producing parallel ﬁfths. (f−h) Four-voice extensions of the preceding schemas.
The V–I form (g) cadences on a sonority containing only perfect consonances.

17 Not all medieval cadences are like this, of course: one sometimes ﬁnds progressions such as (G3, B3,
D4)®(F3, C4, C4), but it is reasonable to suppose that musicians would incline toward cadences in which
the pitch class in the bass is also the object of melodic convergence, as these would presumably create a
stronger sense of emphasis on a single pitch class.
18 These ideas derive from Randel (1971), who suggests that the increasing popularity of the V–I cadential
form is the result of two factors: ﬁrst, a preference for concluding on open ﬁfths rather than complete
triads, and second, an increasing preference for four-voice textures. See also Lowinsky 1961.

209

210

history and analysis

cadential fourth progressions do exhibit a clear pattern of tension and release, and
almost always employ converging melodic voices. One interesting possibility is that
functional tonality arose out of the gradual fusion between these two types of progression—in other words, the within-phrase fourth progressions gradually acquired
the tension-release quality of the cadential formulas, articulating the music into a
sequence of short “harmonic cycles,” each concluding with its own tension-resolving
V–I progression. We will return to this idea in the next chapter.

6.3.4 Parallel Perfect Intervals
Finally, a word about the prohibition on parallel perfect ﬁfths and octaves. Many
theorists have proposed that the prohibition is connected to the phenomenon of
auditory streaming: on this account, parallel motion by perfect ﬁfth or octave tends
to destroy the sense that the music is composed of independent musical voices,
since it leads us to “fuse” the voices into a single melody.19 While I am sympathetic
to this explanation, it seems to me that the prohibition might also reﬂect structural features of diatonic scale itself. Figure 6.3.14 shows that parallel diatonic ﬁfths
almost always produce parallel chromatic ﬁfths; by contrast, parallel diatonic thirds
do not produce the same degree of chromatic parallelism, since the diatonic scale
contains a more even distribution of major and minor thirds. To me, this difference
is at least as striking as the difference in the acoustic quality of the intervals. Figure
6.3.14 illustrates this point by comparing two sorts of parallel motion in Messiaen’s nine-note “mode 3.” Here three-step scalar intervals are always four semitones
large, while four-step scalar intervals alternate between six and seven semitones.
I ﬁnd that the passages exhibit a roughly similar degree of “voice independence,”

Figure 6.3.14 Parallel motion within the diatonic scale (a−c) and in Messiaen’s “Mode 3”
(d−e). Underneath each interval I have written its chromatic size in semitones. The brackets
identify chromatic motion that is not parallel.

(d)

19 See Huron 2001 and the references therein.

The Extended Common Practice

even though one of them contains parallel perfect ﬁfths and the other doesn’t. This
suggests scale structure plays at least some role in explaining the prohibition on
forbidden parallels.20

***
Let me conclude this discussion by reinforcing two general points. First, there are a
number of features of Renaissance practice that preﬁgure later styles, including triadic harmonies, the 3 + 1 arrangement of the voices, the avoidance of parallel perfect intervals, and the increasing use of root progressions by perfect ﬁfth. These facts
should perhaps make us hesitate before drawing too sharp a distinction between the
musical languages of Palestrina and Bach.21 Second, and perhaps more important,
several features of Renaissance syntax can be seen as relatively obvious solutions to
very basic compositional goals—ensuring voice independence, writing consonant
music using three-note sonorities, and harmonizing stepwise convergence onto a
unison. In hindsight, we can see these developments as exploiting relatively obvious
possibilities lying dormant in the diatonic system.
In saying this, I do not mean to propose a deterministic or Hegelian view of music
history according to which music was fated to develop as it actually did: one can certainly imagine alternate histories in which, say, Western composers never developed
an aversion to parallel perfect ﬁfths. But I do think that composers, like all artists,
are opportunists, quick to take advantage of whatever possibilities present themselves.
And the fundamental moral of Part I is that the ﬁve components of tonality impose
nontrivial constraints on composers’ choices, boxing them in on some sides while
allowing them to move freely in other directions. One might make an analogy here to
a mountaineer ascending a cliff: though the climber is in principle free to move in any
direction, the structure of the rock will naturally suggest certain routes, offering handholds and footholds that will guide any sensible person’s decisions. In much the same
way, we can sometimes tell reasonably compelling stories about why music might have
developed as it did. The trick for the historian is to make room for contingency while
also capturing the way in which music history sometimes follows the path of least
resistance, like a climber ascending a cliff by way of a particularly inviting chute.

20 One point in favor of the acoustic explanation is that parallel perfect fourths are permitted in classical three-voice counterpoint, whereas parallel perfect ﬁfths are not. (This marks an interesting difference
between ﬁfths and octaves: parallel octaves remain objectionable no matter how the octaves are arranged
in register, whereas ﬁfths can always be converted to unobjectionable fourths by a suitable transposition
of voices.) However, it is not clear whether we should try to ﬁnd principled explanations for every feature
of traditional practice. In fact, very occasional parallel perfect ﬁfths, embedded in complex contrapuntal
textures, may not signiﬁcantly weaken voice independence.
21 Well-meaning scholars have sometimes been overzealous in their attempts to complicate this picture. For example, Harold Powers (1992, pp. 11–12) denies each of the following claims: “the modal system
was displaced by the tonal system,” “modality evolved into tonality,” and “the ancestors of our major and
minor scales were the Ionian and Aeolian modes.” It seems to me that these three truisms are unobjectionable when properly understood; by rejecting them completely, Powers commits an error as egregious as the
oversimpliﬁcations he warns against.

211

212

history and analysis

6.4

functional harmony

Where our early medieval excerpt exhibited the basic two-dimensional coherence
of Western music, combining recognizable melodies with consonant harmonies, the
Renaissance passage added a much more robust notion of harmonic consistency. Our
next example features two further innovations. First, chords are now constrained to
move according to a small number of (“functional”) harmonic conventions. These
conventions go hand-in-hand with a much stronger emphasis on the tonic, so that
centricity is often signiﬁcantly clearer than in earlier music. Second, keys now participate in their own meaningful progressions, as modulation becomes more systematic
and encompasses a wider range of macroharmonic states. The result, as I have said,
is a musical style that is hierarchically self-similar, with the same fundamental procedures appearing on both the level of the scale and that of the chord.
Figure 6.4.1a presents the opening of one of J. S. Bach’s harmonizations of the
chorale melody “Herr Christ, der ein’ge Gott’s sohn.” Where the progressions in Josquin’s “Tu pauperum refugium” are extremely free, those in Bach’s chorale can be
summarized by the simple map in Figure 6.4.1b. Such maps embody the new conventions central to eighteenth-century harmony—for instance, that ii chords often move
to V chords, but not vice versa. The bottom staff of the ﬁgure shows that the music
again uses the 3 + 1 schema, with the upper three voices in close position and moving
in a strongly crossing-free manner, and with the bass obeying its own principles. The
Figure 6.4.1 (a) The ﬁrst phrase of Bach’s chorale “Herr Christ, der ein’ge Gott’ssohn”
(No. 303 in the Riemenschneider edition) and a reduction of the upper voice counterpoint.
(b) A simple model of the chord progressions it contains. Chords can move freely rightward,
but can move leftward only by following the arrows.

or: IV vii°@

&b c œ
œ

œ
œœ œœ œ œœ

? b c œœ

œ
œ

F: I

&b c œ
œœ

œœ

œœ œ œ œ
œ œ

U

˙œ # œ œ # œœ
œ
œ œœ œ œ
œ œ œ œ

IV I V 7 vi
d: i

ii# V 7 i

œœ œœ
œ œ

# œœœ

œœ
œ

œœ
œ

œœ n œ œœ œœ

œœ

U

˙˙ .
.

œ œ œœ œœ œ œ ˙ .
œ
œœ
˙.

g: V
i
F: ii

V2 I6

V 7

I

œœ
œ

œœœ œœœ

œœœ

˙˙ ..
˙.

œ
œœ # œœ
œ

..
..
..

The Extended Common Practice

213

similarity to Figure 6.3.1 suggests that functionally tonal music augments Renaissance
voice-leading practices with new and distinctive harmonic rules.22
This last observation is surprisingly controversial. A number of theorists, inﬂuenced
by Heinrich Schenker, seem to deny that functional tonality involves purely harmonic
conventions.23 Instead, they claim that what appear to be independent harmonic laws
can actually be derived from new voice-leading principles indigenous to the classical
era. We will consider this view more carefully in the next chapter. For now, though, let
us note that we have good historical reasons for claiming that functionally tonal music
obeys purely harmonic laws. To put it crudely: Renaissance music uses efﬁcient voice
leading, avoids parallel ﬁfths and octaves, and allows triads to progress in a very free
fashion; classical music observes many of the same voice-leading conventions, but also
requires chords to move in particular ways. Moreover, twentieth-century tonal music
often permits parallel ﬁfths and octaves while still conforming to the harmonic schemas
of the classical era. It seems exceedingly natural to represent this situation as shown in
Figure 6.4.2. Here, the so-called “common practice period” is depicted as lying at the
intersection of two separate common practices: a contrapuntal common practice that
includes the music of the Renaissance, and a harmonic common practice that includes
a good deal of twentieth-century music. Theorists who renounce harmonic laws risk
effacing these two common practices, and hence obscuring the connections between
Renaissance music, classical tonality, and more recent rock and jazz.
Functional harmony is also notable insofar as it charts coherent paths through
the space of possible keys. This can be seen in the opening phrases of one of Bach’s
settings of the hymn “Ein’ feste Burg,” shown in Figure 6.4.3. The music begins in
D major but modulates to A major at the end of the ﬁrst phrase; it then turns to B
minor to start the second phrase, returning to the tonic D major at the end. As discussed earlier, these modulations involve particular voice leadings between scales: the
ﬁrst raises G to Gs, the second raises A to As, and the last cancels these two changes
by returning to the opening collection. Figure 6.4.4 shows how these modulations
appear on the scale lattice of §4.6: the music begins by taking minimal steps between
adjacent collections, and ends by moving diagonally back to its starting point. Such
voice leadings represent a higher dimensional analogue to the contrapuntal processes
linking individual chords.
harmonic conventions
voice-leading conventions
1500

1600

1700

1800

1900

2000

the “common practice” period

22 To be fair, functionally tonal music may involve a few new rules, such as the requirement that the
leading tone resolve upward. Nevertheless, the vast majority of its contrapuntal rules are inherited from
earlier styles.
23 See, for example, Salzer 1982, Schenker 2001, and Beach 1974.

Figure 6.4.2
The “common
practice
period” as the
intersection of
two common
practices.

214

history and analysis
Figure 6.4.3 The ﬁrst two phrases of one of Bach’s harmonizations of “A Mighty Fortress is
Our God” (Riemenschneider No. 20).

Figure 6.4.4
The modulations
in Figure 6.4.3,
graphed on a
portion of the
scale lattice.

When I ﬁrst began to study
tonal harmony, the chord-by-chord
constraints seemed to be the most
important and distinctive feature
of the style. I thought the regular
ﬂow from tonic to subdominant to
dominant provided music with a
powerful and historically unprecedented level of structure—one that
differentiated it from the less principled harmonic languages of other
eras. Twenty-ﬁve years later, it now
seems to me that systematic modulation is at least as important, providing a powerful tool for producing large-scale
harmonic change while also creating a remarkable sort of self-similar musical texture. It is interesting, therefore, that modulation continues to feature prominently
in twentieth-century music, even in styles that have abandoned the chord-to-chord
constraints of the classical era. Indeed, one could even argue that systematic relations among macroharmonies are the most signiﬁcant and enduring legacy of the
functional tradition.

6.5

schumann’s chopin

We’ll approach our next style with a bit of musical analysis. Figure 6.5.1 summarizes the chords used in Schumann’s “Chopin,” a wonderful little piece of musical
portraiture. The harmony here is not radical: it opens in Af major, turns brieﬂy to
Bf minor, and immediately returns to Af major at the start of the example’s third
bar. Bar four moves to F minor, featuring a chromatic passage in which the tenor
and bass exchange the notes En and G. The major point of interest lies in the last
bar: beginning at F minor we move to a shocking A7 chord which then progresses
to Ef7, the dominant of Af. It is precisely the sort of daring harmonic gesture that

The Extended Common Practice

215
Figure 6.5.1
A harmonic
summary of
Schumann’s
“Chopin.” Each
whole note in
the summary
corresponds to
a measure in the
actual work.

characterizes Chopin’s music—at once willful and completely convincing to the ear.
One can well imagine the young Schumann playing the passage with a wink.
Now, what can we say about this A7 chord? Where does it come from and what
does it mean? It is, to begin with, a chord without a name. Without the Gn, one
might call it a “Neapolitan,” but according to harmony textbooks such chords typically behave rather differently. Were this a piece of contemporary jazz, we might call
the A7 a “tritone substitution” for the dominant Ef7, though the name seems more
than a little anachronistic here. We could perhaps invent a new term for the chord,
calling it a “Schumann seventh” or some such. Or we could name it with reference to
other keys, asserting that it has been “borrowed” from either D major or D minor. But
these descriptions merely serve as labels for our puzzle,
rather than solutions. What we want to know is why Figure 6.5.2 The last
Schumann might have written such a chord, and why measure of “Chopin” can be
interpreted as a four-voice
it sounds so shocking and so beautiful at one and the
passage in which each voice
same time.
moves by semitone.
The obvious answer is that the chord is connected by
efﬁcient chromatic voice leading to both the preceding
F minor and the following Ef7. Figure 6.5.2 shows that
we can model the music as having four distinct musical
voices, each moving by semitone. Our exotic A7 chord
is a chromatic passing chord—a moment of musical
liquidity that “ﬁlls the gaps” between the perfectly respectable diatonic sonorities surrounding it. But it would be wrong to dismiss it as a mere agglomeration of linear
passing tones with no vertical signiﬁcance, since the purported passing tones form a
familiar dominant seventh chord that has already occurred in the piece. (In m. 3 of the
ﬁgure, neighboring motion brieﬂy converts an E diminished seventh into an A dominant seventh.) To downplay the vertical signiﬁcance of the A7 chord is to miss the fact
that Schumann could have chosen any number of different passing or neighboring
chords, and that this particular sonority appears twice in a very short span of time.

216

history and analysis

What makes the chord interesting, therefore, is its twofold status. Contrapuntally,
we can think of it as a mere collection of passing tones. Harmonically, however, it has
its own individuality and signiﬁcance. Furthermore, the A7 chord suggests keys—D
major and D minor—that are intuitively quite “distant” from the tonic Af. Thus the
A7 is simultaneously close and not close to the chords surrounding it: it is melodically
close, since A7 can be connected by efﬁcient voice leading to both F minor and Ef7;
but it is tonally distant, since the keys of D major and D minor are in some sense “far”
from the tonic Af major. It is precisely this conﬂict that produces the feeling that the
A7 chord is both out of place and yet profoundly right.
Geometrically, both of these distances can be modeled with the voice-leading
spaces of Chapter 3. Key distances can be represented using the seven-dimensional
space depicting voice-leading relationships among familiar scales, as we will see
in the next chapter. Chord distances can be represented using the lower dimensional spaces containing triads and seventh chords. In four-note chromatic space,
for example, A7 is quite close both to Ef7 and the doubled triad F-Af-Af-C. In
more traditional tonal contexts, the proximity of A7 and Ef7 is not apparent, since
chords are restricted to a particular major or minor scale; thus, to move from A7 to
Ef7 one must not only change chords, but also change scales via modulation. The
essence of nineteenth-century harmony lies in the elimination of this modulatory
step: in “Chopin,” Schumann temporarily abandons the diatonic world in favor of a
direct manipulation of chromatic relationships. This involves replacing a relatively
simple diatonic geometry with the much more complex geometry of chromatic
possibilities—a shift that is illustrated, in the three-note case, by Figure 6.5.3. The
contrast between these ﬁgures shows at a glance why chromatic music can be so
hard to understand.

Figure 6.5.3 Voice leading relations among diatonic triads (a) are much less complex than
those among chromatic triads (b).

The Extended Common Practice

6.6

chromaticism

Schumann’s musical portrait could serve as the frontispiece to the entire tradition of nineteenth-century chromaticism, a genre that is characterized by the
increasing tendency to conceive of chords as objects in chromatic space. This
tendency manifests itself in two musical techniques, one pedestrian and the other
more radical. The pedestrian technique uses chromatic chords to embellish or decorate familiar tonal progressions without fundamentally unseating the conventions
of functional harmony. The more radical technique abandons functional norms in
favor of direct chromatic voice leading between triads and seventh chords. These
direct chromatic moves serve a variety of musical functions, acting as neighboring
chords, passing chords, bridges to distantly related keys, and motivic progressions
in their own right. It is this second technique that has led theorists to propose that
nineteenth-century musical syntax is fundamentally dual, combining a diatonic
“ﬁrst practice” inherited from the classical era, with a newer “second practice”
based on chromatic relationships.24
Figure 6.6.1 illustrates this fundamental change from diatonic to chromatic
frames of reference. Relative to the diatonic scale, each voice in Figure 6.6.1a moves
by a single step, so that there is no gap between successive notes. Relative to the chromatic scale, however, G moves to A by two chromatic steps. As nineteenth-century
composers began to think more chromatically, it became increasingly tempting to
try to ﬁll this gap. In Figure 6.6.1b, for example, the added note between G and A
produces two different sonorities, a C augmented triad on the way up and an F minor
triad on the way down.25 From this perspective, the two chords result from the Figure 6.6.1 (a) Relative to the diatonic scale
same fundamental musical process of each voice moves by the smallest possible
distance. (b) Relative to the chromatic
ﬁlling in gaps.
scale, there are gaps that can be ﬁlled in.
Contemporary terminology some- The resulting progression appears in the
times seems designed to obscure this fact, nineteenth-century song “You tell me your
describing the F minor chord as being dream, I’ll tell you mine.”
borrowed from the key of C minor. I am
somewhat suspicious of this metaphor of
“borrowing.” Musical keys are not lending libraries, and there are no borrower’s
cards that can be used to verify whether
the F minor chord is indeed on loan

24 This view has been defended by Mitchell (1962), Proctor (1978), and Cohn (1996, 1997, 1998a). See
also the essays in Kinderman and Krebs 1996. Antecedents can be found in Kurth 1920 and Weitzmann
1860.
25 In principle, of course, one could use the F minor chord on the way up, and the C augmented on the
way down, but this would be less effective. In C–f–F, the single-semitone shift Af®A occurs after the root
motion has already happened, and sounds like a “correction” of the ﬁnal chord. In C–C+ −F, the chromatic
alteration intensiﬁes the C chord, and makes the root change more dramatic when it happens.

217

218

history and analysis

from C minor. Moreover, the idea of “borrowing” potentially reinforces a compartmentalized approach to chromatic harmony, one that presents the style as a series of
disconnected idioms with no common structure. (For example, in one popular textbook “borrowed” chords appear eight chapters before augmented triads, thus making
it seem as if the chords in Figure 6.6.1 have no relationship.26) Rather than focusing on
assigning labels to chords (such as “borrowed chord” or “augmented sixth”), I would
prefer to focus on the underlying musical procedures relating them, which in many
cases is chromatic voice leading. Otherwise, it can be very difﬁcult to understand the
fundamental logic animating chromatic music.27
In the previous example, chromaticism decorates a familiar progression. Figure
6.6.2 exhibits the more radical kind of chromaticism as it operates in the middle
phrase of Chopin’s E major prelude. Almost all the unusual moves in this passage can
be interpreted in light of two different voice-leading “systems”: one connecting triads
whose roots relate by major third, and the other connecting seventh chords whose
roots relate by minor third or tritone. We begin with the major-third system, moving
from E major to C major by way of the voice leading (B, Ds, Fs)®(B, D, G); this connects V in E to V in C. The music then hints at dominants of F major, D minor, and
Af major, each expressed in a slightly different way: the dominant of F is a dominant
seventh chord, the dominant of D is both a triad and a diminished seventh, and the
dominant of Af is both a diminished and dominant seventh. Finally, we return to E
Figure 6.6.2 The second phrase of Chopin’s E major prelude. Beneath the excerpt I provide
simpliﬁed voice leadings that illustrate the major- and minor-third systems.

26 Aldwell and Schachter 2002. “Mode mixture” is not even included in the section on chromaticism,
but is considered a completely different procedure. Kostka and Payne (2003) treat modal mixture and
augmented triads in Chapters 21 and 26, respectively, but give little sense of the relation between them.
Perhaps the best pedagogical treatment is in Gauldin (1997), who treats mode mixture and augmented triads in different chapters, but who includes an introductory discussion that clariﬁes the similarities between
them.
27 I don’t wish to suggest that there is never any role for the notion of “borrowing” or modal mixture,
only that we should be careful not to invoke these ideas reﬂexively and without justiﬁcation.

The Extended Common Practice

by way of a single-semitone voice leading connecting Gs minor to an (incomplete)
B7 chord. Below the example I have provided a hypothetical “background” in which
the contrapuntal logic is easier to see. We can think of these voice leadings as basic
templates which Chopin has embellished in a relatively straightforward way.
A more involved example is given by the scherzo to Schubert’s C major String
Quintet (Figure 6.6.3).28 The piece is exuberantly simple and folksy, presenting the
same melodic material in a variety of distant keys. Five of Schubert’s eleven modulations involve the major-third system: three directly juxtapose major-third-related tonic
triads, while two more connect a tonic triad with what turns out to be the dominant
of the following key. Three of the remaining modulations involve minor-third-related
dominants: the initial feint to D minor connects V7/IV to the minor-third-related V/ii
(which here appears without its seventh), while the modulation from Af to G connects
C7 (itself obtained via a semitonally ascending sequence of seventh chords) directly
to Ef7, which is in turn reinterpreted as an augmented sixth of G. (This passage is
cleverly varied in the recap, where the ascending semitonal motion continues upward
to an Af7 which is then reinterpreted as the German sixth of C major; as a result, the
entire passage modulates down by minor third rather than down by semitone.29) Once
again, the majority of the modulations use efﬁcient chromatic voice leading among
triads and seventh chords. To the extent that we can familiarize ourselves with the
major- and minor-third systems, we can begin to see that Schubert’s kaleidoscopic key
changes reuse a small number of familiar contrapuntal moves.
Let me clarify that I am not claiming that Schubert and Chopin explicitly conceptualized these different chromatic systems; it is entirely possible that they simply sat at
the piano and exploited the most efﬁcient voice leadings that came to hand. My point
Figure 6.6.3 An outline of the modulations in the scherzo to Schubert’s C major String
Quintet. Local tonics are shown with open noteheads. Of the eleven modulations, nine involve
the major- and minor-third systems; only two employ traditional pivot chords.

28 Thanks to Andrew Jones, who made a number of the observations in this paragraph.
29 This compensates for the fact that the recap’s D minor moves up to Ef major rather than back to C
major, leaving Schubert in an inconvenient key.

219

220

history and analysis

is that the geometry of chord space ensures that this sort of intuitive exploration
will necessarily result in music that can be described using the major- and minorthird systems. It is useful here to revisit the analogy of the mountain climber, though
now representing an individual composer rather the development of Western music
as a whole. Chromatic composers, like mountaineers, will be constrained by the
environment in which they operate, and the geometrical spaces of Part I are literally
the terrain through which chromatic music moves. Insofar as we understand this
geometry, we will also understand why intuitive musical exploration produces the
results it does—in this case a plethora of major-third-related triads and minor-thirdor tritone-related seventh chords.
It seems to me that a deep appreciation of nineteenth-century music requires a systematic grasp of all the voice-leading possibilities between familiar sonorities. This, of
course, was a central theme of Part I. The notion of “near symmetry” (§2.9) allows us
to understand how a chord’s internal structure determines its contrapuntal capabilities:
thus, given a particular sonority such as the C dominant seventh, we can identify other
structurally similar chords that are nearby. This, in turn, leads us to notice that triads
can typically be connected smoothly to their major third transpositions while seventh
chords can be efﬁciently linked to their minor-third and tritone transpositions. The
geometrical spaces of Chapter 3 offer a convenient way to visualize these facts, allowing
us to draw “maps” in which the major-third and minor-third systems are clearly represented. Furthermore, by focusing on crossing-free voice leadings—treating voice crossings as embellishments of these more basic templates—we saw that we can reduce the
vast number of voice-leading possibilities to a much more manageable set of categories
(§4.9–10). Taken together, these tools allow us to evaluate composers’ choices in light of
a robust understanding of the options available to them. Or, to revert to the metaphor,
they allow us to understand the mountaineer’s decisions in light of a systematic knowledge of the rock face. If we can internalize these principles, understanding the logic of
chromatic voice leading, then chromatic music will start to seem much more coherent:
instead of describing Chopin or Schubert’s music as resulting from capricious acts of
musical fancy, Romantic lawbreaking that obeys no ﬁxed principles, we will instead see
a small collection of familiar paths through chromatic space.

6.7

twentieth-century scalar music

The ﬁrst half of the nineteenth century witnessed a tremendous expansion of harmonic options; new chords were permitted and new chromatic voice leadings were
used to connect formerly distant chords. But it saw relatively few extensions to music’s
scalar or modal vocabulary. This imbalance eventually led to a palpable compositional dilemma: what melodic notes should be used to accompany the chords of the
chromatic tradition?
This problem became particularly acute when composers required a large number of melodic notes to accompany a single chromatic sonority. To see why, consider
Figure 6.7.1. Suppose you would like to associate each chord with a complete scale—

The Extended Common Practice

say, a run that spans at least an octave. One option is simply to use the C major
scale, creating a clash with the chromatic notes of the altered harmonies. Another is
to incorporate the chordal alterations by inserting additional chromatic notes into
the passage. A third is to replace diatonic notes with their “altered” forms, fusing
the basic scale of the key (here, C diatonic) with alterations belonging to the chords
themselves. These three alternatives represent the main nineteenth-century solutions to the problem of associating chord and scale, as illustrated by Figure 6.7.2.
Twentieth-century tonality instead exploits the fact that the sonorities of chromatic harmony can all be embedded in a small number of familiar scales. (Recall
from §4.4 that just seven kinds of scale contain every “cluster-free” chord.) Twentiethcentury composers treat these scales as ready-to-hand accompaniments for particular
chromatic chords. Thus, for example, a composer might use the D and Bf acoustic
scales to harmonize the augmented and minor triads in Figure 6.7.3. This solution is
noteworthy for several reasons. First, the acoustic scales would traditionally be associated with the keys of A minor and F minor, keys that are quite distant from one
another. Second, though the acoustic scale is familiar from the classical tradition,
it is used here in unfamiliar modes (treating C as the tonic). And third, since the
acoustic scale has just seven notes, it creates a smallish macroharmony that is not
overwhelmingly chromatic. As a result, the passage has a kind of rigorous logic, even
while departing from the procedures of traditional tonality.
Figure 6.7.4 illustrates this technique in the context of Ravel’s String Quartet,
where a G9–Cf9–Fadd6 progression gives rise to three separate scales: the G9 chord
has a pronounced whole-tone ﬂavor; the Cf9 is accompanied by the octatonic scale,

Figure 6.7.1 Accompanying chromatic chords with scales. In (a), the scale does not contain
the chromatic chords; in (b−c) it does. The music in (b) augments the diatonic scale with the
altered notes, while the music in (c) replaces diatonic with altered notes.

221

222

history and analysis
Figure 6.7.2 (a) In Strauss’ Till Eulenspiegel (R7), the harmony Bf-Df-E-Gs serves as an
altered dominant chord resolving semitonally to the tonic F. The scale in the bass, however,
is a simple Af major that does not contain the En of the harmony, resulting in a ﬂeeting
dissonance. (b) In Wagner’s Parsifal (mm. 668–9, Schirmer vocal score p. 40), a diminished
seventh chord is harmonized with a melody touching on all the chromatic notes except Fs
and G. The effect is of a wash that creates a sense of motion, but does not clearly suggest any
familiar scale. (c) In m. 86 of the ﬁrst movement of Mozart’s Piano Sonata K. 533, a familiar
augmented sixth chord gives rise to an unusual (“gypsy”) scale. This scale is derived by
combining the notes of C diatonic with the alterations belonging to the German augmented
sixth.

Figure 6.7.3 Twentieth-century scalar composers might use acoustic scales to harmonize
altered chords. The result is a melodic texture without augmented seconds or consecutive
semitones.

and the F major chord is accompanied by F diatonic. The bottom staves of Figure
6.7.4 interpret the harmonies. Level (c) is purely diatonic, and depicts a relatively
standard ii9–V9–I6 progression. Level (b) includes chromatic embellishments of this
pattern: in the ﬁrst two chords, diatonic Bf becomes the applied leading tone Bn and
diatonic D becomes Cs, producing a Gs11 chord and a Cf9.30 Finally, level (a) embellishes this progression with whole-tone and octatonic scales. What is remarkable is
that each level suggests a different stage in our overarching historical narrative. Level
(c) is purely diatonic, and uses a functional chord progression inherited from classical tonality. Level (b) uses chromatic embellishments that evoke nineteenth-century
chromatic practice. Level (a) adds a distinctively twentieth-century contribution, as
30 Note that the Cs resolves upward by semitone to the D, so that the Cf9–Fadd6 progression combines
elements of a V–I progression in F major with a vii°7–i progression in D minor.

The Extended Common Practice
Figure 6.7.4 (a) Whole-tone and octatonic scales in Ravel’s String Quartet. (b) The
underlying progression, and its diatonic logic (c).

Figure 6.7.5 Bill Evans using the octatonic scale in his Town Hall recording of “Turn Out the
Stars.”

the altered chords give rise to additional scales that are neither diatonic nor chromatic. Chapters 9 and 10 will show that jazz musicians inherit and systematize these
techniques. Thus in Figure 6.7.5, Bill Evans uses the octatonic scale to accompany the
V chord, very much in the manner of Ravel’s String Quartet. Jazz theorists are both
systematic and explicit when describing these relations between chord and scale,
providing recipes that show students which scales to play over the altered chords of
jazz harmony. In this sense, jazz manages to standardize the intuitive scalar exploration of earlier decades.
The two examples we have considered represent a relatively traditional strain of
twentieth-century scalar thinking, in which nondiatonic scales are used to accompany functionally harmonic progressions. Chapter 9 will also present examples that
reject the ii–V–I paradigm, drawn from impressionist pieces by Debussy, Ravel, and
Janáček; minimalist and postminimalist works by Reich, Adams, and Nyman; and
nonfunctional jazz by the Miles Davis quintet. These examples, though stylistically
quite diverse, reuse the same basic scales and the same basic compositional techniques.
To my mind, this package of scalar procedures represents one of the most interesting recent developments in the thousand-year tradition that is Western tonality—a
thread of common practice linking a wide variety of recent tonal styles, equal in its
signiﬁcance to the other developments surveyed in this chapter.

223

224

history and analysis

6.8

the extended common practice

The eighteenth and nineteenth centuries are often called the “common practice
period” in Western music.31 The term suggests a compositional consensus transcending national and temporal boundaries: Italian music of 1720, it is claimed, is quite similar to the German music of the 1880s, and both styles are quite different from any of
the music composed prior to 1700 and subsequent to 1900. Other Western styles, such
as Renaissance polyphony or contemporary jazz, may involve shared musical practices
that are distantly related to those of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. But any
similarities are overwhelmed by the differences. Consequently, there is no substantive
sense in which Palestrina or Duke Ellington can be said to participate in the same
musical tradition as the musicians of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
The view sketched here is a different one. I have claimed that when we step back
far enough, we can see a much broader common practice that includes not just classical composers, but also jazz musicians like Ellington and Renaissance musicians like
Palestrina. Central to this extended common practice is the technique of connecting
harmonically signiﬁcant chords by efﬁcient voice leading. We have seen this in each
of our musical excerpts. In our simple medieval style, efﬁcient voice leading connects
consonant intervals; in later music, it connects structurally similar triads and seventh
chords. Classical music introduces modulation, applying efﬁcient voice leading to
scales as well as chords. Chromaticism shifts freely between the diatonic and chromatic realms. Finally, twentieth-century tonality develops a consistent technique of
associating chromatically altered chords with a small number of familiar scales. At
this level of abstraction, it looks like the tonal composers of the Western tradition are
all playing fundamentally the same game, creating music that is both melodically and
vertically coherent, and incorporating the various innovations of their predecessors.
I think there is something sublime about this. It is amazing that contemporary
rock guitar ﬁngerings are directly related to voice-leading practices more than half a
millennium old (Figures 6.3.9 and 6.3.10), or that Bill Evans’ improvisations develop
ideas found in Ravel’s carefully notated String Quartet (Figures 6.7.4 and 6.7.5). And
though I am mindful of the need to remain ever vigilant against the temptations of
Hegelian or Whiggish history, I am fascinated by the way certain stylistic developments in Western music seem to respond to, or arise out of, technical problems faced
by earlier composers—for example, the way nondiatonic scales provide a solution to
melodic challenges inherent in chromatic harmony (§6.7), or the way triads provide
a solution to the problem of writing consonant three-voice counterpoint (§6.3). By
focusing on the very general mechanisms of tonal coherence, by developing a bird’seye view of Western tonal practice, we can start to see these connections more clearly.
Geometry has helped us here, providing a different space for each of our ﬁve
styles. We used the two-dimensional Möbius strip to represent early medieval

31 The term seems to have originated with Walter Piston, who used it in his 1941 harmony textbook.
See Harrison (forthcoming) for perceptive comments on the notion of a “common practice period.”

The Extended Common Practice

two-note counterpoint. Later, the circle of diatonic thirds proved helpful in modeling Renaissance triadic voice leading. The turn to baroque music required us to
introduce the scale lattice, a three-dimensional region in seven-dimensional scale
space. The chromaticism of Schumann, Schubert, and Chopin led us to supplement
our earlier diatonic models with more complex chromatic spaces, in which we ﬁnd a
wealth of “shortcuts” between once-distant chords. Finally, Chapter 9 will show that
twentieth-century scalar music involves a much more complex sort of scalar voice
leading, involving a correspondingly sophisticated use of the scale lattice. Thus the
development of musical style can be represented, at least in part, as a process of
exploring an increasingly sophisticated array of musical spaces. Our earlier theoretical work allows us literally to visualize this process, giving us a uniﬁed set of geometrical models that help us comprehend the development of Western music.
Pedagogically, I ﬁnd this perspective to be extremely fruitful. My own musical
education was a traditional one, centered almost exclusively on a bifurcated diet of
musty Germanic classics and bracing twentieth-century atonality. The introductory music-theory class at my undergraduate institution devoted an entire year to
Bach chorales. Second-year theory was devoted exclusively to classical and very early
Romantic music, while subsequent classes discussed twelve-tone music, Schenkerian
analysis, and baroque counterpoint. Not once in my entire four years of undergraduate education did I hear a pedagogical word about jazz, rock, or minimalism—except
in an unguarded moment, when one of my professors, an atonal composer and theorist, let slip that he preferred Sgt. Pepper’s to any piece of atonality.
I believe we can do better. Part of what interests me about the narrative in this
chapter is the way it suggests a more inclusive pedagogy, more suited to the pluralism of contemporary culture. I teach a year-long, introductory music-theory class
based on the ﬁve musical styles we have just considered. Students begin by writing
faux-medieval two-voice counterpoint in which parallel ﬁfths are permitted. After a
brief detour into contemporary rock harmony, they progress to simpliﬁed four-voice
Renaissance music along the lines of Josquin’s “Tu pauperum refugium.” By the time
the common practice is introduced, they are already somewhat adept at the business
of connecting triads by efﬁcient voice leading while also avoiding forbidden parallels.
This makes the introduction of classical harmonic norms (including modulation)
considerably less painful than it usually is. The ﬁnal sections of the course provide
a systematic introduction to chromatic voice leading and twentieth-century scalar
techniques. At the end of the year, students have learned that musical styles change,
that tonality is a living tradition, and that when you dig deep enough, you can ﬁnd
nonobvious connections between very different musical styles. My hope is that these
lessons prepare them to confront today’s wide open, polystylistic, multicultural, syncretistic, and postmodern musical culture.

225

