chapter 4

Scales
Now we’re ready to incorporate scales into our developing theoretical apparatus. We’ll
begin by modeling scales as “musical rulers” that allow us to measure distances in
pitch and pitch-class space. We’ll then investigate a number of familiar scales, including the pentatonic, diatonic, chromatic, and melodic minor. This leads to a discussion
of the relation between modulation and voice leading. Finally, we investigate scalar
and interscalar transpositions—concepts that are useful not just for understanding
scalar music, but also for understanding voice leading more generally. The upshot is
that there is an interesting duality, or complementarity, between chord and scale. Not
only can chordal concepts (e.g. voice leading) help us understand scalar processes
(e.g. modulation), but the reverse is also true; concepts like scalar transposition provide useful tools for understanding relationships between chords.1

4.1

a scale is a ruler

Intuitively, the opening of The Sound of Music’s “Do, Re, Mi” (Figure 4.1.1) involves
three repetitions of the same musical pattern: when composing each phrase, Richard
Rogers simply “did the same thing” at different pitch levels. (This, of course, is part
of the song’s cheery didacticism—it’s supposed to teach kids music.) But we are hard
pressed to describe this sense of sameness using the ideas developed so far. From the
standpoint of Chapter 2, (C, D, E) and (D, E, F) are fundamentally different objects,
since they are not related by transposition, inversion, or any other combination of
OPTIC symmetries.
The difﬁculty, of course, is that we are thinking chromatically rather than diatonically. Instead of describing F as being one semitone above E, we should describe
it as being one scale step above E. Once we start to think diatonically we realize that
each phrase begins with two ascending scale steps, with the entire pattern moving up
by step at each repetition. The moral is that a scale provides us with an alternative
measure of musical distance, and that we must be careful to choose the right distance
metric for the job. In principle, any collection of pitches can be a scale: a scale’s notes
do not have to be very close to one another, nor are they required to repeat after every

1 The ideas in this chapter are based on Tymoczko 2004 and 2008b.

Scales
Figure 4.1.1 The opening notes
of the ﬁrst phrases of “Do, Re,
Mi,” interpreted chromatically
and diatonically. The numbers
represent intervals as measured
relative to the two scales.

octave, nor is it necessary that scales have “ﬁrst” or “tonic” notes (Figure 4.1.2). All the
scale needs to do is to tell us how to move up and down by 1 unit, or scale step.2
Octave-repeating scales, which contain each of their pitches in every possible
octave, can be represented as points in circular pitch-class space.3 When depicting
them geometrically we can choose whether the visual layout should reﬂect chromatic
or scalar distance. (Note: throughout this chapter, the term “chromatic” refers to the
continuous, log-frequency measure of §2.1, rather than to distances along some chromatic scale.4) For example, Figure 4.1.3a uses chromatic distance, representing C and
D as farther apart than E and F, while Figure 4.1.3b uses scalar distances, placing
the seven notes around the circle so that steps all appear to be the same size. We
can do something similar even when working with the higher dimensional chord
spaces of the previous chapter. For example, Figure 4.1.4a draws the two-note Möbius
strip, labeling only the dyads in the C diatonic scale. Points are connected by lines
when they can be linked by voice leading in which both voices move by diatonic step:

Figure 4.1.2 The “Do, Re, Mi”
pattern in other scales.

2 Clough and Meyerson (1985) use the term “diatonic length” to refer to the scale-speciﬁc measure of
musical distance.
3 Non-octave-repeating scales, though musically quite interesting, occur only sporadically in Western
music; we will not discuss them here.
4 Only in equal temperaments do scale distances correspond to log-frequency distances.

117

118

theory

the roughly horizontal lines represent parallel motion within the scale; the roughly
vertical lines represent contrary motion within the scale. The irregularity of the
resulting grid reﬂects the fact that the scale’s steps are not all the same chromatic
size. Figure 4.1.4b redraws the graph using scalar distance, so that the grid is perfectly
regular and all scale steps appear to be equally large.5
Figure 4.1.3 An octave-repeating scale is a circular arrangement of pitch classes. It can be
drawn either using chromatic distance (a) or scalar distance (b).

Figure 4.1.4 Two-dimensional chord space, drawn using chromatic distance (a) and scalar
distance (b). Only the white notes are labeled.

5 You may ﬁnd it interesting to draw lines representing single-step voice leading among perfect ﬁfths
and major thirds; this produces the discrete lattice in Figure 3.11.1b.

Scales

To my eye, Figure 4.1.4a has a three-dimensional quality, resembling a crumpled
piece of paper or an aerial view of a hilly city, such as San Francisco. This impression of three-dimensionality testiﬁes to the way our visual system has evolved to
manipulate multiple kinds of distance. When we look down at San Francisco, we
need to infer the intrinsic length of the city blocks from their apparent length on
our retinas. Intrinsically the blocks are all (roughly) equal, since San Francisco is a
grid city, but the blocks appear different, since some travel uphill. (When seen from
above, these uphill blocks look shorter, as we lose the vertical dimension.) These two
visual distances are closely analogous to the two musical distances we have been discussing. Just as the hot air balloonist needs to juggle multiple visual distances when
looking down at San Francisco, so too does the musician need to realize that the line
segments in Figure 4.1.4a have the same diatonic length, but different chromatic
sizes. Remarkably, all of this is encapsulated in the crumpled appearance of Figure
4.1.4a—demonstrating once again that geometry can help us understand abstract
music-theoretical relationships.

4.2

scale degrees, scalar
transposition, and scalar
inversion

Since a scale provides a measure of musical distance, it also deﬁnes scale-speciﬁc
notions of transposition, inversion, chord type, and set class. These allow us to adapt
the ideas of the previous chapters to our new scalar perspective.
We begin by assigning numbers to the notes in the scale—arbitrarily selecting
some note as scale degree 1, labeling the note immediately above it scale degree 2,
the note two steps above it scale degree 3, and so on (Figure 4.2.1). (The choice of a
ﬁrst scale degree is a mere notational convenience and does not imply that this note
is more signiﬁcant than the others.) Scale degree numbers are analogous to numerical pitch-class labels, with one trivial difference: while music theorists label pitch
classes starting from zero, they label scale degrees starting from one.6 Note that while
scale degree numbers are dependent on the arbitrary choice of a ﬁrst scale degree,
scalar distances are not—in C diatonic, for instance, the scalar distance between C
and D is always one scale step, no matter what the ﬁrst scale degree happens to be.
Musicians refer to these distances in a somewhat confusing way, using the terms “a
second,” “a third,” and “a fourth” to refer to scalar distances of one, two, and three
steps, respectively.
Transposition and inversion are the two distance-preserving operations in chromatic space. We can deﬁne new operations of scalar transposition and scalar inversion
that preserve scalar distances. To transpose relative to a scale, simply add a constant
to each scale degree (Figure 4.2.2). (Here we use “scale degree arithmetic”—for an
6 It would be possible to bring the two conventions in line, for instance, by labeling scale degrees starting from zero. This would make scale degree labels formally identical to pitch-class labels.

119

120

theory

scale degree:
1
scalar
distance:

2

1

3

4

5

6

7

Figure 4.2.1 Scale degrees and
scalar distances. A scalar distance
of one step is called a “second,” a
distance of two steps is “a third,” and
so on.

2

n-note scale, we add or subtract n until the result lies between 1 and n, inclusive.7) To
invert relative to a scale, choose a ﬁxed point that will remain unaffected by the inversion. Any note x scale steps above the ﬁxed point gets sent to the note x scale steps
below the ﬁxed point, and vice versa. Scalar inversion can be represented algebraically
by subtraction from a constant value: in C major, we invert (C, D, F) around the ﬁxed
point E by subtracting each scale degree from 6, transforming 1, 2, 4 into 5, 4, 2, or (G,
F, D).8 The mathematics is identical to that in §2.2, only using scale degree numbers
rather than chromatic pitch-class labels.
Relative to a scale, two chords belong to the same chord type (transpositional set
class) if they are related by scalar transposition. Thus, relative to C harmonic minor,
the chords {B, D, F} and {C, Ef, G} are both “triads,” and hence transpositionally
related, even though one is diminished and the other is minor (Figure 4.2.3). Relative
to C harmonic minor, {Af, B, Ef} is not a triad, because Af and B are only one scale
step apart. (Chromatically, of course, it is an Af-minor triad and is transpositionally
related to C minor.) This shows that the same chords can be transpositionally related
relative to one scale, but not another.9 Scalar “set classes” can be deﬁned in the obvious way, as groups of chords related either by scalar transposition or scalar inversion.
Thus {C, D, F} and {D, F, G} belong to the same set class relative to C harmonic minor,
because they are related by scalar inversion around Ef.
Figure 4.2.2 (a) To transpose up by three scale steps, add 3 to each scale degree number. (b)
To invert around E (scale degree 3), subtract each scale degree number from 6 (= 3 × 2). In
both cases, use “scale degree arithmetic,” adding or subtracting 7 until the result lies between
1 and 7.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7
C D E F G A B

F G A B C D E
4 5 6 7 1 2 3

7
B

1
C

2
D

3
E

4
F

5
G

6
A

7 To transpose (F, G, A) up by three steps in the C diatonic scale, add 3 to (4, 5, 6) obtaining (7, 8, 9).
Then subtract 7 from any numbers larger than 7, producing (7, 1, 2).
8 To invert around ﬁxed point x, one subtracts each scale degree from 2x.
9 In a scalar context, letter names often indicate distance. Thus, {Af, B, Ef} has a step while {C, Ef, G}
does not.

Scales
Figure 4.2.3 Relative to the C harmonic minor
scale, these chords all belong to the same
transpositional set class, and are therefore triads.
{Af, B, Ef} is not a member of this set class, and is
not a triad, even though it is related to {C, Ef, G}
by chromatic transposition.

It is even possible to assign scale degree numbers to notes that are not in the scale.
Relative to C diatonic, the note Cs can be considered scale degree 1.5, since it lies halfway between scale degrees 1 and 2 (Figure 4.1.3). Similarly, Eμ (E quarter-tone sharp)
can be considered scale degree 3.5, since it is halfway between scale degrees 3 and 4. It
follows that scalar transposition and inversion can act on notes outside the scale! For
example, we can shift (C, D, E) up by half a scale step to produce (Cs, Ds, Eμ), or we
can invert (C, D, Ds) around Ds to produce (F, E, Ds).10 Proceeding in this way, we
can apply scalar transposition and inversion completely promiscuously—shifting any
collection of notes by any fraction of a scale step.
This suggests the perverse musical strategy of writing music that uses the C diatonic scale to measure musical distance, while not privileging its notes in any way.
For example, Figure 4.2.4 repeatedly transposes the C major triad by one and a half
scale steps, producing {Ef, Gf, Bf}, {F, A, C} and {Gs, Bμ, Ds}.11 The resulting music
is guided by the diatonic scale without emphasizing the white notes themselves. A
brilliant music theorist, gifted with extremely sharp ears and a somewhat demented
musical imagination, might even be able to discern the presence of the scale from the
deformations it introduces as chords move through musical space. I stress that I am
not recommending this as a practical possibility; my point is simply that a musical
scale is very similar to what mathematicians call a metric, or a method of measuring
distance. In principle, a scale can function in this way even in highly chromatic contexts such as Figure 4.2.4. This is just to repeat the point that a scale need not also be
a macroharmony.

Figure 4.2.4 This music
uses the C major scale
to measure distance,
while also containing
notes foreign to the scale
(compare Figure 4.1.1).

10 Inversion around a point halfway between two scale degrees sends scale tones to scale tones. Here,
for example, C and D get sent to F and E.
11 Gf is 1.5 scale steps above E, since it is halfway between F and G. Similarly, Bμ is 1.5 scale steps above
A, since it is halfway between B and C. Note that we are using the log-frequency metric to measure fractions
of a scale step (§2.1).

121

122

theory

4.3

evenness and scalar transposition

Listeners are typically aware of both scalar and log-frequency distance at the same
time. We know that (D, E, F) is in some sense “the same” as (C, D, E), but we also
know that (E, F) is different from (D, E). Ordinary musical terminology adopts this
twofold perspective, asserting that (E, F) and (D, E) are both “seconds” (one-step
intervals), while adding the qualiﬁcation that the ﬁrst is “minor” and the second
is “major.”12 Scalar music is interesting precisely because of this doubleness. When
moving musical patterns along a scale, composers inevitably transform their material
in subtle ways, creating a pleasing mixture of identity and difference.
For scalar music to be successful, these induced variations must be small—otherwise, listeners would not be able to treat (D, E, F) as being essentially similar to (C, D,
E). Figure 4.3.1a presents an example of a scale that fails spectacularly in this regard.
Scalar transposition transforms (C, Cs, D) (analogous to “Do, a deer”) into (Cs,
D, Bf) (“Re, a . . . drop?!!?!?”), creating an eight-semitone step that sounds nothing
whatsoever like the one-semitone step between C and Cs. By contrast, Figure 4.3.1b
presents a relatively even three-note scale, in which scalar transposition is completely
successful and gestures retain their shape as they are transposed. Such passages are
common in Western music, demonstrating that scalar terminology can be useful even
when we are investigating objects that are not traditionally considered to be scales.
Clearly, scalar transposition will be precisely equal to chromatic transposition
when the scale’s notes are distributed perfectly evenly in pitch-class space—as in
the case of the familiar whole-tone scale. When the scale is nearly even, then the
two forms of transposition will be nearly but not exactly the same. In some ways
this latter situation is preferable: scalar transposition along a perfectly even scale
does not introduce any variations into the music and can become boring rather
quickly. A bit of unevenness therefore adds musical interest by introducing a degree
of variation. Interestingly, we can also make an analogous point about chords. When
a chord divides the octave perfectly evenly, efﬁcient voice leading typically involves
parallel motion in all voices and does not create the effect of independent melodic

Figure 4.3.1 (a) An uneven scale, in which the step between D and Bf is much larger than
the others. (b) A small but nearly even scale, containing only the notes {C, E, G}.

12 “Major” and “minor” here mean “big” and “little,” as in Ursa major and Ursa minor; they do not refer
to the major and minor tonalities.

Scales
Figure 4.3.2 (a) Chords that divide the octave completely evenly can be connected to their
transpositions by efﬁcient but parallel voice leading. (b) Slightly uneven chords can be
connected to their transpositions by voice leading in which the voices move by different
distances, creating the sense of counterpoint. (c) Along a completely even scale, scalar
transposition introduces no variation into music. (d) A small amount of unevenness creates
slight amounts of variation, which can often be desirable.

lines (Figure 4.3.2). A little bit of unevenness is preferable here as well, allowing us
to escape parallelism by causing the voices to move unequally. We might therefore
say that both scales and chords are subject to the Goldilocks Principle—not too much
evenness, because that would be boring, and not too little, because that would lead
to musical disorder.
Near evenness therefore plays at least three fundamentally different roles in musical life: the nearly even collections can be linked to their transpositions by efﬁcient
voice leading, they include the acoustically consonant chords, and they also allow
for scalar transpositions that introduce moderate but not overwhelming amounts of
variation into musical textures. It is somewhat remarkable that these three separate
considerations all point in the same musical direction. Intuitively, one would think
that the requirements for constructing contrapuntal music had nothing in common
with the requirements for constructing effective scales, and this in turn might lead
to the expectation that composers had an enormous amount of freedom in creating
alternative musical languages. The overdetermination of Western chords and scales
leads to the very opposite conclusion. For insofar as composers are interested in harmonic consistency, acoustic consonance, or scalar transposition, they will necessarily
ﬁnd themselves gravitating toward the same familiar musical objects.

4.4

constructing common scales

Since scales typically function as macroharmonies, tonal composers have reason to
be interested in scales containing many consonant intervals. And since the octave
is the most consonant of the intervals, composers have reason to use scales that are
maximally saturated with octaves—that is, scales in which each note has an octave
both above it and below it. But this, of course, is just to say that the scale is octave
repeating. Octave-repeating scales are therefore overdetermined in their own modest
way: besides being easy to use and remember, they also contain as many octaves as
they possibly can.

123

124

theory

The second-most consonant interval, the acoustically pure perfect ﬁfth, is just a
hair’s breadth larger than its familiar equal-tempered cousin. Suppose you would like to
construct an octave-repeating scale that is maximally saturated with acoustically pure
ﬁfths—that is, you would like as many notes as possible to have ﬁfths both above them
and below them. It has been known for thousands of years that a ﬁnite scale can never
have pure ﬁfths above and below each of its notes; the best one can do is construct scales
in which all but two notes have this property—in other words, “stacks of ﬁfths” such
as those in Figure 4.4.1. If the scale divides the octave nearly evenly, then the ﬁnal note
of the stack is nearly a perfect ﬁfth away from the initial note.13 Figure 4.4.1 identiﬁes
three salient possibilities: a stack of ﬁve perfect ﬁfths falls approximately 0.9 semitones
short of three octaves, a stack of seven perfect ﬁfths exceeds four octaves by about 1.137
semitones, and a stack of twelve perfect ﬁfths overshoots seven octaves by nearly 0.25
semitones.14 We can therefore build nearly even scales containing four, six, and eleven
perfect ﬁfths, otherwise known as the pentatonic, diatonic, and chromatic scales. The
pentatonic has a “near ﬁfth” approximately equal to a minor sixth; the diatonic has a
“near ﬁfth” approximately equal to a tritone; and the chromatic scale has a “near ﬁfth”
a bit smaller than the perfect ﬁfth. Different tuning systems will assign slightly different sizes to these intervals, depending on how exactly they compromise between the
demands of evenness and acoustic purity. We will return to this issue momentarily.
Let us now play the same game with thirds. Suppose you would like to create a
scale maximally saturated with acoustically pure major or minor thirds. Figure 4.4.2
shows that three acoustically pure major thirds, or four acoustically pure minor
thirds, are about half a semitone away from an octave. To extend these stacks further
would create very small melodic intervals that would be awkward to sing and play,
and this is rarely done in Western music. Instead, musicians consider the cycle C-EGs-C to be closed, containing two pure thirds (C-E and E-Gs) and one “near major
Figure 4.4.1 (a) A stack of ﬁve perfect ﬁfths falls 0.9 semitones short of three octaves. (b) A
stack of seven perfect ﬁfths overshoots four octaves by 1.14 semitones. (c) A stack of twelve
ﬁfths overshoots seven octaves by 0.25 semitones. (Note that the Bs is not quite the same as
Cn.) By eliminating the top note of each stack we can form a relatively even scale with one
“imperfect ﬁfth.”

13 Carey and Clampitt (1989) unpack the term “almost” using the mathematics of continued fractions.
14 Beyond twelve notes, a stack of ﬁfths has microtonal intervals about a quarter of a semitone large,
which are very difﬁcult to sing. We will not consider these scales here.

Scales
Figure 4.4.2 (a) A stack of four major thirds falls 0.41
semitones short of an octave. (b) A stack of ﬁve minor
thirds overshoots an octave by 0.62 semitones.

third” (Gs-C). (Modern equal temperament of course regularizes the thirds so that
they are exactly the same size, with the resulting augmented triad dividing the octave
into three precisely even parts.) Similarly, four minor thirds are considered to form
a closed cycle A-C-Ef-Gf-A, consisting of three pure minor thirds and one “near
minor third”—or in equal temperament, four completely equal intervals.
Unlike our stacks of perfect ﬁfths, these thirds-cycles are too small to serve as satisfying macroharmonies. However, we can combine cycles to make larger collections.
The hexatonic scale (Figure 4.4.3a) combines two augmented triads at a distance of a
perfect ﬁfth. This scale is maximally saturated with major thirds while also containing
a large number of perfect ﬁfths. However, it does not divide the octave particularly
evenly, since its steps are (approximately) one and three semitones large. The octatonic
scale (Figure 4.4.3b) is analogous to the hexatonic, but is built with minor-third cycles;
it contains a large number of minor thirds and perfect ﬁfths. Because its steps are one
and two semitones large, it is considerably more even than the hexatonic scale. Hexatonic and octatonic are close cousins, being structurally similar and playing important
roles in nineteenth- and twentieth-century music. A third possibility, the whole-tone
scale (Figure 4.4.3c), combines two augmented triads at a distance of a major second;
although it is not particularly saturated with consonances, it is perfectly even. In principle, we could use diminished seventh chords to construct a perfectly even eight-note
scale, although it is not available in twelve-tone equal temperament.
We can also form two-octave stacks of major and minor thirds, as in Figure 4.4.4.
The thirds can be arranged to produce four familiar scales: diatonic, “acoustic” (or
melodic minor ascending), harmonic minor, and “harmonic major.”15 The acoustic
scale is so-called because it is approximately equal to the ﬁrst seven pitch classes of
the harmonic series; it is usually labeled relative to the ordering (C, D, E, Fs, G, A, Bf),
Figure 4.4.3 (a) The hexatonic scale combines two augmented triads at a distance of a
perfect ﬁfth. (b) The octatonic scale combines two diminished sevenths at a distance of a
perfect ﬁfth. (c) The whole-tone scale combines augmented triads at a distance of a major
second; it is perfectly even, but contains no perfect ﬁfths.

15 In principle, there is a ﬁfth possibility, C-E-Gs-C-Ef-Gf-A, which has two instances of a single note.
In some tuning systems these two Cs are slightly different.

125

126

theory
Figure 4.4.4 Four scales can be represented as nearly even stacks of three major thirds and
four minor thirds: diatonic (a), acoustic (b), harmonic minor (c), and harmonic major (d).

known as the “C acoustic collection.”16 (This is equivalent to either the mixolydian
mode with raised fourth degree or the lydian with lowered seventh.) The harmonic
scales are the only ones we have considered that are not inversionally symmetrical:
the harmonic minor is ubiquitous in classical music, while its inversion, the so-called
harmonic major scale, was investigated by nineteenth-century musicians such as
Weitzmann and Rimsky-Korsakov.17 It can be described as a major scale with lowered
sixth degree or as a harmonic minor scale with raised third.
Figure 4.4.5 categorizes our eight scales based on their step sizes. The scales on
the left—diatonic, acoustic, whole tone, and octatonic—have steps that are at most
two semitones large, and thirds (two-step scalar intervals) that are either three or
four semitones large.18 These scales are important because they permit composers to
import traditional compositional techniques to new scalar environments: by selecting adjacent scale tones, a composer can create melodies that are recognizably stepwise (i.e. whose notes are linked by one- or two-semitone intervals); and by selecting
scalar “thirds” a composer can create chords that are recognizably “tertian” (i.e. whose

16 The ﬁrst thirteen harmonic partials of C are roughly equal to the pitch classes C-C-G-C-E-G-Bf-CD-E-Fs-G-A, with the eleventh and thirteenth partials (Fs and A) being rather ﬂat relative to their equaltempered counterparts. The acoustic scale is the best equal-tempered approximation to these notes.
17 See Riley 2004.
18 In their twelve-tone equal-tempered versions; other versions of the scales have steps that are approximately one or two semitones large, and thirds that are approximately three or four semitones large. Not surprisingly, these scales have been thoroughly investigated, by writers such as Berger (1963), Lendvai (1971),
Gervais (1971), Whittall (1975), Pressing (1978, 1982), van den Toorn (1983), Howat (1983), Antokoletz
(1984, 1993), Perle (1984), Russom (1985), Forte (1987, 1990, 1991), Taruskin (1985, 1987, 1996), Parks
(1989), Cohn (1991), Rahn (1991), Larson (1992), Callender (1998), Clough, Engebretsen, and Kochavi
(1999), Quinn (2002), Zimmerman (2002), Caballero (2004), and Rappaport (2006). See Tymoczko 1997,
2002, and 2004 for more.

Scales
Figure 4.4.5 The scales in (a) have steps that are either one or two semitones large, and
thirds that are three or four semitones large. Those in (b) have at least one step that is three
semitones large. The top three scales in (b) have thirds that are three or four semitones large.
The pentatonic scale is enclosed in a box because it is a subset of the diatonic.

adjacent notes are linked by three- or four-semitone intervals). The scales in the second group—harmonic minor, harmonic major, hexatonic, and pentatonic—have at
least one step that is three semitones large, and hence lead to more exotic melodies.
However, the ﬁrst three scales have thirds that are three or four semitones large, and
can again be used to construct “tertian” chords. By contrast, pentatonic thirds are
four or ﬁve semitones large, which means that stacks of pentatonic thirds tend to
sound like “fourth chords” (that is, chords whose notes are ﬁve chromatic steps apart).
Figure 4.4.6 shows that twentieth-century tonal composers often used the pentatonic
scale to create the impression of “fourthiness.”
In twelve-tone equal temperament, our scales have another useful property as
well: they contain every chord that does not itself contain a “chromatic cluster” such
as {C, Cs, D}.19 The scales thus provide a technique for managing a greatly extended
harmonic vocabulary that nevertheless stops short of atonality’s extremes—that
is, composers can construct harmonies by freely choosing notes from one of these
scales, secure in the knowledge that they will never generate a dissonant chromatic
cluster. Conversely, the scales provide a ready “reservoir” of melodic notes with which
to accompany any cluster-free chord. Note in particular that “polychords,” formed
by superimposing two triads, can always be embedded within one of these scales.
In this sense, they ﬁt naturally with the extended tertian sonorities characteristic of
twentieth-century tonal music.
A ﬁnal word about tuning and temperament. Temperament enters the picture because of the need to balance the demands of regularity and acoustic purity.
A Pythagorean twelve-tone chromatic scale contains acoustically pure ﬁfths, but
does not divide the octave precisely evenly. Conversely, the twelve-tone equal-tempered chromatic scale sacriﬁces purity in the name of evenness—with all its steps
19 Note that from this point of view the pentatonic scale is redundant, since it is a subset of the diatonic.

127

128

theory
Figure 4.4.6 Diatonic fourths and pentatonic thirds. In (a), from mm. 34–35 of Debussy’s
“La ﬁlle aux cheveux de lin,” diatonic fourths give way to pentatonic thirds. In (b), from Ligeti’s
Piano Concerto (second movement, mm. 60–61) diatonic ﬁfths are superimposed on pentatonic
fourths (the inversions of pentatonic thirds). In (c), Herbie Hancock uses pentatonic thirds in
the ﬁfth chorus of “Eye of the Hurricane,” from the album Maiden Voyage. (d) Pentatonic thirds
at the end of the chorus of the Decemberists’ “Here I Dreamt I Was an Architect.”

being precisely the same size, but its ﬁfths being very slightly impure.20 Beyond these
two alternatives are a variety of other options, such as just intonation and meantone tuning, each enforcing a slightly different compromise between evenness and
euphony. The important point is that the scales we have been considering will be
interesting no matter which intonational compromise we favor, simply because they
divide the octave fairly evenly, while also containing a large number of consonances.21
20 Similarly, in the just major scale, six of the seven thirds are acoustically pure, but one of the six perfect
ﬁfths is not; alternative tuning schemes redistribute the unevenness differently among the various intervals.
21 In some alternative tuning systems there may be possibilities not considered here. For example, Paul
Erlich (personal communication) has pointed out that in 22-tone equal temperament, it is possible to
construct scales with ﬁve minor thirds and two major thirds.

Scales

That so many of them can be played on the ordinary piano keyboard is testimony to
the power and ﬂexibility of the twelve-tone equal-tempered system.

4.5

modulation and voice leading

Figure 4.5.1 presents the transition section from the ﬁrst movement of Mozart’s
G major Piano Sonata, K. 283. The ﬁrst three bars are sequential, transposing the
same music up one step at each repetition, while the last three bars contain a second
sequence, now transposed up two steps at a time. As the music repeats, the accidentals
change: Fn moves to Fs in measure 4 and Cn moves to Cs in m. 6.
Suppose we ask a naive question: why say that Mozart’s music changes scale? Why
not say instead that Mozart uses a nine-note scale containing all the white notes plus
Fs and Cs? The answer lies in the music’s sequential structure: we would like to say
that the leaps (D, F), (E, G), and (Fs, A), are two-step scalar intervals, but there can be
no scale in which (D, F), (E, G), and (Fs, A) are all two steps apart.22 Thus, if we wish
to claim that the passage is a sequence—the same pattern repeated at different musical levels—we are required to postulate changes in the underlying scale.
In fact, we are forced to postulate speciﬁc voice leadings between scales. This is
because the sequence of scalar intervals will be preserved only if we assert that the
F moves up by semitone to the Fs, and the Cn moves up by semitone to Cs. To see
why, look at the last six notes in the fourth bar of the example, D-F-E-G-Fs-A. Presumably, we would like to say that the music here consists in a repeating “up two,
down one” pattern. But if this is right, then the Fn and Fs must occupy the same
Figure 4.5.1 (a) The transition from the ﬁrst movement of Mozart’s G major Piano Sonata,
K. 283. (b) The passage involves two voice leadings between scales.

22 Such a scale would have to contain E, F, Fs, and G, in which case the interval E-G would be at least
three scale steps large.

129

130

theory

abstract position: the note Fn is one step above E, the note Fs is one step below G,
and the distance E-G is two scale steps. The only way these facts are consistent is if
the scale degree that used to be located at F has somehow moved to Fs—or in other
words, if there has been a voice leading between scales.
We conclude that a piece’s scalar structure can determine speciﬁc voice leadings
between its macroharmonies. It is our desire to analyze the music using scale steps,
and in particular to do justice to its sequential structure, that requires us to postulate speciﬁc scalar voice leadings. I ﬁnd it useful here to imagine a frog hopping in a
regular way around a gently drifting circle of lily pads—say, forward by two lily pads,
back by one lily pad, forward by two, back by one, and so on (Figure 4.5.2). As the
frog hops, the fourth lily pad moves into a new position, with the others remaining
ﬁxed. Clearly, to describe the frog’s motion perspicuously, we need to measure in
units of lily pads. (It would be somewhat odd to describe it as hopping forward by 10
centimeters, backward by 3 centimeters, and so on, oblivious to the fact that the size
of its jumps is determined by the position of the pads!) But we also need to take into
account the fact that the lily pads are themselves shifting: the phrase “lily pad #3” acts
as a kind of variable that can refer to various locations in physical space.23 In much
the same way, we often want to analyze music using scale steps even while the scales
themselves are changing. In these contexts a scale degree is a kind of abstract address
(“the musical location one step above E and one step below G”) that can point to a
variety of different chromatic locations (such as Fn or Fs).24
We can now see that traditional modulation is typically a two-stage business.
Modulation is often initiated by voice leading between scales—the fourth degree
gets raised by semitone, the leading tone gets lowered, and so on (Figure 4.5.3). This
change of scale permits the introduction of the new key’s V7 chord, setting the stage

3

2

4

Figure 4.5.2 A frog,
hopping along a circle
of gently shifting lily
pads.

1

23 The idea of a scale degree as pointer is captured by Agmon’s two-dimensional model of the diatonic
system (Agmon 1989), which plays a role in forthcoming work by Steven Rings.
24 Some music uses variable scale degrees that can come in multiple forms. For example, the seventh
scale degree in classical minor-key music can occur either as a raised leading tone or as a lowered subtonic.
Here, it is as if the lily pads were moving much more rapidly, with the abstract address “seventh scale
degree” shifting from leading tone to ﬂatted seventh on a measure-by-measure (or even beat-by-beat)
basis. Unfortunately, it would take us too far aﬁeld to consider ﬂexible scale degrees in more detail.

Scales
Figure 4.5.3 (a) Classical modulation as a two-stage process. Here a modulation from A
major to E major, in which the scale shifts before the tonal center (represented by the boxed
note). Thus we ﬁrst change D to Ds and then shift the tonic (boxed) note from A to E. (b) In
twentieth-century tonality, one frequently ﬁnds a change of scale without a change of tonal
center. For example, The Who’s “I Can’t Explain” moves from E mixolydian in the verse to E
major in the chorus; here the tonal center stays ﬁxed while D moves to Ds.

for a shift in the tonal center. Thus, in the typical modulation from tonic to dominant, the raising of the fourth scale degree occurs prior to the conclusion of the V7–I
cadence in the new key. (In fact, it sometimes takes a while for our ears to be convinced that the scale shift represents a genuine change in tonic, rather than a passing
melodic inﬂection.) In classical music, shifts between parallel keys (such as C major
and C minor) are unique insofar as they do not involve any change of tonic. But
in twentieth-century tonality, we encounter a much wider range of tonic-preserving
modulations, including all the shifts between parallel diatonic modes.
It is important to understand that the points I have been making do not depend in
any way on notation. The question is about conceptualizing music in terms of scalar
distances, and this does not require that the music be notated at all—in the case of our
Mozart example, it merely requires that it be useful to conceptualize the distances F-A
and Fs-A as thirds, and hence to infer that the note F has moved to Fs. Nevertheless,
notation can often help us determine voice-leading relationships among scales. Suppose we imagine that the seven letter names A–G represent distinct musical voices,
so that there is an “A” voice, a “B” voice, and so on. Accidentals can then be taken to
indicate how the letter-voices move: thus when Mozart replaces Fn with Fs, he signals
that the “F voice” has moved up by semitone to Fs. In other words, standard musical
notation faithfully reﬂects the fact that the ﬁrst modulation in Figure 4.5.1 occurs by
way of the voice leading (C, D, E, F, G, A, B)®(C, D, E, Fs, G, A, B), while the second
occurs by way of (C, D, E, Fs, G, A, B)®(Cs, D, E, Fs, G, A, B).
Of course, scalar voice leading can occur in nonmodulatory contexts as well. Consider, for example, the passages in Figure 4.5.4. In the ﬁrst, the notation suggests that
the G in a Bf major scale moves down to Gf, creating Bf harmonic major, while
in the second it suggests that F moves up to Fs, producing G harmonic minor. We
can experience this difference without musical notation: for instance, an improvising
musician might play the diminished chord in Figure 4.5.4a, anticipating a continuation whereby the Gf moves downward to F, while on another occasion the same

131

132

theory
Figure 4.5.4 Spelling often indicates a difference in musical function. Here, the chord {A, C,
Ef, Gf} would typically lead back to a Bf major triad, while {A, C, Ef, Fs} would lead to G
minor. Spelling can be interpreted as indicating speciﬁc voice leadings between scales.

improviser might play the same chord anticipating a continuation where the Fs rises
to G. Our musical expectations are powerful enough that the same chord can even
sound different in these two contexts. (Certainly, when imagining the passages in my
head I experience them quite differently.) Here again, notation can clarify matters,
even though the actual phenomena do not depend on notation itself.

4.6

voice leading between common
scales

In twelve-tone equal temperament, the four most even seven-note scales are the diatonic, acoustic, harmonic minor, and harmonic major. Consequently, their voiceleading relations are modeled by one of the lattices described in §3.11 and repeated
here as Figure 4.6.1.25 As mentioned earlier, the diatonic circle of ﬁfths zigzags threedimensionally through the center of the ﬁgure, moving successively up, right, and into
the paper. It turns out that the remaining scales are also linked by a chain of singlesemitone voice leadings. For instance, beginning with A harmonic major, we ﬁnd
A harmonic major®A harmonic minor®D acoustic®E harmonic major®
E harmonic minor ® A acoustic ®. . . .
This is a second “circle of ﬁfths” whose unit of sequential repetition is three scales
long. These scales wind their way around the diatonic circle, somewhat in the manner of a double helix. However, the two strands are not quite the same shape: where
the diatonic circle takes a right-angled turn after every step, the nondiatonic strand
moves in a straight line through each acoustic collection.
25 In twelve-tone non-equal-tempered contexts, we would ﬁnd similar lattices whose vertices are
minutely displaced.

Scales
Figure 4.6.1 Voice leadings among seven-note scales. The diatonic circle of ﬁfths (dark solid
line) starts at C diatonic (lower left front), while the nondiatonic circle (dashed line) starts at
G acoustic (lower right front).

The harmonic and acoustic scales are closely related to the transpositionally symmetrical whole-tone, hexatonic, and octatonic scales. Figure 4.6.2 shows that we
can change whole tone into acoustic by a voice leading in which a single pitch class
“splits” into its chromatic neighbors; because of the whole-tone scale’s sixfold transpositional symmetry, there are six possible acoustic scales that can be reached in this
way.26 Similarly, octatonic can be transformed into acoustic by the reverse process—a
transformation in which a major second “merges” into its central note. (Again, since
the octatonic scale is transpositionally symmetrical, there are four ways to “merge”
into an acoustic collection.) Octatonic can move to harmonic major or minor by a
more complicated process of “merging”: here, we fuse three notes spanning a minor
third, producing the minor second in the center of the span—for instance, {Cs, Ds,
E} becomes {D, Ef}, transforming C octatonic into G harmonic minor. (There are
eight such possibilities for every octatonic scale, four leading to harmonic major and
four leading to harmonic minor.) Finally, the hexatonic can be transformed into harmonic major or minor by the reverse process: here, a minor second such as {Gs, A}
splits to become a three-note scale fragment whose outer notes span it, such as {G,
Af, Bf}. There are six such possibilities for every hexatonic scale, three leading to
harmonic major and three leading to harmonic minor.

26 Callender (1998) uses the words “split” and “fuse” to refer to these “non-bijective” voice leadings
(§4.9). Related discussions of scale-to-scale voice leading (though not always using those terms) can be
found in Perle 1984, Taruskin 1996, Howat 1983, Antokoletz 1993, and Tymoczko 2004.

133

134

theory
Figure 4.6.2 (a) To transform a whole-tone scale into an acoustic, “split” one note into its
two chromatic neighbors. (b) To transform an octatonic scale into an acoustic, “merge” a
major second into the note at its center. (c) To transform an octatonic scale into a harmonic
major or minor, “merge” three notes spanning a minor third into the semitone they enclose.
(d) To transform a hexatonic collection into a harmonic major or minor, “split” a semitone
into a three-note scale-fragment enclosing it.

Figure 4.6.3 describes these relationships using an inverted pyramid, with the
three transpositionally symmetrical scales on the top line. The middle line contains
the nondiatonic seven-note scales, while the diatonic scale is at the bottom. Scales are
connected by line segments if they can be linked by particularly efﬁcient voice leading: either a “split” or “merge” described in the preceding paragraph, or one of the
single-semitone voice leadings represented on Figure 4.6.1. The numbers above each
line indicate the presence of multiple possibilities for that particular kind of voice
leading. Thus the notation “¬6” on the line connecting whole tone to acoustic indicates that there are six different ways to “split” a note of the whole-tone scale, creating
six different acoustic collections. By contrast, “1®” points in the opposite direction,
because for any particular acoustic scale there is only one way to “merge” its notes to
create a whole-tone collection.
The table in Figure 4.6.4 shows how the nondiatonic seven-note collections can
be used to connect transpositionally symmetrical scales. Every scale shares six of its
seven notes with the octatonic scale to its left, and ﬁve of six notes with the wholetone or hexatonic scale above it. (For example, G acoustic and Df acoustic share six
notes with Cs-D octatonic and ﬁve notes with Df whole tone.) In addition, each
seven-note scale shares six of its notes with some diatonic collection. Figure 4.6.5 tries
to convey the same information graphically: the central core features the full cycle
of 36 seven-note nondiatonic scales, each linked to its neighbors by single-semitone
voice leading. On the outside of this central circle runs the diatonic circle of ﬁfths;
another can be found within the central circle. (Here, the double-headed arrows connect scales sharing six of their seven notes: the A harmonic major collection, for example, shares six notes with A diatonic; while the next collection along the non-diatonic

Scales
Figure 4.6.3 Voice leadings among familiar scales. The transpositionally symmetrical scales
are at the top. The harmonic and acoustic scales mediate between these and the diatonic.
The numbers indicate how many scales of each type can be connected by the voice leadings
described in Figures 4.6.1 and 4.6.2. Thus the whole-tone scale can be connected to six
different acoustic scales by a “split,” while every acoustic scale can be connected to only one
whole-tone scale by a “merge.”

circle, A harmonic minor, shares six notes with C diatonic.) The labels along the central circle indicate the nearest octatonic, whole-tone, and hexatonic scales. This exotic
and almost alchemistical graph provides a way to visualize all the voice leadings we
have been discussing. I encourage you to verify that Figures 4.6.1, 4.6.3, and 4.6.5
provide different perspectives on the same basic relationships.

Figure 4.6.4 Each scale in the table shares six of its seven notes with the octatonic scale to its
left, and contains ﬁve of the six notes in the whole-tone or hexatonic scale above it.

135

136

theory
Figure 4.6.5 A geometrical representation of the voice leading between diatonic, acoustic,
harmonic major/minor, whole-tone, hexatonic, and octatonic scales. Here “wt 1” and “wt 2”
refer to the Cs and D whole tone scales, respectively; “oct 1,” “oct 2,” and “oct 3” refer to the
Cs-D, D-Ef, and Ds-E octatonic scales; and “hex 1,” “hex 2,” “hex 3,” and “hex 4” refer to the
Cs-D, D-Ef, Ds-E, and E-F hexatonic scales.

4.7

two examples

The previous section placed the acoustic and harmonic scales between the diatonic
and the transpositionally symmetrical scales, since each shares six notes with some
diatonic collection, while also being very close to some octatonic, whole-tone, and
hexatonic collections. (This is represented by the fact that the harmonic and acoustic
scales occupy the central line of the inverted pyramid in Figure 4.6.3.) And in fact,
twentieth-century composers often use acoustic and harmonic collections to mediate
between these different harmonic worlds. For example, at the end of the central section of “Mouvement,” Debussy moves from Fs mixolydian to C whole tone by way of
the E acoustic scale (Figure 4.7.1). This acoustic collection is as close as possible to the
other two, sharing ﬁve of the whole-tone scale’s six notes, and six of the diatonic scale’s
seven notes. In this way, Debussy creates a smooth transition from familiar diatonic
modality to the much more exotic world of the whole-tone scale. This was one of

Scales
Figure 4.7.1 At the end of the B section of Mouvement, Debussy moves from Fs mixolydian
to the C whole tone by way of the Fs mode of E acoustic.

his favorite compositional techniques, with similar progressions appearing repeatedly
throughout his works.27
For a more complicated example, consider “Sunlight Streaming in the Chamber,”
the ﬁrst of Prokoﬁev’s 1916 Five Poems of Anna Akhmatova (Figure 4.7.2). The music
begins with a repeating ﬁgure that echoes the opening of Stravinsky’s Petrouchka,
composed just a few years earlier. I interpret the underlying harmony here as an E
major triad, which can be connected to the following C major by semitonal voice
leading. C major then initiates a stepwise descent through B minor, A major, G major,
and Fs major, each generating familiar scales. The music then shifts suddenly to C
diatonic, moving toward a half cadence on an Fs half-diminished seventh. The second half of the song begins by alternating between E minor (with added C) and A9
chord (with G in the bass), vaguely suggesting ii–V in D major. The piece then shifts
to D acoustic (A melodic minor) for six measures, ending with a turn to C-Df octatonic. This is the ﬁrst appearance of the octatonic scale in the piece and it has a somewhat surprising effect, giving the impression of a question mark or raised eyebrow
rather than an exclamation point.
Figure 4.7.3 graphs Prokoﬁev’s scales using the two-dimensional scale lattice of
Figure 3.11.8. The diatonic and acoustic collections form a compact region of the
graph: the four diatonic collections (C, G, D, and A) are all adjacent on the zigzag of
ﬁfths, with the two acoustic collections (D and E) connected to these scales by singlesemitone voice leading.28 Although the music does not always exploit these connections, there are a number of transitions that do so. (For instance, the move from B
melodic minor to A diatonic, or the progression from C diatonic to G diatonic to D
diatonic.) Overall, there are six shifts involving single-semitone voice leading, ﬁve
or six two-semitone shifts, one or two three-semitone shifts, and one four-semitone
shift (Figure 4.7.4). It is interesting that the more dramatic shifts occur at the beginning and end of the song, with the smoother motions concentrated in the middle.
27 See Chapter 9 and Tymoczko 2004.
28 Note that I am considering the opening to be in E mixolydian rather than E major; if one wishes to
assert the presence of E major, then there are ﬁve diatonic collections in the piece.

137

138

theory

Figure 4.7.2
An outline of
Prokoﬁev’s
Op. 27 No. 1.

Figure 4.7.3 The scales in
Prokoﬁev’s piece form a
connected region.

Scales
Figure 4.7.4 Prokoﬁev typically modulates by relatively efﬁcient
voice leading, with the most dramatic changes occurring at the
beginning and end of the piece. Here, the numbers refer to the total
number of semitonal shifts required to connect each scale to its
successor: thus, the number “3” in the second line indicates that
it takes 3 semitonal shifts (G®Gs, A®As, C®Cs) to change G
diatonic into E acoustic.

The ﬁnal modulation deserves some comment. Had Prokoﬁev wanted to create a
smooth transition from the antepenultimate D diatonic scale to the concluding CDf
octatonic, he could have done so, since both scales share almost all their notes with A
acoustic. (See Figure 4.7.3, where this is obvious.) However, the penultimate acoustic
collection does not share a large number of notes with the ﬁnal octatonic scale. (It
does however share ﬁve notes with the preceding D diatonic.) Nevertheless, this D
acoustic scale still has audible links to both the diatonic and octatonic scales, since
it is “nearly transpositionally related” to both (§2.8). In other words, the mediation
here is one of internal intervallic structure rather than particular common tones:
Figure 4.7.5 shows that the acoustic scale shares the step-interval sequence 2-1-2-2-2
with the diatonic and the sequence 2-1-2-1-2 with the octatonic. Consequently, the
piece articulates a gradual transition at the level of interval content, with the acoustic
scale containing more tritones than the diatonic, but fewer than the octatonic, fewer
ﬁfths than the diatonic, but as many as the octatonic, and so on.29
Overall, Prokoﬁev’s music suggests a somewhat loose and playful structure—
the sense is of a relatively intuitive use of closely related scales, rather than a more
logical or systematic exploration. Nevertheless, it is signiﬁcant that he uses closely
related scales that can be linked by efﬁcient voice leading, and that he often modulates so as to highlight these connections. It is also relevant that his scalar vocabulary consists entirely of scales we have discussed, suggesting that our abstract,
scale-theoretic considerations do indeed capture his actual concerns. Chapter 9 continues this line of argument, demonstrating that the techniques we have identiﬁed

29 This sort of transition occurs frequently in twentieth-century music, for instance at the opening of
Debussy’s “Fêtes” (the second of the Nocturnes) and the third of Prokoﬁev’s Ten Pieces, Op. 12.

139

140

theory
Figure 4.7.5 In Prokoﬁev’s piece the acoustic scale mediates between diatonic and octatonic
in a somewhat abstract way. On the left side of (a) we see that the A acoustic scale can
mediate between D diatonic and the C-Df octatonic, sharing almost all of its notes with both
collections. However, the right side of (a) shows that Prokoﬁev presents the D acoustic scale
instead. (b) When we consider intervallic structure, we see that the acoustic is similar to both
diatonic and octatonic, sharing step patterns 2-1-2-1-2 with the octatonic and 2-1-2-2-2
with the diatonic.

here are symptomatic of a much more general practice stretching from late nineteenthcentury tonality to contemporary jazz and postminimalism.

4.8

scalar and interscalar
transposition

Figure 4.8.1 shows two appearances of the subject of Shostakovich’s Fugue in E
minor, one in E aeolian, and the other in G mixolydian.30 The two forms of the subject are related by a double process of transposition: a scalar transposition downward
by diatonic step, from aeolian to mixolydian, combined with chromatic transposition upward by ﬁve semitones, from G diatonic to C diatonic (Figure 4.8.2). Though
this combination of scalar and chromatic transposition can occasionally be found in
earlier centuries, it plays a central role in twentieth-century tonal composition, particularly in the works of composers such as Debussy, Ravel, Stravinsky, Shostakovich,
Steve Reich, and John Adams. By way of illustration, Figure 4.8.3 cites rehearsal 13
of Debussy’s “Fêtes,” where scalar transposition upward by two steps combines with

30 The theme itself does not contain the aeolian mode’s Fs. However, it is present both in the key signature and the countersubject.

Scales
Figure 4.8.1 The subject
in Shostakovich’s Fugue in
E minor, Op. 87 No. 4, as it
appears at the opening of the
piece and in m. 22.

Figure 4.8.2 The two forms of the subject relate by scalar and chromatic transposition.

Figure 4.8.3 Rehearsal 13 of Debussy’s “Fêtes” (Nocturnes II).

chromatic transposition downward by three steps. The resulting voice leading shifts
Af dorian into Af lydian, raising Gf, Cf, and Df.
Note that these two kinds of transposition can sometimes combine to produce a
simple change of accidentals, as in the opening of the Rondo from Clementi’s Piano
Sonata, Op. 25 No. 2 (Figure 4.8.4). The theme, which originally begins on scale
degree 5 in G major, returns on scale degree 1 of D major, with Cs replacing Cn.
Though one could say that Clementi simply moved the note Cn up by semitone, it is
also possible to describe the relationship as combining two separate transpositions:
scalar transposition down by four scale degrees followed by chromatic transposition up seven semitones. These two transpositions nearly cancel each other out,
leaving behind the single-semitone shift C®Cs as a residue. As we will see, there

141

142

theory
Figure 4.8.4 The D-major theme in
the Rondo from Clementi’s Piano
Sonata, Op. 25 No. 2, originally
begins on scale degree 5 in G major,
but returns in the transition with Cn
replaced by Cs. The two forms of the
theme can be related by a combination
of scalar and chromatic transposition.

are a number of musical circumstances in which it is proﬁtable to think in precisely
this way.
If scalar transposition moves a musical pattern along a single scale, then a
slightly more general process of “interscalar transposition” moves a pattern from one
scale to another.31 Figure 4.8.5 tracks the main motive of Bach’s D minor invention as
it moves from D harmonic minor scale to F major and D melodic minor ascending
(G acoustic). Although the scale changes, each form of the motive uses precisely the
same set of scalar intervals. In fact, if we label the notes of D harmonic minor and F
major in the standard way, we can use the very same scale degree numbers to describe
the ﬁrst two passages in the ﬁgure. In this sense, we can say that they are related
by zero-step interscalar transposition. Similarly, if we label the degrees of D melodic
minor starting from D, then Figure 4.8.5a relates to (c) by two-step interscalar transposition—meaning that each note of Figure 4.8.5c is two scale degrees higher than
the corresponding note of Figure 4.8.5a. Of course, the number of steps involved in
an interscalar transposition depends on our arbitrary choice of the ﬁrst scale degree.
What is important is the fact that two passages are related by interscalar transposition, not the particular label we apply to the relationship.
Figure 4.8.5 Three forms of the motive in
Bach’s D minor two-part invention. Scale
degrees are shown above each example.

31 See Santa 1999 and Hook 2007a. Hook (2007b and 2008) and Tymoczko (2005) explore the relation
between key signatures and interscalar transpositions.

Scales

Figure 4.8.6 identiﬁes interscalar transpositions in Debussy, Stravinsky, and Shostakovich. The ﬁrst two examples involve interscalar transposition from the diatonic
scale to the acoustic. The third is interesting insofar as its “scales” are simple triads.
(This is the gimmick of Shostakovich’s A major fugue; it is a “bugle fugue” that treats
triads as if they were scales.) Thus in Figure 4.8.6c, the main theme originally appears
in the A major triad (top line); when it returns in minor, at m. 21, it has moved to a
new three-note scale, Fs minor. This is interscalar transposition by zero steps (middle
line). Eventually, in the stretto, the theme is transposed diatonically along the A major
scale (bottom line). Thus the bottom two lines of Figure 4.8.6c are connected by
descending-step interscalar transposition.32

Figure 4.8.6 Interscalar transposition in the opening of Debussy’s “Fêtes” (a), Stravinsky’s
Rite of Spring (b), and Shostakovich’s A major fugue (c).

32 Transposing (Cs, A, Fs) down by step produces (A, Fs, Cs). A zero step interscalar transposition
takes (A, Fs, Cs)—or “third, root, ﬁfth” in the minor triad—to (Cs, A, E), or “third, root, ﬁfth” in the
major triad.

143

144

theory

One terminological point: the previous examples describe what might be called
“interscalar transpositions in pitch-class space,” since they link octave-repeating scales
with the same number of notes. There is an even more general musical transformation that relates scales of different sizes, which we can call “interscalar transposition
in pitch space.” Figure 4.8.7 presents examples from Debussy and Steve Reich. These
transformations introduce octave-dependent changes into the music: for example,
the D5 in the top line of Figure 4.8.7a gets mapped to C, whereas the D4 gets mapped
to Bf. Consequently, we cannot speak of “what happens to the pitch class D”; instead,
we need to speak about what happens to speciﬁc pitches in speciﬁc registers. By contrast, when the scales have the same number of notes, then all pitches in a pitch class
are transformed in exactly the same way. (For example, the interscalar transposition
in Figure 4.8.6a moves every D up by three semitones.) This in turn means that these
interscalar transpositions can be modeled as voice leadings between pitch-class sets.
This is precisely why they will be important in what follows.

Figure 4.8.7 (a) “Fêtes” presents the same pattern of scalar intervals in the seven-note
dorian mode and the six-note whole-tone scale. (b) Steve Reich’s Variations for Winds, Strings,
and Keyboards presents the same pattern of scalar intervals in the six-note diatonic hexachord
and the ﬁve-note pentatonic scale.

4.9

interscalar transposition and
voice leading

In the ﬁnal sections of this chapter I want to switch gears somewhat, exploring the
connections between scale theory and voice leading. To prepare for this discussion we
need to make a subtle conceptual shift: instead of thinking of chords as being embedded within larger scales, we will start to think of them as scales unto themselves. In other
words, we will think of the C major chord as being a “scale” whose three scale degrees
are C, E, and G, respectively. (This is just what we did in discussing Figure 4.8.6c,

Scales

Shostakovich’s A major fugue.) This will allow us to represent the voice leading (C,
E, G)®(B, E, G) as an interscalar transposition that sends the ﬁrst scale degree of the
C major triad to the third scale degree of the E minor triad (C®B), the second scale
degree to the ﬁrst (E®E), and the third scale degree to the second (G®G). Once we
start thinking in this way, we will see that there is a deep connection between the notion
of an “interscalar transposition” and the general problem of identifying efﬁcient voice
leadings between chords.
To understand why, notice that scalar and interscalar transpositions represent a
very special kind of voice leading: not only are they free of voice crossings, but they
remain so no matter how their voices are distributed in pitch space. (For this reason, I
will say that they are “strongly crossing free.”) For example, the ﬁrst voice leading in
Figure 4.9.1 has no crossings no matter how we change the register of its individual
voices. By contrast, the second voice leading is only weakly crossing free, since transposing its lowest voice up by an octave creates a crossing between the bottom two
voices. Given a strongly crossing-free voice leading, we can always arrange its voices
so that each chord spans less than an octave, with ascending steps in one chord being
sent to ascending steps in the other (Figure 4.9.2).33 But this in turn implies that the
voice leading is a scalar or interscalar transposition, since it sends any scalar interval
in the ﬁrst chord to the same scalar interval in the second.
Figure 4.9.1 The voice leading in (a) is
strongly crossing free: no matter what octave
its voices are in, there will never be crossing.
The voice leading in (b) is crossing free but not
strongly so, since a crossing is created when the
lowest voice moves up by octave (c).

Figure 4.9.2 In a strongly crossing-free voice
leading, the voices can be transposed by
octave so that each chord is in “close registral
position,” spanning less than an octave.
Ascending steps in one collection are sent to
ascending steps in the other.

The connection to voice leading lies precisely here: in §2.7, we saw that, for any
“reasonable” measure of voice-leading size, removing voice crossings never makes
the voice leading larger. (See also Appendix A.) This means that we can take any
voice leading and, by repeatedly removing voice crossings and changing the octave
in which voices appear, eventually produce a scalar or interscalar transposition. Since
octave shifts don’t affect the voice leading, and since removing crossings never makes
it larger, the ﬁnal voice leading is guaranteed to be at least as small as the original (Figure 4.9.3). Consequently, there is always a maximally efﬁcient voice leading between
33 Conversely, any voice leading that can be arranged in this way is an interscalar transposition.

145

146

theory

any two chords that is a scalar
or interscalar transposition.34
It follows that the concept of
interscalar transposition will
be relevant wherever efﬁcient
voice leading is important.
Let me illustrate with a few
concrete examples. Figure 4.9.4
identiﬁes the minimal voice
leading between C major and
A minor triads. If we consider
each triad to be a scale, with
root, third, and ﬁfth being its
ﬁrst, second, and third scale
degrees, then the voice leading
is an interscalar transposition
by one ascending step.35 Similarly, the most efﬁcient voice leading between the C major and C minor triads is an
interscalar transposition by zero steps (root to root). The ﬁgure also shows that the
most efﬁcient voice leading between Cø7 and Ef7 chords is an interscalar transposition by three steps (root to seventh), and the most efﬁcient voice leading between F
diatonic and G acoustic scales is an interscalar transposition by one descending step
(scale degree one to scale degree seven).36 Geometrically, interscalar transpositions can
be represented as collections of crossing-free paths between two concentric circles, as
in Figure 4.9.5. Appendix A shows that these voice leadings correspond to paths that
do not “bounce off ” the mirror boundaries of higher-dimensional chord space.
Figure 4.9.3 Repeatedly octave-transposing and
removing crossings will eventually produce a strongly
crossing-free voice leading. (a) Transposing the bass
voice up by octave produces a crossing (b). Switching
the bass and tenor in the ﬁrst chord removes the
crossing (c). Transposing the tenor up by octave
produces another crossing (d). Switching soprano and
alto in the ﬁrst chord removes this crossing (e), yielding
a strongly crossing-free voice leading. Since removing
crossings never makes a voice leading larger, the voice
leading in (e) is at least as small as that in (a).

Figure 4.9.4 The minimal voice leading
between C major and A minor triads (a),
between C major and C minor triads (b),
between Cø7 and Ef7 chords (c), and between
F diatonic and G acoustic scales (d). All are
interscalar transpositions.

34 Here and for the remainder of this section, I use “voice leading” to mean “voice leading without doublings, in which every note in one chord is mapped to exactly one note in the other.” Mathematically, these
are called bijective voice leadings. We will return to the issue of doublings at the end of the section.
35 Here and in what follows, I always consider the root of a traditional chord to be its ﬁrst scale degree.
36 Considering G to be the ﬁrst scale degree of the G acoustic collection. If we consider the scale to be
D melodic minor and number its scale degrees from D, then the relevant interscalar transposition is two
ascending steps.

Scales
Figure 4.9.5 Strongly crossingfree voice leadings can be
represented geometrically
by non-intersecting paths
connecting two concentric
circles. Here the music
progresses radially outward,
from the inner circle to the
outer. The voice leading (F, Gs,
B, Ds)®(E, Gs, B, D) holds Gs
and B constant, moving F and
Ds down by semitone.

Throughout this book I have emphasized that Western music involves the simultaneous satisfaction of two independent constraints—a vertical constraint that requires
chords to be structurally similar, and a horizontal constraint that dictates that they
be connected by efﬁcient voice leadings. Clearly, to satisfy these constraints, a composer must be able to ﬁnd the efﬁcient voice leadings between arbitrary chords. This
need is all the more pressing when we reﬂect that composers regularly ask questions
that require sorting through a large number of possibilities. Suppose, for example,
you write the chord in Figure 4.9.6, and decide to move it to some nearby dominant
seventh; to solve this problem, it is (in principle) necessary to search 288 different
voice leadings to all twelve dominant sevenths. It is rather remarkable, therefore, that
composers, theorists, and even beginning music students manage to ﬁnd efﬁcient
voice leadings so quickly, and with so little apparent effort.
Our discussion helps explain how this can be possible. Rather than searching all the
different voice leadings between chords, musicians need consider only the small number
of interscalar transpositions. For example, if you want to ﬁnd a minimal voice leading between the C half-diminished and F dominant seventh chords, it is sufﬁcient to
consider the four interscalar transpositions shown in Figure 4.9.7—mapping the root
of the half-diminished to the root, third, ﬁfth, and seventh of the dominant seventh
chord, respectively. This reduces the number of potential voice leadings by a factor of six,
from twenty-four down to four. (For larger chords the reduction of effort is even more

Figure 4.9.6 Suppose a composer decides to connect this F halfdiminished seventh chord to some dominant seventh chord by
maximally efﬁcient voice leading. There are almost three hundred
possible voice leadings to consider. Yet musicians manage to solve
problems like this very quickly.

147

148

theory
Figure 4.9.7 In order to ﬁnd the minimal voice leading between two chords, it is necessary
to check only the interscalar transpositions between them. Here, the ﬁrst interscalar
transposition maps the root of Cø7 to the root of F7, the second maps root to third, the third
maps root to ﬁfth, and the fourth maps root to seventh. Having chosen a destination for the
root, the rest of the voice leading is completely determined by the fact that it is an interscalar
transposition.

dramatic.) Thus when harmony teachers enjoin their students to avoid voice crossings,
they are actually achieving two distinct aims: they are encouraging a kind of composition in which the voices remain registrally separate, and hence easy to distinguish aurally,
while also drastically reducing the “search space” that students must consider when looking for efﬁcient voice leadings. This last point, though rarely discussed, is arguably central to the whole enterprise of Western composition: for if “crossed” voice leadings could
be smaller than their uncrossed counterparts, it would be enormously more difﬁcult to
combine harmonic consistency with efﬁcient voice leading—simply because it would be
very hard to sort through all the voice-leading possibilities.
It follows that there are both perceptual and conceptual reasons to expect that
voice crossings should be infrequent, since crossings make life difﬁcult for both listener and composer. And when we look at actual music we ﬁnd that voice crossings are indeed rare, occurring only 5% of the time even in the most polyphonic of
styles.37 Furthermore, when they do occur it is often proﬁtable to interpret them as
embellishments of more basic, crossing-free paradigms. For example, the opening
of Palestrina’s motet “Adoramus Te,” shown in Figure 4.9.8, can plausibly be said to
be based on crossing-free voice leadings in the bottom staff—with the crossing not
only serving to add melodic interest, but also allowing Palestrina to evade the parallel ﬁfths and octaves that would otherwise occur.38 (Notice that in this passage the
top three voices typically articulate voice leadings between complete triads, with the
bass adding doublings—a technique that we will explore later.) Chapters 6 and 7 will
generalize this observation by showing that a large majority of voice leadings, in a
large range of music, can be understood as embellishments of a few basic templates,
all of which are strongly crossing free. This in turn suggests that composers really
do privilege the crossing-free voice leadings, perhaps thinking of voice crossings as
surface-level embellishments to be used only on special occasions.
37 The ﬁgure “5%,” which refers to the percentage of voice leadings containing crossings, is based on a
statistical survey of a large number of MIDI ﬁles of vocal compositions by ﬁfteenth and sixteenth-century
composers. There is some evidence that the rate of voice crossings gradually decreases over this period. Note
that some of these voice leadings are only weakly crossing-free.
38 These sorts of voice crossings are quite common in Renaissance music, for example in the opening
phrase of Lassus’ Prophetiae Sibyllarum.

Scales

One word of caution: for simplicity, I
have been considering
voice leadings without
doublings, in which
the number of voices
is equal to the number
of notes in each of the
two chords. However,
it sometimes happens
that a minimal voice
leading maps multiple
notes in the one chord to a single note in the other. For example, the ﬁrst voice leading in Figure 4.9.9 is smaller than any of the four-voice voice leadings between the C
and E major seventh chords. This, clearly, is not an interscalar transposition.39 Fortunately, in many practical applications, we can ignore this complication, restricting
our attention to voice leadings without doublings. (Figure 4.9.10 demonstrates that,
for nearly even three- and four-note chords, maximally efﬁcient voice leadings are
almost always doubling free.) In the grand scheme of things, this is quite fortunate,
for otherwise the composer’s task of ﬁnding efﬁcient voice leadings would be considerably more difﬁcult than it already is.

Figure 4.9.8 The opening phrase of Palestrina’s “Adoramus Te”
can be interpreted as embellishing a fundamentally crossing-free
template.

Figure 4.9.9 The ﬁve-voice voice leading on the left
is smaller than any of the four-voice alternatives.
Here, three voices move by one semitone, whereas the
smallest four-voice alternative moves one voice by
three semitones and one voice by one semitone. Voice
leadings containing doublings cannot be identiﬁed
using the techniques discussed in this chapter.

2 notes
3 notes
4 notes
5 notes
6 notes
7 notes
8 notes

All Chords Nearly Even
0%
0%
10%
1%
29%
2%
48%
8%
61%
19%
69%
14%
73%
11%

Figure 4.9.10 The probability that the minimal
voice leading between two randomly chosen
n-note chords will involve “doublings,” as in
Figure 4.9.9. The ﬁrst column represents the
likelihood of doublings when the chords are
selected randomly from all pairs of n-note
chords, while the second represents the
likelihood when chords are restricted to the four
most even n-note chords. Nearly even chords
with four or fewer notes thus require doublings
only rarely.

39 More precisely, it is not an interscalar transposition between four-note chords; it is an interscalar
transposition between the ﬁve note chords {C, E, E, G, B} and {E, Gs, B, B, Ds}, but it is not obvious how to
ﬁgure out which notes to double. There exist efﬁcient algorithms for solving this problem, but the details
are too technical to discuss here (see Tymoczko 2006 and 2008b).

149

150

theory

4.10

combining interscalar and
chromatic transpositions

Let me end by showing how scale theory can be used to model the intuitive knowledge possessed by sophisticated tonal composers. To begin, note that the interscalar
transpositions linking any transpositions of the same two chord types will always
be related by individual transposition. For instance, the scalar transpositions linking
the C major triad to itself are individually transpositionally related to the interscalar
transpositions linking the C major to the E major triad, and indeed to those connecting any other major triads (Figure 4.10.1). This is because transposition can never
introduce voice crossings into a voice leading, even when applied individually.
From this it follows that we can decompose any strongly crossing-free voice leading from C to E major into two parts: a scalar transposition that moves each note
down by some number of scale steps (relative to the C major triad) and a chromatic transposition that moves each note up by some number of semitones. This
voice leading will be efﬁcient when these two components nearly cancel out—as,
for instance, when a one-step descending scalar transposition nearly neutralizes the
Figure 4.10.1 (a) The scalar and/or interscalar transpositions between any transpositions of
the same two chord types are always individually T-related. (b) The minimal voice leading
between C and E major triads can therefore be analyzed as the combination of a one-step
descending scalar transposition with a four-semitone ascending chromatic transposition.
(c) More generally, the minimal (three-voice) voice leading between any major triads can be
depicted as combining chromatic and scalar transposition. As the chromatic transposition
increases, the descending scalar transposition increases as well, so that the two forms of
transposition cancel out.

Scales

four-semitone ascending chromatic transposition (Figure 4.10.1). In fact, we can
produce a similar decomposition of any strongly crossing-free voice leading between
any two major triads. Again, the voice leadings will be efﬁcient when the two transpositions combine to leave each voice roughly where it was: thus in Figure 4.10.1c
the descending scalar transposition increases as the ascending chromatic transposition does.
Figure 4.10.2 uses this idea to organize the efﬁcient voice-leading possibilities
between half-diminished and dominant seventh chords. Here, we represent voice
leadings between half-diminished and dominant sevenths as combining an interscalar transposition (from C half-diminished to C dominant seventh) with a chromatic
transposition to some other dominant seventh. Again, there is an inverse relationship between the two transpositions, so that one counteracts the other. Thus we see
that efﬁcient voice leadings occur when scalar or interscalar transpositions neutralize the
effects of chromatic transpositions.
The upshot is that we can provide a surprising and nontrivial answer to what
might otherwise seem like a hopeless question: what is it that a composer knows,
when she knows all the most efﬁcient voice leadings from one type of chord to
another? For example, what does a composer know when she can easily identify the
most efﬁcient path between any particular half-diminished and dominant seventh
chords? Our answer is: she knows how to combine interscalar and chromatic transpositions. That is, in the particular case of half-diminished and dominant sevenths, she
knows how to combine the four templates in Figure 4.10.2a with the various chromatic transpositions. Thus a seemingly complicated musical skill—knowing all the
most efﬁcient voice leadings between two chord types—reduces to a much simpler
kind of knowledge, knowing how to combine two familiar kinds of transposition.
In the second half of the book, I show how this idea allows us to understand
chromatic music “from the inside,” revealing some of the remarkable ways in which
nineteenth-century composers explored the contrapuntal possibilities available to
them. For now, let me simply offer a few hints about what is to come. Figure 4.10.3
analyzes the ﬁrst four resolutions of the half-diminished seventh chord in the prelude
to Wagner’s Tristan, showing that the ﬁrst two involve interscalar transposition by
zero steps, whereas the last two involve interscalar transposition by ascending step.
Besides helping us understand these relationships, scale theory can prompt us to ask
new questions: for example, we might ﬁnd ourselves wondering whether Wagner uses
the other two interscalar transpositions in his opera, or whether he ever substitutes
one scalar transposition for another. Similarly, Figure 4.10.4 contains a series of progressions that resolve a seventh chord into a triad. Scale theory can show us that the
ﬁrst two voice leadings are closely related, since they map the root of the seventh
chord to the root of the triad, whereas the third maps the root to the ﬁfth.40 Finally,
consider the situation of a composer who wants to identify efﬁcient (three-voice)
voice leadings from major to minor triads. Having absorbed the ideas in this chapter,

40 Here we can conceive of the triad as a four-note scale with one doubled note.

151

152

theory
Figure 4.10.2 (a) The four interscalar transpositions from the C half-diminished
seventh chord to the C dominant seventh. (b) The minimal voice leading between the
C half-diminished and F dominant seventh chords combines the third of these interscalar
transpositions with chromatic transposition upward by ﬁve semitones. (c) The minimal
(four-voice) voice leading between any half-diminished and dominant seventh chords
combines one of these interscalar transpositions with a chromatic transposition. Again, as the
chromatic transposition increases, the descending interscalar transposition increases as well,
so that the two forms of transposition cancel out.

Scales
Figure 4.10.3 The ﬁrst four resolutions of the
half-diminished seventh chord in Wagner’s
Tristan. The ﬁrst two map root to root, while
the second two map root to third.

Figure 4.10.4 Three chromatic voice
leadings. The ﬁrst two map the root of the
ﬁrst chord to the root of the second, and
can be considered interscalar transpositions
from a seventh chord to a triad with
doubled root. The last maps the root of the
ﬁrst chord to the ﬁfth of the second.

the composer will see that there are really just three basic possibilities: once the destination of the root is chosen, the rest of the interscalar transposition is determined.
Each possibility gives rise to a family of voice leadings, all related by individual transposition and hence sharing the same basic voice-leading structure.
The broader moral is that there is indeed a close connection between chord concepts and scale concepts. Fundamentally, a scale is a large chord, and a chord is just a
small scale: both participate in efﬁcient voice leadings, and both can be represented
using the same basic geometries; composers develop musical motifs by transposing
them along familiar chords, as if chords were just very small scales (Figs. 4.3.1b and
4.8.6c); and efﬁcient voice leading frequently involves interscalar transposition or
strongly crossing-free voice leadings. In fact, it even turns out that there is a close
analogy between the idea of decomposing voice leadings into scalar and chromatic
transpositions, and the idea of analyzing them into pure parallel and pure contrary
components. Thus there are signiﬁcant theoretical advantages to adopting a uniﬁed
perspective that treats chords and scales similarly.
Those of you who are interested in pursuing this idea in greater technical detail
should consult Appendix C, while those who are impatient for analysis can instead
turn to Chapters 8 and 9. Everyone else is encouraged to proceed to Chapter 5 in an
orderly fashion.

153

