J Indian Philos (2014) 42:353–375
DOI 10.1007/s10781-013-9191-6

On the Distinction Between Epistemic and
Metaphysical Buddhist Idealisms: A Śaiva Perspective
Isabelle Ratié

Published online: 5 September 2013
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013

Abstract Modern scholarship has often wondered whether Indian Buddhist idealism is primarily epistemic or metaphysical: does this idealism amount to a kind of
transcendental scepticism according to which we cannot decide whether objects
exist or not outside of consciousness because we can have no epistemic access
whatsoever to these objects? Or is it rather ontologically committed, i.e., does it
consist in denying the very existence of the external world? One could deem the
question anachronistic and suspect that with such an inquiry we project onto
Ancient and Medieval India a distinction that remains profoundly alien to it, were it
not for a few preserved texts where Indian authors themselves distinguish between
two such kinds of idealism within the Buddhist philosophical tradition. As already
pointed out by Dan Arnold, this is the case in the commentary by Manorathanandin
on Dharmakı̄rti’s Pramāṇavārttika; but the difference between two varieties of
Buddhist idealism is also alluded to in Hindu sources, both Mı̄māmsaka and Śaiva.
˙
The present article offers a new analysis of Manorathanandin’s short and somewhat
ambiguous distinction, and it examines in this connection some important remarks
found in the works of the Śaiva nondualists Utpaladeva (c. 925–975) and Abhinavagupta (c. 975–1025). It shows that according to these authors, in fact the
epistemic version of the Buddhist argument in favour of idealism is already
metaphysical insofar as it necessarily involves a denial of the existence of the
external world, and it attempts to assess the faithfulness of this Śaiva interpretation
to its Buddhist sources.

Keywords Idealism · Buddhism · Manorathanandin · Utpaladeva ·
Abhinavagupta

I. Ratié (&)
Institut für Indologie und Zentralasienwissenschaften, Leipzig, Germany
e-mail: isabelle.ratie@gmail.com

123

354

I. Ratié

The Buddhist Sākāra-/Nirākāra-vāda Debate and the Distinction Between
Epistemic and Metaphysical Idealisms
Idealism—or rather, some form of idealism—certainly constitutes one of the most
important philosophical stakes in the Buddhist debate between the sākāravādins, i.e.
the “proponents of the thesis that consciousness bears aspects (ākāra)”, who
consider that consciousness becomes aware of the various objects of the world by
taking on their form or appearance, and the nirākāravādins, i.e. the “proponents of
the thesis that consciousness bears no aspect”, who hold that consciousness
apprehends its objects without any change in its intrinsic form.1 For if consciousness
can only apprehend its objects by taking on their form, what we perceive is not an
external reality, but only internal forms of consciousness, and our conviction that
external objects exist around us is bound to fall from the status of an indubitable
intuition to that of a questionable belief.
Admittedly, the Sautrāntikas,2 while conceding that objects of perceptual
consciousness can only be internal aspects taken on by consciousness,3 have
nonetheless claimed that the existence of an external reality can be inferred as the
cause of phenomenal variety; but as shown by Dharmakı̄rti, such a relation of cause
and effect between imperceptible external objects and the objects of which we are
aware cannot be established, for the simple reason that relations of cause and effect
can only be determined on the basis of previous perceptions of both the cause and
the effect—but we can never perceive an external object by nature inaccessible to
consciousness. The aim of the famous Dharmakı̄rtian sahopalambhaniyama
argument (or the argument of “the necessity [for the object] to be perceived along
with [cognition]”)4 therefore seems to be, rather than an attempt at demonstrating
the nonexistence of the external object, a mere endeavour to show that there can be
no epistemic access whatsoever (i.e. neither perceptual nor inferential) to any
external entity, since this external entity cannot even be determined to be the cause
of the various aspects taken on by consciousness.5
But what exactly is the goal of Dharmakı̄rti and of the Buddhist authors
belonging to Dharmakı̄rti’s tradition when they set out to show that the only objects
grasped by consciousness are internal aspects of consciousness? What does the
demonstration that there can be no epistemic access to external objects entail for
them? Is their aim simply to establish some sort of transcendental scepticism by
pointing out that we have no way of asserting or denying the existence of external

1

On this debate see e.g. Kajiyama (1965), Mimaki (1976, pp. 38–40, 71–78 and en. 329), Dhammajoti
(2007) and Moriyama (2008).

2

On my use of this term see Ratié (2010a, fn. 16, p. 442).

3

On the fact that Sautrāntikas are presented as sākāravādins in Buddhist as well as non-Buddhist
literature see e.g. Hattori (1968, p. 98) and Mimaki (1976, p. 37 and en. 142).
4

The argument is formulated in PVin, Pratyakṣapariccheda 54ab (see below, fn. 38).

5

This is at least how many non-Buddhist sources have interpreted the sahopalambhaniyama argument
(see e.g. Ratié 2010a, fn. 23, pp. 444–445; 2011b, pp. 484–486). For a similar conclusion drawn from
Buddhist sources see e.g. Matsumoto (1980). On post-Dharmakı̄rtian Buddhist debates over the meaning
and import of this argument, see Iwata (1991).

123

Epistemic and Metaphysical Buddhist Idealisms

355

objects? Or do they aspire to establish a stronger statement thanks to this
demonstration—namely, that external objects simply do not exist?
This distinction between an ontologically committed or “metaphysical” idealism
(one that asserts that nothing exists apart from consciousness) and a purely
epistemic kind of idealism (one that merely states that we can have no epistemic
access whatsoever to any external reality, regardless of its existence or nonexistence) is at the heart of several recent debates in the field of Buddhist studies, and
modern scholars have been engaged in (sometimes heated) discussions as to
whether Vasubandhu, Dignāga or Dharmakı̄rti for instance propounded an epistemic
or a metaphysical variety of idealism. In the cases of Vasubandhu6 and Dignāga,7
one cannot help but suspect with Lambert Schmithausen that the modern attempts to
present these authors as mere phenomenologists completely unconcerned with the
ontological status of external reality are to some extent driven by a contemporary
fashion and often remain blind to what the texts themselves have to say.8 The case
of Dharmakı̄rti is more delicate, however—thus Matthew Kapstein considers that
Dharmakı̄rti found the old mereological arguments of Vasubandhu to be “at best a
supplement to profounder epistemological arguments for idealism”,9 but he does not
specify in what way the former are deemed at best supplementary, and the latter,
profounder (nor if the epistemological arguments for idealism are ontologically
committed for Dharmakı̄rti). On the other hand, the now famous interpretation of
Dharmakı̄rti’s works by George Dreyfus and John Dunne as involving a “sliding
scale of analysis”10 tends to present the Dharmakı̄rtian epistemological arguments
in favour of idealism as some sort of preliminary stage leading to an ultimate (and
ontologically committed) idealistic argument. Thus according to George Dreyfus,
the demonstration that objects of consciousness are mere internal forms of
consciousness only shows the “plausibility” of the Yogācāra view that
6
Thus according to Oetke (1992), while the author of the Viṃśikā was probably unaware of the
distinction between the two types of argument (see below, fn. 16), the treatise only establishes a kind of
epistemic idealism; and Lusthaus (2002) argues that Vasubandhu’s goal was solely to establish some kind
of epistemic or phenomenological idealism without committing as to the ontological status of the external
object. Schmithausen (2005) offers a convincing response to Lusthaus (2002) and concludes (pp. 51 ff) to
an ontological denial of external reality in the Yogācāra tradition based on the Viṃśikā and Triṃśikā (see
also Mayer 2009).
7

As regards the nature of Dignāga’s idealism (at least according to Jinendrabuddhi), see e.g. Chu (2006,
p. 227), which presents it as ontologically uncommitted and considers that Jinendrabuddhi uses the term
antarjñeyavāda “only in an epistemological sense”; I am not convinced, however, that this is the case (see
Ratié 2011a, pp. 307–308, fn. 3).

8

See Schmithausen (2005, p. 49): “The result of my investigation […] may not be welcomed by the
critics of the traditional interpretation of Yogācāra thought. But I have to admit my amazement at the
emotional vehemence of their criticism. Is it merely because Yogācāra thought as traditionally understood
seems so counter-intuitive to modern Western common-sense that some scholars think they must ‘defend’
the Yogācāras against such an understanding? But isn’t this the same mode of procedure that scholars
who worked when idealism was the dominant strand in Western philosophy are criticized for, viz. reading
the presuppositions of one’s own time and milieu into the old texts?”
9

Kapstein (2001, p. 196) (according to en. 20, p. 203, this judgement is based on a reading of PV,
Pratyakṣapariccheda 360).

10

See Dreyfus (1997) and Dunne (2004). On this “sliding scale of analysis” in the works of Śāntaraksita
˙
and Kamalaśı̄la, see McClintock (2003, pp. 139–142; 2010, pp. 85–91).

123

356

I. Ratié

consciousness does not need external objects to perceive, whereas the “denial of the
reality of external objects” comes as the only solution to another problem, namely
“the dilemma created by an impression of a solid extended object produced by
atoms, which do not have extension by themselves”.11 Similarly, according to John
Dunne, the ultimate level of analysis of Dharmakı̄rti’s works involves not only the
idea that there can be no epistemic access to external objects but also the denial of
their existence, and it is “the inability to specify whether the image in perception is
singular or multiple that is the primary argument against the existence of extramental objects”.12 Dan Arnold’s interpretation, although it involves a somewhat
different understanding of the expression “epistemic idealism” used by John
Dunne,13 conforms on the whole to the latter’s understanding of Dharmakı̄rti’s
idealism insofar as Arnold contends that Dharmakı̄rti’s epistemic arguments for
idealism (those that rest on the analysis of ākāras and on the sahopalambhaniyama)
are only aimed at showing that the Sautrāntikas basically share the same
epistemological principles with the Vijñānavādins. These epistemic arguments
should therefore be considered as mere prolegomena to another, metaphysical type
of idealistic argument, the paradigm of which would be found in Vasubandhu’s
mereological criticism of external objects, and which supposedly constitutes (at
least in Manorathanandin’s eyes) the crucial step establishing the nonexistence of
external objects.14 However, the contention that this Dharmakı̄rtian sliding scale of
analysis necessarily culminates in an ontologically committed form of idealism (as
well as the very legitimacy of the “sliding scale” metaphor) has been challenged,
and Birgit Kellner has recently pointed out that the arguments presented by John
Dunne as involving an ontological denial of external reality are purely epistemic in
content.15
But however interesting these contemporary debates are, they often remain silent
on one crucial issue: were the Buddhist philosophers themselves aware of this
distinction between the epistemic and metaphysical varieties of idealism that we
keep applying to their works16—and if so, how exactly did they understand it? In
this respect, Arnold’s contribution to this discussion is of particular interest insofar
as it points out that at least some Buddhist thinkers seem to have been aware of this
crucial difference between two kinds of idealism. There is, however, another source
worthy of being considered in this regard: the same distinction is found in the works
of non-Buddhist authors who were heavily influenced by Dharmakı̄rti’s tradition,
11

Dreyfus (1997, p. 103).

12

Dunne (2004, p. 63).

13

See Arnold (2008, p. 6, fn. 8).

14

See Arnold (2008).

15

See Kellner (2011).

16

Some modern scholars have openly expressed their doubts in this regard; see e.g. Oetke (1992, p. 222),
which considers that “it might be more realistic to assume” that the author of the Viṃśikā was not “fully
aware of the difference” between the two kinds of arguments, and adds that he might have confused the
two issues to the point that he considered epistemic arguments as capable of proving a metaphysical type
of idealism (see ibid.: “it is even conceivable that the writer of the treatise would have been prone to
regard the proof regarding our experiences as an adequate means for establishing the thesis that no world
of mind-independent things exists at all”).

123

Epistemic and Metaphysical Buddhist Idealisms

357

and the following pages are an attempt to examine how two Śaiva philosophers,
Utpaladeva (c. 925–975) and Abhinavagupta (c. 975–1025), have distinguished and
understood two kinds of Buddhist idealism that we might call respectively
“epistemic” and “metaphysical”.
Utpaladeva’s Pratyabhijñā System, or the Śaiva Art of Recycling
Buddhist Ideas
But why choose some non-Buddhist sources to try and understand a Buddhist
distinction? The most obvious answer to this question is that very few preserved
Buddhist texts written in India explicitly mention it—in fact Arnold only adduces
one short passage in Manorathanandin’s commentary of Dharmakı̄rti’s
Pramāṇavārttika (PV) in favour of his twofold interpretation of Buddhism idealism.
And indeed, this passage is crucial; but as can be seen below, it is far from being
unambiguous. On the other hand, Śaiva texts from the tenth and eleventh centuries
constitute an important source for our knowledge of Buddhist philosophy
(particularly that of Dharmakı̄rti’s tradition), because while fighting with the
Buddhist rivals with whom they were competing in the kingdom of Kashmir, these
authors acquired a precise and extensive knowledge of their adversaries’ conceptual
weapons, and they also borrowed many Buddhist ideas so as to suit their own
metaphysical principles.17 Of course, this integration of Buddhist elements into a
nondualistic Śaiva metaphysical background did not go without some profound
changes in the original meaning of Buddhist concepts: according to Utpaladeva’s
“Pratyabhijñā” (“Recognition”) system, the individual can only obtain liberation by
recognizing himself as Śiva, understood as a single, all-encompassing consciousness
playfully manifesting the universe by merely taking on countless aspects or
appearances (ākāra, ābhāsa). The Śaiva nondualistic system is therefore an
idealism, but one that accepts the existence of a single, enduring subject—which is
of course perfectly contradictory with the Buddhist theory of selflessness
(nairātmyavāda), so that the nondualist Śaivas often radically transformed the
purport of the Buddhist notions that they had borrowed. Nonetheless, the works of
Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta remain an extremely precious source for our
knowledge of Indian Buddhism, not only because they often give quotations of
Buddhist works (including some that have not been preserved in their original
Sanskrit),18 but also because while transforming the meaning of the Buddhist
notions that they integrate to their system, they remain aware of their original aim,
and because they themselves often (although alas not always) insist on the distance
between their own interpretation and the Buddhist position.

17

See Torella (1992).

18

See e.g. the first Sanskrit verse of Dharmakı̄rti’s Santānāntarasiddhi, quoted by Abhinavagupta in
ĪPVV, vol. II, p. 110 (see Ratié 2007, p. 323, fn. 20; 2011a, p. 591), or the many fragments of
Śaṅkaranandana’s works quoted in the same text (see Bühnemann 1980).

123

358

I. Ratié

Manorathanandin’s Distinction Between Two Kinds of Arguments
in Favour of Idealism
The PVV passage which, as pointed out by Arnold, formulates a distinction between
epistemic and metaphysical idealisms occurs as Manorathanandin is explaining
why, according to Dharmakı̄rti, the fact that we only perceive objects that are
internal aspects of consciousness shows that the cause of phenomenal variety cannot
be found in any external reality but only within an internal mechanism of latent
traces or imprints (vāsanā) left by previous experiences.19 Manorathanandin has just
explained that this is the case because we can experience the causal efficacy of
latent traces (in dreams for instance) whereas we cannot determine any causal
relationship between the external objects and ākāras, since external objects remain
forever imperceptible.20 To this a Sautrāntika opponent replies that Dharmakı̄rti has
only shown that there is no sādhaka, no argument proving the existence of the
external object; but he has not proved that the external object does not exist—he has
not presented any bādhaka, any argument refuting its existence:
If [the Sautrāntika opponent] were to [object:] “No: even so, [i.e.] even if there
is no argument proving (sādhaka) [the existence of] an imperceptible external
[object, nonetheless, you] have not demonstrated the nonexistence (abhāva)
[of this external object]”, [we would answer the following.] Because [we]
demonstrate [our] opinion through this only and nothing else (tāvataiva):
19
PV, Pratyakṣapariccheda 334–336: yadi buddhis tadākārā sāsty ākāraviśeṣiṇī / sā bāhyād anyato veti
vicāram idam arhati // darśanopādhirahitasyāgrahāt tadgrahe grahāt / darśanaṃ nīlanirbhāsaṃ nārtho
bāhyo’sti kevalaḥ** // kasyacit kiṃcid evāntarvāsanāyāḥ prabodhakam / tato dhiyāṃ viniyamo na
bāhyārthavyapekṣayā // [*ākāraviśeṣiṇī PVS: ākāraniveśinī PVM. ** kevalaḥ PVM: kevalam PVS] “If the
cognition has the aspect of the [object], it is particularized by this aspect. [Now,] this deserves
examination: is it [thus particularized] because of an external [entity,] or because of [something] else?
Because there is no apprehension of an [object that would be] devoid of the particularity that is
perception, and because there is an apprehension [of an object] when there is an apprehension of its
[perception, one must conclude that] it is perception that bears the aspect ‘blue’; there is no external
object that would be independent [of cognition]. It is only a certain [cognition] that awakens an imprint of
a certain [earlier cognition] inside [the cognitive series]; there is a restriction of cognitions [to their
particular respective objects] thanks to this, and not with respect to any external object.” On this passage
see Vetter (1964, pp. 80–81) and Taber (2010, p. 291). As regards PVS, note should be made that the PV
stanzas were not contained in the manuscript used by Rāhula Sāṅkrtyāyana for his edition of the PVV,
˚ PV while taking into consideration
and that he inserted them on the basis of his own earlier edition of the
Manorathanandin’s commentary (on the available sources regarding the text of Dharmakı̄rti’s PV see
Kellner (2010)). Birgit Kellner was kind enough to let me know (personal communication; see Kellner
(2010) for the sigla used in the following) that the reading ākāraviśeṣiṇī is confirmed by Devendrabuddhi
and Ravigupta (Tib. khyad par can), MA, PVZh and PrB, while PrA′ reads ākāraniveśinī, and PVt has rjes
zhugs can (which might translate something like –ānuvartinī/-ānugāminī?). As for the reading kevalaṃ,
although Manorathanandin’s commentary supports it, all the other extant sources (PrA′, PrB) have kevalaḥ
(the Tibetan translations, which have yan gar, are inconclusive here).
20

PVV, p. 220: ko hi viśeṣo bāhyo vā niyāmakaḥ pratibhāsasya prabuddhavāsanāviśeṣaḥ samanantarapratyayo vā. tatra vāsanāyāḥ sāmarthyaṃ svapnādāv upalabdhaṃ na tu bāhyasya,
nityaparokṣatvāt. “For what is it that determines the appearance [of cognition]: a particular external
[entity], or rather, a particular imprint (vāsanā) that has [just] been awakened [and functions as a]
condition as an immediate and similar antecedent (samanantarapratyaya)? Among these two [candidates,
we] see that the imprint has this capacity in a dream for instance, but [we do] not [see] that an external
[entity may have this capacity,] since it is forever imperceptible.”

123

Epistemic and Metaphysical Buddhist Idealisms

359

“cognition is manifest, whereas an external [entity] is not manifest at all”,21
we have not taken the trouble of refuting the external object which behaves
like a demon (piśācāyamāna) [and] which is devoid of any argument proving
[its existence] (sādhaka).22 Nonetheless, if the [opponent’s] obstinacy
(nirbandha) in [demanding] the refutation of this [external object] is very
heavy, one must make [him] examine the master’s refutation of atoms
according to whether one supposes that [the external object] has parts or not.23
My understanding of this passage is quite different from Arnold’s, but what
matters for our current inquiry is that according to Manorathanandin, once one has
proved that there is no positive argument (sādhaka) in favour of the external object
because the external object is absolutely unmanifest, there is no more need to
demonstrate that it does not exist, or one does not have to take the trouble of such a
refutation. If, nonetheless, the opponent heavily insists on getting such a refutation,
he should be led to examine Vasubandhu’s mereological arguments. Arnold points
out that the passage clearly distinguishes between epistemic and metaphysical
proofs,24 and he considers that according to Manorathanandin at least, the second
set of arguments only (i.e., the set of “metaphysical”, mereological arguments
propounded by Vasubandhu) is decisive as regards the very existence of the external
object, whereas the first point only shows that we can have no epistemic access
whatsoever to the object, without telling us anything regarding the actual existence
of the object.25
21
Here my understanding of the passage differs from Arnold’s (see Arnold (2008, p. 16): “A cognition is
appearing; but it does not appear as external”).
22

Here too, my understanding of the passage differs from Arnold’s (see ibid.: “Our effort (which is
dedicated to negating a fiendish external object which is without a pramāṇa that is probative of the
desired conclusion) is only to that extent”), not only as regards the general structure of the sentence (this
difference is in part due to my conjecture -niṣedhe nāsmākam ādaraḥ, as I do not see how the Sanskrit
sentence can be construed otherwise), but also as regards the meaning of the word piśācāyamāna, which
Arnold translates as “fiendish” and regards as “an unusual rhetorical flourish for Manorathanandin” (ibid.,
fn. 39): it seems to me that here Manorathanandin is simply alluding to the classical example of an entity
by nature imperceptible, i.e., a demon (piśāca), and that he is making the point that the external object
behaves like/is similar to a piśāca (piśācāyamāna being the middle present participle of a denominative
verb formed on piśāca) insofar as it is imperceptible.
23

PVV ad PV, Pratyakṣapariccheda 336, p. 220: na, tathāpi parokṣasya bāhyasya sādhakasyābhāve’pi
nābhāvasthitir iti cet, pratibhāsamānaṃ jñānaṃ bāhyaṃ tu na pratibhāsata eveti tāvataivābhimatasiddheḥ, sādhakapramāṇarahitapiśācāyamānabahirarthaniṣedhe nāsmākam* ādaraḥ. yadi tu tanniṣedhanirbandho garīyān sāṃśatvānaṃśatvakalpanayā paramāṇupratiṣedha** ācāryīyaḥ paryeṣitavyaḥ. [*-niṣedhe
nāsmākam conj.: -niṣedhenāsmākam Ed. **paramāṇupratiṣedha corr.: paramāṇupratiṣedhe Ed.]
24
See Arnold (2008, p. 16): “This revealing exchange is remarkable for its expression of a point that is
too often missed in discussions of Yogācāra: the difference between epistemic arguments for idealism
(arguments based on the claim that all we immediately know is things that are themselves mental), and
metaphysical arguments for the claim that only mental things exist.”
25

See ibid.: “Dharmakı̄rti’s Yogācāra […] emphasizes that all he claims to have shown […] is that
whatever the content of a cognition seems to be, its seeming so is not itself external […]. Cognition’s
seeming some way, however, is all that is ever really known for sure. If one wanted, additionally, to argue
that only such ‘seemings’ themselves exist—if, as Manorathanandin here puts it, one’s intention to refute
external objects was ‘weightier’—it would be necessary to advert to a fundamentally different kind of
argument. It would, in particular, be necessary to offer a metaphysical argument of the kind
paradigmatically examplified by the Viṃśatikā of Vasubandhu […].”

123

360

I. Ratié

But is Manorathanandin’s intention only to point out that there are two steps in the
demonstration of idealism, and that here Dharmakı̄rti’s reasoning only goes halfway
so to speak, i.e., that Dharmakı̄rti contents himself with an argument that can only lead
to some sort of scepticism regarding the external object, whereas other arguments such
as Vasubandhu’s constitute one possible further step insofar as they clearly deny the
existence of the external object?26 One wonders whether here, Manorathanandin is not
rather explaining that the ontological question regarding the external object becomes
simply irrelevant as soon as the epistemic argument is formulated: since the argument
just put forward by Dharmakı̄rti demonstrates that there is strictly no way of proving
the existence of the object, refuting its existence becomes pointless. In support of this
understanding of the passage, one might adduce Manorathanandin’s allusion to the
demon (piśāca):27 mentions of such imperceptible entities are recurrent in
Dharmakı̄rtian and post-Dharmakı̄rtian discussions on the anupalabdhi theory, as
an example of entity whose existence cannot be ascertained or denied due to its
imperceptibility.28 Manorathanandin’s comparison of the external object with a piśāca
thus seems to imply that the endeavour to prove or refute the existence of the external
object is as hopeless as an attempt to determine whether a particular place is occupied
by some imperceptible demon; and his adding that there is no sādhaka whatsoever in
favour of the external object also seems to emphasize that there is nothing to be gained,
from a philosophical point of view, from an ontological inquiry regarding an entity that
cannot be determined to exist anyway.
Besides, Manorathanandin explains that the second set of arguments should be
used in case the interlocutor has a heavier/very heavy nirbandha for the refutation of
the external object. Arnold understands the term nirbandha as some sort of neutral
“desire”, but the word rather denotes an obstinacy, a stubborn insistence, and
Manorathanandin might rather mean that if one is faced with a particularly stubborn
opponent who goes on demanding a refutation of the external object in spite of what
has already been shown (i.e., that seeking proofs of the external object is useless
since anyway this external object is completely out of reach), then one may have
recourse to Vasubandhu’s argument.
So to sum up, Manorathanandin clearly distinguishes two kinds of arguments for
idealism, the first of which can be termed “epistemic” inasmuch as it shows that
there is no way to prove the existence of an object by nature imperceptible, whereas
the second rests on a mereological analysis of the type put forward in Vasubandhu’s
Viṃśikā.29 However, I am not entirely sure whether Arnold is right in considering
26

According to Arnold, this is the case because Dharmakı̄rti is only concerned with showing that the
Sautrāntikas’ epistemology is in fact the same as that of the Vijñānavādins. See Arnold (2008, p. 17):
“Dharmakı̄rti does not claim to have shown that only mental events can exist—only that, whatever the
case in that regard, we are only immediately aware of mental events. But Dharmakı̄rti can […] here
readily allow that this is all he has shown, since that already gets him all he needs epistemologically.
Insofar, that is, as Dharmakı̄rti’s concerns are only epistemological […] there is nothing to be added to the
‘Sautrāntika’ case in order for Dharmakı̄rti’s to be the epistemology of a finally idealist position.”

27

See above, fn. 22.

28

See e.g. Kellner (1997, p. 105).

29

On the high probability that the original title of Vasubandhu’s text was not (contrary to Sylvain Lévi’s
assumption) Viṃśatikā but Viṃśikā, see Kano (2008, p. 345).

123

Epistemic and Metaphysical Buddhist Idealisms

361

that here Manorathanandin asserts that only Vasubandhu’s arguments are decisive
for metaphysical idealism, or that they constitute one further step in the
demonstration of idealism. It seems to me that Manorathanandin might very well
contend the epistemic argument to be of much more importance than the
“metaphysical” arguments insofar as it puts into question the very relevance of
such arguments. Or to put it in a simpler way: according to Manorathanandin, rather
than being ontologically neutral, the epistemic argument neutralizes all ontological
questions: it does not merely state that external objects can exist or not, it shows that
wondering whether the external objects exist or not is pointless.
It should be noted, however, that such an interpretation does not necessarily
mean that the epistemic argument put forward by Dharmakı̄rti leads to a mere
scepticism regarding the ontological status of the external object. Thus as Kellner
has pointed out,30 in Dharmakı̄rti’s anupalabdhi theory, the existence of objects that
are not perceived remains doubtful only insofar as these objects, although they are
sometimes perceived, are not necessarily and immediately perceived when they do
exist: we cannot ascertain the fact that there is no piśāca here and now from the
mere fact that we do not perceive it, because piśācas are supposed to be
imperceptible for human beings, but as Kellner puts it, “a piśāca can be perceived
by another piśāca”, as well as by a yogin.31 In other words, whereas the piśāca is not
absolutely imperceptible, but only imperceptible for some subjects in some
circumstances, the sahopalambhaniyama argument shows that the external object is
never perceptible in any circumstance (na pratibhāsata eva, says Manorathanandin).
And this might make quite a difference: we can entertain doubts regarding the
existence of an entity that is imperceptible to us and in some given circumstances,
but is this attitude still an option when it comes to an entity that is by nature
absolutely and always unmanifest? And particularly in Dharmakı̄rti’s system, which
grants so much importance to the notion of causal efficacy (arthakriyā) and which,
in fact, simply equates it with reality, what kind of reality could a completely
unmanifest object still be credited with if it is incapable of the minimal efficacy
consisting in causing some kind of perception of itself? From this point of view,
Manorathanandin’s formulation of the distinction between the two kinds of
arguments might seem slightly ambiguous: when he states that Dharmakı̄rti has not
taken the trouble of refuting the external object because he demonstrates his opinion
merely by showing that the external object is absolutely unmanifest, we can
understand that Dharmakı̄rti rejects (here at least) an ontologically committed form
of idealism in the name of an epistemic idealism that eliminates the question of the
ontological status of the object as a purely irrelevant matter, but we could also
interpret the sentence as meaning that the epistemic argument, inasmuch as it shows
the absolute imperceptibility of the object, is in fact already ontologically
committed (and therefore renders any further refutation redundant), the implicit
reason for this being that an absolutely imperceptible object can only be
nonexistent. And whether this ambiguity was intended or not by Manorathanandin,

30

See Kellner (1999).

31

Kellner (1999, p. 196) (see also ibid., fn. 5, p. 195).

123

362

I. Ratié

interestingly enough, the Śaivas (who were aware of a similar distinction between
two kinds of Buddhist idealism) seem to have exploited such an ambiguity.
The Śaivas’ Interpretation of this Distinction: The Epistemic Argument
as the Argument Par Excellence for Metaphysical Idealism
Thus Abhinavagupta too distinguishes two kinds of idealistic arguments—one based
on the absence of manifestation of the external object, and one based on the
absurdity of the very nature of the external object. In the ĪPV, he explains:
And as regards this [external object,] there is no argument proving [its
existence] (sādhaka), and the main (mukhya) argument refuting [its existence]
(bādhaka) amounts to this only: the absence of [its] manifestation (prakāśana)
even as an object of inference if [this object] is distinct from the manifesting
consciousness (prakāśa). As for the additional arguments refuting [the
existence of the external object] (abhyuccayabādhaka), they are: the
impossibility of the existence of a whole (avayavin); the fact that the
inherence (samavāya) [of the whole in its parts] is not established; the fact that
the [external object must] possess some contradictory properties, such as
movement and the absence of movement, being covered and being uncovered,
being colored and being colourless, a difference between parts according to
[the six] directions (digbhāgabheda), etc.32
The “additional” arguments to which Abhinavagupta is alluding here are
obviously taken from Buddhist sources, as is confirmed by Abhinavagupta’s own
ĪPVV, which mentions that Utpaladeva attributed them to some “Vijñānavādins” in
his lost Vivr̥ ti on the passage, and which explicitly refers to Vasubandhu’s
Vijñaptimātratāsiddhiḥ, Dignāga’s Ālambanaparīkṣā and Śaṅkaranandana’s Prajñālaṃkāra (the latter probably contained a synthesis of the two former texts, as well
as of PV, Pramāṇasiddhipariccheda 86–87).33 Examining these arguments in detail
is beyond the scope of this paper,34 but what matters here is that they are all devoted
to showing that however we may try to understand the nature of the external object
(i.e. as endowed with parts or not), we cannot give any satisfactory account of it
from a rational point of view—in other words, these bādhakas are more or less
refined versions of Vasubandhu’s mereological arguments.
As for the first kind of argument mentioned by Abhinavagupta, namely, the
absence of manifestation (prakāśana) of the external object, it is ascribed by the
Śaivas themselves to Dharmakı̄rti. Thus Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta side with
32
ĪPV, vol. I, p. 178: …yatra sādhakaṃ ca nāsti pramāṇaṃ bādhakaṃ ca prakāśād bhede’numeyatayāpi
prakāśanābhāva iti tāvan mukhyam. abhyuccayabādhakās tv avayavino vr̥ ttyanupapattiḥ samavāyāsiddhiḥ kampākampāvaraṇānāvaraṇaraktāraktadigbhāgabhedādiviruddhadharmayogaḥ…
33

See ĪPVV, vol. II, p. 144 (see also ĪPV, vol. I, p. 181 for another allusion to Śaṅkaranandana), quoted
and translated in Ratié (2010a, pp. 446–447). See also Krasser (2001, p. 503) and Eltschinger (2010,
p. 108) on this passage.
34

On the content of these arguments see Ratié (2010a, pp. 447–452), and for a more comprehensive
account, Ratié (2011a, pp. 390–403).

123

Epistemic and Metaphysical Buddhist Idealisms

363

Dharmakı̄rti in the sākāra/nirākāra debate: they too argue that if consciousness
remained a perfectly undifferentiated manifesting entity (prakāśamātra), it simply
could not manifest the differences between its various objects, so that there could be
no such thing as an awareness of phenomenal variety;35 Abhinavagupta specifies
that the argument belongs to Dharmakı̄rti.36 The Śaiva nondualists also refute the
Sautrāntika’s contention that the external objects must be inferred as the cause of
the various ākāras that consciousness takes on by having recourse to the
Dharmakı̄rtian sahopalambhaniyama. According to the Śaiva interpretation of this
argument, the very fact that we cannot experience the object without its cognition
means that we cannot infer the existence of an object external to consciousness as
the cause of the various aspects taken on by consciousness, because a causal
relationship presupposes the invariable co-presence (anvaya) and co-absence
(vyatireka) of the two related entities; but in the case at hand, we cannot ascertain
that whenever there is an external object, there is a cognition bearing a particular
objective aspect, and that whenever there is no external object, there is no such
cognition, because we cannot experience these two entities separately.37 And here
too, Abhinavagupta specifies that the Śaiva position is simply that of Dharmakı̄rti:38
even though the Śaivas claim that their argument ultimately surpasses Dharmakı̄rti’s
inasmuch as it involves the very impossibility of even conceptualizing the external
object (since according to the Śaiva nondualists, even concepts involve some kind
of immediate manifestation of their object),39 they repeatedly acknowledge their
35

See Ratié (2010a, pp. 439–445).

ĪPVV, vol. II, p. 79: tataś ca sākāratākr̥ ta eva niyamaḥ. yathāha: tatrānubhavamātreṇa jñānasya
sadr̥ śātmanaḥ / bhāvyaṃ tenātmanā yena pratikarma vibhajyate // iti; tasmān nīlākāro’pr̥ thagbhūto
bodhāt. “And as a consequence, the restriction (niyama) [of a cognition to a particular object which is
distinct from the other objects] must be due to the fact that [the cognition] takes on the aspect [of this
object] (sākāratā). As [Dharmakı̄rti] has said: ‘Because [otherwise], the nature of cognition would remain
the same with respect to any [object], since it would be a pure [undifferentiated] experience
(anubhavamātra), it must be [cognition] itself thanks to which [the cognition] is differentiated according
to each object.’ Therefore the aspect (ākāra) ‘blue’ is not distinct from the cognition (bodha).” The
quotation is borrowed from PV, Pratyakṣapariccheda, 302. Cf. PVV: anyathānubhavamātratayā sarvatra
viṣaye sadr̥ śaṃ jñānaṃ prativiṣayaṃ kathaṃ bhedena vyavasthāpayituṃ śakyeta? “If it were not the case,
the cognition would be similar with respect to any object, because it would consist of nothing but
[undifferentiated] experience, [so] how could it be made to be different according to each object?”
36

37

See Ratié (2011b, pp. 484–486).

38

ĪPVV, vol. II, p. 78: etad dhi sahopalambhaniyamād abhedo nīlataddhiyor iti vijñānākāramātraṃ
nīlādi prasādhayituṃ nirūpitam. “For all of this has been explained [by Utpaladeva] in order to make it
clear that [the various objects] such as blue are nothing but aspects (ākāra) of consciousness, according to
[the principle stated by Dharmakı̄rti]: ‘Because of the necessity [for blue and the cognition of blue] to be
perceived together (sahopalambhaniyama), there is no difference between blue and the cognition of
blue’.” The quotation is borrowed from PVin, Pratyakṣapariccheda 54ab.
39
See Ratié (2011b, pp. 493–499): admittedly, the Sautrāntika talks about an external object, so he does
form some kind of concept of it. And he forms it by relying on the notion of externality (bāhyatā/
bāhyatva), which he draws from ordinary experience (we can all see that a pot can be external to a house,
that a house can be external to a village, etc.). However, Utpaladeva points out that the Sautrāntika can
talk about an external object only thanks to the ambiguity of the word “externality”: when we talk about
the externality of the pot with respect to the house, by “externality” we only mean a spatial relationship of
proximity; but consciousness, which is not spatially determined, cannot stand in a relationship of
proximity with anything else. So in fact when the Sautrāntika talks about an external object, he can only
mean an object that is perfectly alien to the very nature of consciousness—and such an object is precisely

123

364

I. Ratié

debt towards the great Buddhist philosopher as regards the argument of the external
object being absolutely unmanifest.
Now, Abhinavagupta’s distinction of the two kinds of arguments is remarkable in
several respects.
First of all, his distinction is quite similar to Manorathanandin’s insofar as
Abhinavagupta too distinguishes an argument merely based on the absence of
manifestation of the external object (which he ascribes to Dharmakı̄rti, even though
he considers that Utpaladeva has come up with a fuller version of it) from arguments
based on the impossibility of accounting for the nature (whether endowed with parts
or not) of this object—and Abhinavagupta too mentions Vasubandhu as a source of
this latter type of argument.
Second, Abhinavagupta notes, just as Manorathanandin, that there is no proving
argument (sādhaka) regarding the external object; but—and this is a crucial
point—he immediately adds that the very fact that the external object is absolutely
unmanifest actually constitutes an argument against its existence: according to
Abhinavagupta, the fact that the external object is absolutely unmanifest means not
only that it is “not proven by any means of knowledge” (niṣpramāṇaka) but also that
it is “rejected thanks to a means of knowledge refuting [its existence]”
(bādhakapramāṇanirasta).40 Thus for the Śaivas, the epistemic argument is not
confined to a demonstration that there is no argument proving the existence of the
external object; or rather, the very demonstration that there is no sādhaka
whatsoever in favour of the external object constitutes a bādhaka, an argument
refuting its existence.
Third, Abhinavagupta does not seem to believe that the arguments based on the
nature of the object (the “metaphysical” arguments according to Arnold’s
Footnote 39 continued
something that we are incapable of conceptualizing, because as soon as we try to think about it, we are
already transforming it into an object of consciousness. The principle on which this argument rests is that
consciousness remains a manifesting entity (prakāśa) whether it is perceptual or conceptual, so that in our
concepts as well as in our perceptions, the object of consciousness must be somehow manifest: according
to Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta, even concepts must somehow involve some kind of aspect (ākāra) of
their object that consists in a variety of manifestation (ābhāsa), but there can be no such aspect of that
which is by nature absolutely unmanifest, so that the external object cannot be conceptualized anymore
than it can be perceived. The Śaivas themselves emphasize their disagreement in this regard with the
Dharmakı̄rtian epistemologists: see e.g. ĪPV, vol. I, pp. 190–191 (translated in Ratié 2011b, pp. 496–497),
where Abhinavagupta alludes to “those who consider that no real entity (vastu) is manifest in a concept”
(ye vikalpe vastu nābhātīti manyante) and adds that “as for us, we have [already] demonstrated that even
determination (adhyavasāya) has an object that is being manifest” (asmābhis tūpapāditam adhyavasāyasyāpy ābhāsamānaviṣayatvam). He alludes to ĪPK 1.3.5 (on which see Ratié 2011a, pp. 139–142,
and Kawajiri 2011) before explaining that an object devoid of manifestation cannot be conceptualized at
all, whereas a conceptualized object cannot be, by definition, an object external to the manifesting
consciousness.
40
See ĪPVV, vol. II, p. 130: iti teṣu samāpte vyavahāre ’nyena prakāśātiriktena tata evāprakāśatvān
niṣpramāṇakena bādhakapramāṇanirastena ca bāhyārthavargeṇa kim adhikenānviṣṭena. “Since mundane
practice is entirely accounted for if these [manifestations alone exist], what is the point of all these
external objects that [you] are looking for [as something existing] over and above [phenomena, whereas
these external objects are] other [than the manifesting consciousness, i.e.] distinct from the manifesting
consciousness? Since for this very reason [they] do not consist in the manifesting consciousness
(aprakāśatva), they are both not proven by any means of knowledge and rejected thanks to a means of
knowledge refuting [their existence].”

123

Epistemic and Metaphysical Buddhist Idealisms

365

distinction) are more decisive as regards the refutation of the external object’s
existence than the first type of argument. On the contrary, according to him, the first
type of argument is the “main” or “fundamental” (mukhya) argument against the
external objects, while the others are merely “additional” (abhyuccaya). Abhinavagupta further explains the distinction between the two kinds of arguments by
saying that the “additional” ones target this or that specific property of the external
object (such as having parts), whereas the “main” one, which rests on the mere fact
that the external object is absolutely unmanifest, functions through some kind of
global refutation, or more literally, by “entirely devouring” (sarvagrāsa) the
external object (just as Śiva’s terrible form, Bhairava, devours the universe, or just
as a total eclipse makes the sun disappear):
And [Utpaladeva explains in his Vivr̥ ti that against the thesis of the existence of
the external object,] there is not only this [aforementioned] refuting argument
(bādhaka) which functions through the means of knowledge (pramāṇa) [lacking
in the case of the external object]; [there is] also [a refuting argument which
functions] “through itself”, that is to say, through the [external object’s] own
[nature], [or more precisely,] through the awareness arising from the examination of the [very] nature of the object of knowledge. In other words, the very
nature of the object of knowledge eradicates the external [object] insofar as it
makes obvious that [this object can]not exist. For the first refuting argument
functions while completely disregarding the nature of the object of knowledge
[i.e. it works] whether [we] accept that it has parts [or that it] is devoid of parts,
[and whether we accept that] it is contradicted [by this or that particular property
or that] it is not—rather, [it functions] by entirely devouring [the external object]
in this way: “[whatever is] distinct from the manifesting consciousness
(prakāśa) is not manifest (na prakāśate).”41
The commentator Bhāskarakantha, for his part, explains the ĪPV distinction
˙ ˙˙
between the “main” and the “additional” arguments by pointing out that the first one
is the “essential” (pradhāna) one because it proceeds by refuting “directly” or
“immediately” (sākṣāt) the external object,42 whereas the additional arguments are
only of a secondary importance (anvācaya) and are subordinated (gauṇa) to the first
one because they only refute “indirectly” or “aporetically” (prasaṅgena).43
So for the Śaiva nondualists, the Buddhist mereological type of argument is not
the decisive step enabling the idealist to leave the plane of a mere scepticism
regarding the existence of the external object. On the contrary, this set of arguments
is presented as some sort of metaphysical cherry on the cake, whereas the first
ĪPVV, vol. II, p. 138: na ca kevalam idam eva bādhakaṃ yat pramāṇamukhena pravr̥ ttaṃ yāvat svato
’pīti svamukhena prameyasvarūpanirūpaṇapravr̥ ttapratītidvāreṇāpi pravr̥ ttam, prameyasvarūpam
evāsattvāviṣkaraṇenonmūlayaty* eva bāhyam iti yāvat. pūrvakaṃ hi bādhakaṃ prameyasvarūpam
anapekṣyaiva sāṃśam anaṃśaṃ viruddham aviruddhaṃ yad bhavatu tad bhavatu, prakāśād bhinnaṃ na
prakāśata iti tu sarvagrāsena pravr̥ ttam. [*evāsattvāviṣkaraṇenonmūlayaty conj. (see Ratié forthcoming,
fn. 24): eva sattvāviṣkaraṇenonmūlayaty Ed.]
41

42

Bhāskarī, vol. I, p. 222: mukhyaṃ bhavati – pradhānaṃ bhavati sākṣādbādhakatvāt.

43

Bhāskarī, vol. I, p. 223: abhyuccayena – anvācayena, prasaṅgeneti yāvad bādhakāḥ. ata eva
gauṇatvam eṣām, pūrvaṃ sākṣād bāhyabādhakam, ete prasaṅgenaiva bādhakā iti.

123

366

I. Ratié

argument can indeed be termed epistemic insofar as it rests on the total impossibility
of an epistemic access to the external object, but the Śaivas consider it as being
already fully committed from an ontological point of view. Thus they agree with
Manorathanandin insofar as they too admit that once the external object is
established to be absolutely unmanifest, one does not have to take the trouble of any
further refutation. But whereas Manorathanandin only states that there is no need to
take the trouble of refuting the existence of the external object “because [we]
demonstrate [our] opinion through this only, and nothing else (tāvataiva)”,44 i.e.,
through the total absence of manifestation of the external object, Abhinavagupta
clearly states that “this only” (tāvat), i.e. the total absence of manifestation of the
external object, constitutes the main argument refuting its existence.45
So why do the Śaiva nondualists consider that the epistemic argument proves that
the external object does not exist? One could suspect that they manage to make this
leap between the epistemic and the metaphysical aspects of the problem simply by
inferring the nonexistence of the external object from the fact that it is not
perceptible. As a matter of fact, they repeatedly equate existence with manifestation46 and they call their own system (as well as the Vijñānavāda) a “theory of
manifestation” (ābhāsavāda),47 i.e. a “theory according to which reality belongs
[only] to manifestations (ābhāsavastutvavāda).48
However, Utpaladeva and his commentator have adopted Dharmakı̄rti’s theory of
non-perception (anupalabdhi), and they therefore acknowledge that one cannot
legitimately infer the nonexistence of something from the mere fact that this thing
happens to be imperceptible: they admit with Dharmakı̄rti that an object which is by
nature inaccessible to our perception, such as a demon, cannot be determined as
existing or not from the simple fact that we do not see it, and they consider that the
absence of a given entity can only be concluded from its imperceptibility in a given
place and time provided that the conditions for perceiving such an entity are
gathered in this particular circumstance.49
44

See above, fn. 23.

45

See above, fn. 32.

46

See e.g. ĪPV, vol. II, p. 241 (avabhāsasāratvād vastūnām…, “Since real entities (vastu) have
manifestation as their essence…”), or MŚV I, p. 219: anābhātaṃ ca no vastu vyomasadmagavākṣavat /
so’pi vā kalpitākāraś citprakāśe prakāśate // “And that which is not manifested is no real entity, just as the
window of a castle in the sky; or [rather, contrary to what is unmanifest, at least] this [window,] since it
has an aspect constructed [through the power of imagination,] is manifest within the manifesting
consciousness (citprakāśa).” See also e.g. ĪPV, vol. I, pp. 192–193: tac ca sadaiva, prakāśasya
pramātr̥ tvāt, tadātmatayā ca vināprakāśamānasyāvastutvāt. [*vināprakāśamānasyāvastutvāt Bhāskarī:
vinā prakāśamānasyāvastutvāt ĪPV (see Ratié 2011a, fn. 10, p. 481)]. “And this [identity of the object of
knowledge with the knowing subject must] always exist, because the manifesting consciousness is the
knowing subject, and because without this identity with the [knowing subject, the object,] which would
not be manifest, would be no real entity.”
47

See e.g. the introduction to ĪPK 2.4.12 in ĪPVV, vol. III, p. 214, where the term ābhāsavāda obviously
applies both to the Śaiva nondualist system and to that, immediately mentioned at the beginning of the
commentary on the verse, of the Vijñānavādins.
48

See ĪPV, vol. II, p. 163, which also introduces ĪPK 2.4.12.

49

On the adoption of Dharmakı̄rti’s theory of anupalabdhi by the Śaiva nondualists, see Torella (2007)
and Ratié (2010b).

123

Epistemic and Metaphysical Buddhist Idealisms

367

Nonetheless, according to the Śaiva nondualists at least, there is a vast difference
between a piśāca and an external object: the piśāca is not considered as an
absolutely imperceptible object but only as an object imperceptible to some subjects
in some circumstances, and more importantly perhaps, the piśāca is an entity that
can be at least conceptualized, precisely inasmuch as it can be represented as an
entity perceptible to others, be they extraordinary human beings or other piśācas.
But whereas we are capable of imagining the piśāca, i.e., of considering the
possibility of its existence through the mental process called sambhāvanā,50 there is
no way in which we could even consider the mere possibility of the existence of an
external object, because we are simply incapable of imagining what is by nature
completely alien to any kind of mental image.51 Contrary to entities such as the
piśāca, the external entity is therefore an entity that escapes all our attempts to
conceptualize it.52
And this is a crucial point, because in the verse on which Abhinavagupta
comments when distinguishing between the two kinds of arguments,53 Utpaladeva
does not only state that the external object postulated by the Sautrāntika is useless
since within the sphere of ordinary human practice we only relate to phenomena; he
also specifies that this external object is anupapatti—a Sanskrit term which can
mean both “impossible in fact” and “impossible to account for in a rational way”,
50
On the crucial role of sambhāvanā/sambhāvana in the process of exclusion (apoha) that leads to the
formation of concepts, see e.g. ĪPV, vol. I, p. 242 (which conspicuously makes use of a Dharmakı̄rtian
terminology): ato ghaṭāghaṭayor dvayor avabhāsasya sambhāvanāt samāropaḥ sāvakāśo bhavaty
aghaṭasya saty ārope niṣedhalakṣaṇo ’pohanavyāpāra iti tadanuprāṇitā vikalparūpatā ghaṭa ity etasya
niścayasya. “It is thanks to this hypothetical representation (sambhāvana) of the manifestation of two
[entities, i.e.] the pot and the non-pot, that the superimposition (samāropa) can occur; [and] the operation
of exclusion (apohana) consisting in the negation [of what is not the pot] occurs [only] when there is a
superimposition of the non-pot. As a consequence, this certainty, ‘the pot’, consists in a concept (vikalpa),
[and this fact that it consists in a concept] depends on the [exclusion, which in turn depends on the
superimposition, which in turn depends on the hypothetical representation].”
51

See e.g. ĪPV, vol. I, p. 242 (Abhinavagupta has just explained that our concept of the pot rests on our
capacity to imagine both the pot and the non-pot): yas tv ayaṃ prakāśo nāma tasya sthāne yaḥ
saṃbhāvyate sa tāvad aprakāśarūpo na bhavati, tulyakakṣasya hi saṃbhāvanaṃ bhavati, na ca yat
prakāśena kartavyaṃ tad aprakāśasya kadācid dr̥ ṣṭam; saṃbhāvanāropaṇādibalād eva
cāsyāprakāśarūpatvaṃ vighaṭeta. “However, that which is hypothetically represented (sambhāvyate) in
place of the manifesting consciousness itself is certainly not [something] that would not consist in the
manifesting consciousness; for there can [only] be a hypothetical representation of [something] equivalent
[to the entity considered in the process of exclusion], and in no circumstance do [we] see that what can be
accomplished by the manifesting consciousness [can be accomplished] by what is not the manifesting
consciousness. And due to the mere fact that there is a hypothetical representation, a superimposition and
[an exclusion,] the nature of this [entity] cannot remain a non-manifestation.” Note that this means that
the manifesting consciousness itself (prakāśa) cannot be conceptualized any more than what is
completely alien to it; but the crucial difference between prakāśa and aprakāśa lies in the fact that the
first one is always immediately apprehended through the most immediate of all knowledges, i.e. selfawareness (svasaṃvedana), since the Śaivas consider that there is no consciousness without the awareness
of being conscious.
52
See e.g. ĪPVV, vol. II, p. 161: svapne ’py anābhātasya vikalpyatvāyogāt…, “Because what is not
manifested, even in a dream, cannot be conceptualized…”.
53

See ĪPK 1.5.6: syād etad avabhāseṣu teṣv evāvasite sati / vyavahāre kim anyena bāhyenānupapattinā //
“Let [us admit] this: since the sphere of human practice (vyavahāra) is determined on [the basis of] these
manifestations alone, what is the point of some external [object] that would be distinct [from
consciousness and] that is impossible/cannot be accounted for rationally (anupapatti)?”

123

368

I. Ratié

and which for this reason constitutes a perfect expression of the rationalist optimism
at the basis of such arguments as Vasubandhu’s mereological critique of the external
objects: these arguments all presuppose that what is absurd from a rational and
theoretical point of view must be impossible from a factual point of view.54
Now, this is how Abhinavagupta explains Utpaladeva’s verse in his ĪPVV:
This is what [Utpaladeva] says [in ĪPK 1.5.6:] even if the external object is
inferred, it is only insofar as it is being manifest (prakāśamāna eva) [and
therefore internal] that it can be talked about, because if [it] were distinct from
the manifesting consciousness (prakāśa), since as a consequence it would have
no manifestation, even [our awareness] that [the object] is inferred would
amount to a state of stupor.55
Here Abhinavagupta is in fact anticipating on a demonstration that only occurs in
verses 1.5.8–9, where Utpaladeva shows that the external object cannot be
conceptualized at all.56 And showing that an absolutely unmanifest object cannot
even be conceptualized amounts to stating that such an object is anupapatti in the
sense that it is simply unthinkable. In other words, according to the Śaiva
nondualists, the external object is absurd not only because its nature cannot be
accounted for whether it is made of parts or not, but also (and, according to
Abhinavagupta at least, more importantly) because an absolutely unmanifest entity
cannot be conceptualized at all, so that there is no way to give any rational account
of it. Thus elsewhere in the ĪPVV, Abhinavagupta points out that the notion of an
external object called “blue” for instance is absurd anyway, so that there is no more
logical fault in considering it as yellow or as nothing at all than there is in
considering it as existing “in itself” (i.e. independently of any conscious
manifestation);57 and in the parallel passage of the ĪPV, Abhinavagupta concludes:
“therefore if there is a manifesting consciousness [of the object], then [only] the
object exists.”58 That is to say, according to the nondualist Śaivas, the argument
showing that there is no epistemic access whatsoever to the external object is also
the argument par excellence for a “metaphysical” or ontologically committed
idealism, because an object that cannot even be conceptualized can have no
54

See e.g. Arnold (2008, p. 16, fn. 41): “It is […] presupposed by Vasubandhu’s arguments (as perhaps
by metaphysical arguments more generally) that what we can or cannot adequately conceive tells us
something about what is actually possible.”

55
ĪPVV, vol. II, pp. 129–130: etad uktam: anumito’pi bāhyo’rthaḥ prakāśamāna eva vaktavyaḥ,
prakāśād bhede hy aprakāśanaprasaṅgād anumitatvam api vastuno mūrchāprāyaṃ bhavet.
56

See Ratié (2011b, pp. 496–497): in ĪPV, vol. I, pp. 190–191, Abhinavagupta explains that “an object
such as blue that is not pervaded by the manifesting consciousness, even in the form of an inferential
concept” (anumānavikalpātmanāpi prakāśena… anāviṣṭo nīlādir arthaḥ), cannot be inferred at all, but
that if the external object is conceptualized and therefore pervaded by the manifesting consciousness,
“its nature is necessarily nothing but the manifesting consciousness, [and therefore] it is not external
(prakāśamātrasvabhāva eva, na bāhyaḥ).
57

See ĪPVV, vol. II, p. 77: aprakāśasya siddhir eva na kācit, svātmani hi nīlaṃ yadi pītaṃ na kiṃ cid vā,
tat kiṃ duṣyet. [*siddhir conj. (see Ratié 2011a, p. 361 and fn. 117): prasiddhir ĪPVV.] “There is
absolutely no establishment (siddhi) of [what is a] non-manifestation; for if [we said that] in itself
(svātmani), the blue is yellow or [even] nothing at all, how could it be wrong?”
58

ĪPV, vol. I, p. 163: tad yadi prakāśas tadā bhavaty arthaḥ.

123

Epistemic and Metaphysical Buddhist Idealisms

369

existence. The implicit principle at the basis of the Śaivas’ metaphysical
interpretation of the epistemic argument therefore seems to be the same principle
that governs Vasubandhu’s mereological arguments: unless we abandon the idea
that there must be some kind of correspondence between reason and reality, we
must admit that that which cannot be conceptualized in any way cannot exist.
Is the Śaivas’ Interpretation of the Two Kinds of Idealistic Arguments a
Betrayal of Their Buddhist Source(s)?
To sum up, Manorathanandin distinguishes two kinds of arguments for idealism:
one that shows that there is no epistemic access whatsoever to any external object,
and one that shows that the very nature of the external object is absurd since we
cannot satisfactorily account for it whether we imagine it as having parts or not. The
Śaivas make the same distinction, and they clearly consider that the first kind of
argument is just as ontologically committed as the second, or rather, that it is in fact
the main (mukhya) argument against the existence of the external object, whereas
the mereological arguments concerning the nature of the object are only secondary.
Now, is this Śaiva interpretation a betrayal of the original intention of the
Buddhist philosophers by whom Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta were so much
influenced, or does it reflect in some way at least the position of their Buddhist
counterparts?
On the one hand, there is evidence that this distinction largely predates the
writing of the ĪPKs and goes at least as far back as the ŚV, where Kumārila, while
criticizing the idealism of his Buddhist opponents, mentions the two different kinds
of arguments and even specifies that the one resting on the means of knowledge is
the root (mūla) of the one resting on the object of knowledge.59 However, not to
mention that we are left with no clue as to the source from which Kumārila might be
borrowing here,60 determining the exact meaning of such a distinction proves
59
ŚV, Nirālambananavāda 17–18ab: bāhyārthāpahnavo dvaidham eko’rthasya* parīkṣaṇāt / pramāṇam
āśritaś caikas tatrāstāṃ yaḥ prameyataḥ // pramāṇasthas tu mūlatvād ihedānīṃ parīkṣyate /
[* bāhyārthāpahnavo dvaidham eko’rtasya Variant in Ed, p. 158, n. 2: bāhyārthāpahnave’dvaitam
ekārthasya Ed.: bāhyārthāpahnave dvaitam eko’rthasya Kāśikā, TT.] “The denial of [the existence of]
˙ on the examination of the object
external objects [can be made] in two ways: one [such denial is based]
[itself]; and [the other] one rests on the means of knowledge. Among these [two sorts of denial], let [us]
leave aside the one [based] on the object of knowledge; rather, here, for now, [it is] the one based on the
means of knowledge that is going to be examined, because it is the root [of the other argument].” On the
context of this passage see Taber (2010, p. 280).
60

Assuming, of course, that Kumārila is indeed borrowing from a Buddhist source. Admittedly, one
could suspect that in fact the Mı̄māmsaka himself is the author of this distinction as well as of the idea
that one of the arguments is the root˙ of the other (an idea that he invokes so as to justify the fact that
Śabara only mentions one of the Buddhist types of arguments, as Pārthasārathimiśra makes clear in his
introduction to ŚV, Nirālambananavāda 17–18ab). Nonetheless, Kumārila is probably invoking this idea
precisely because it is acknowledged by his opponents (so that the Buddhists cannot criticize Śabara’s text
in this regard if it conforms to their own principle), which would explain in particular why he does not
bother to explain in what way one argument is the root of the other. Besides, even if we were to assume
that this distinction was first devised by a non-Buddhist author, Manorathanandin’s work at least testifies
to the fact that it was adopted by the Buddhists themselves.

123

370

I. Ratié

particularly difficult as the Mı̄māmsaka does not take the trouble of explaining why
˙
one argument is the root of the other. Among Kumārila’s commentators,
Pārthasārathimiśra is content with noting that the argument based on the means
of knowledge is more essential because the establishment of the existence of the
object of knowledge depends on the examination of the means of knowledge;61 as
for Umbeka62 and Sucaritamiśra,63 they merely explain that if the existence of the
external object cannot be established by any means of knowledge, speculations
regarding this object are vain, whereas if a means of knowledge establishes this

61

See NR ad loc., p. 158: pramāṇabalenaiva bāhyārthe vyavasthāpite yad idam avayavino ’vayavātirekeṇānupalabdheḥ paramāṇūnāṃ cātīndriyatvān na bāhyaṃ grāhyaṃ sambhavatīti codyaṃ tat
pramāṇabalenaiva nirastaṃ bhavatīti pramāṇabalenaiva parīkṣitaṃ yuktam iti. “Since the [existence
of] the external object is established through the sole force of the means of knowledge, this sole force of
the means of knowledge refutes the criticism according to which no external apprehended object is
possible because [we] do not perceive any whole independently of the parts and because the atoms are
beyond the reach of the sense organs; therefore it is right to examine [this criticism] through the sole force
of the means of knowledge.” According to Taber (2010, p. 280), Pārthasārathimiśra’s explanation
amounts to saying that “any refutation of objects based on their alleged impossibility would immediately
run up against the evidence of common experience” given that “cognition itself seems to present us prima
facie with objects”. I.e., if I understand Taber’s interpretation correctly, according to Pārthasārathimiśra,
perception, since it presents us with an object appearing as external, ipso facto refutes the mereological
kind of argument. However, here Pārthasārathimiśra rather seems to be simply saying that the argument
based on the means of knowledge is stronger than the former as it is capable of demonstrating the
existence of the object.
62
See TT, p. 198: sa ca yady api bauddhair bāhyārthābhāvaḥ prameyaparīkṣayā pramāṇavr̥ ttyaśaktyā vā*
˙
pratipāditaḥ,
tathāpi prameyaparīkṣāṃ parityajya pramāṇavicāra evāṅgīkr̥ taḥ, tanmūlatvāt prameyasya.
yadi bāhyārthagrāhakatvena pravartante pratyakṣādayaḥ, tataḥ prameyavikalpānāṃ tadviruddhatvād
aprāmāṇyam; atha na pravartante, tataḥ prameyābhāvād eva kutas tadvikalpaḥ. [* pramāṇavr̥ ttyaśaktyā vā
conj.: pramāṇavr̥ ttyaśaktyā Ed.] “And even though the Buddhists demonstrate the nonexistence of external
objects [either] through an examination of the object of knowledge or by [showing] the impossibility for the
means of knowledge of occurring [if its object is external, here Kumārila], setting aside the examination of
the object of knowledge, only has recourse to an examination of the means of knowledge, because [the means
of knowledge] is the root of the object of knowledge. [That is to say,] if [it can be shown that] perception and
[other means of knowledge] operate by apprehending external objects, then the conceptual constructions
[that we might build] regarding the object of knowledge have no validity given that they are contradicted by
this [fact that the means of knowledge apprehend external objects]; but if [the means of knowledge] do not
operate [in such a way], then since there is no object of knowledge at all, what would be the point (kutaḥ) of
any conceptual construction regarding this [nonexistent object]?”
63

See Kāśikā, vol. II, pp. 36–37: ayam arthaḥ – yady api dvedhā bāhyārthāpahnavo bauddhair āśritaḥ,
tathāpi pramāṇāśrita eva mūlabhūtatvād iha vicāryate, pramāṇamūlā hi prameyasthitiḥ. tad yadi
pramāṇam anuguṇam, kiṃ vastuvikalpaiḥ. na tadbalena tadanupapattiṃ parihr̥ tyārtho vyavasthāpyate.
atha tu pramāṇam evārthaṃ pratyācaṣṭe, kiṃ prameyavikalpaiḥ kr̥ takarair iti. “Here is the meaning [of
this passage]: even though the Buddhists base [their] denial of [the existence of] external objects on two
[different] kinds [of arguments], here it is only [the kind that is] based on the means of knowledge that
[Kumārila] examines, because it is the root [of the other]; for the existence of the object of knowledge has
as its root the means of knowledge. Therefore if[, in the course of this examination,] the means of
knowledge is [found to be] in accordance [with the existence of the external object], what could be the
point of the conceptual constructions [that we might build] regarding the thing itself (vastu)? [For if this is
the case,] the object is not established to exist [only] provided that the force of these [conceptual
constructions] does not [show] that this [object] is impossible[: rather, the object must exist anyway]. If,
on the other hand, the sole means of knowledge refutes the [external] object, what point could there be in
those conceptual constructions regarding the object of knowledge [and supposedly] helping [the means of
knowledge to establish something that the means of knowledge already establishes by itself]?”

123

Epistemic and Metaphysical Buddhist Idealisms

371

existence, there is no more point in denying it—but here again, they do not let us
know why this is the case.
By way of contrast, the nondualist Śaivas seem to be particularly keen on
justifying the preeminence of one argument over the other, but while doing so they
also emphasize their disagreement with their Buddhist adversaries, which seems to
suggest that here as often, they are adopting a Buddhist idea but also distorting it so
as to suit their own metaphysical agenda. They thus insist on a crucial divergence
between their own epistemology and Dharmakı̄rti’s, namely the fact that according
to them, concepts (and not only perceptions) require some kind of immediate
manifestation of their object at the time when they occur.64 And thus extending the
notion of ābhāsa to the realm of concepts seems to be precisely what enables
the Śaivas to provide the epistemic argument with a fully ontological dimension: the
external object cannot exist because the very fact that it is absolutely unmanifest and
therefore impossible to conceptualize makes it absurd—and even the Buddhists,
when adducing mereological arguments against the external object, admit the
postulate that what cannot be theoretically accounted for cannot exist in fact. On the
other hand, Dharmakı̄rti (at least according to Manorathanandin’s explanation)
seems to have used the epistemic argument merely to show that contrary to what the
Sautrāntikas claim, there is no rational need whatsoever to postulate the external
object so as to account for phenomena, because such an external object cannot be
determined to be the cause of phenomenal variety, and because this phenomenal
variety can be perfectly explained by an internal mechanism of latent traces, so that
ontological questions become strictly irrelevant regarding an external object that has
no impact whatsoever on the only reality with which we ever have to deal, i.e.,
cognitions.65
64

See above, fn. 39.

65

From this point of view, the first part of ĪPK 1.5.6 at least (i.e., the notion of anupapatti of the external object
excepted) seems to correspond to Dharmakı̄rti’s intention with the epistemic argument. See e.g., among the
newly discovered fragments of Utpaladeva’s Vivr̥ ti on this verse (edited and translated in Ratié forthcoming),
the beginning of fragment A1: vyavahartrapekṣayā tāvad bhāvavyavasthā kriyamāṇāvabhāseṣv eva nirapāyā
paryavasyatīty adhikatarādr̥ ṣṭavastuparyālocanam idaṃ svacchandaceṣṭitaṃ. “To begin with, this investigation of a reality that is imperceptible and [consists in] something more (adhikatara) [than manifestations and
the consciousness manifesting them] is a [purely] arbitrary endeavour (svacchandaceṣṭita), given that with
respect to the subject of human practice (vyavahartr̥ ), the determination of the existence of entities which is
successfully performed only concerns manifestations.” Cf. Abhinavagupta’s summary of this verse at the
beginning of Chap. 1.5 (ĪPV, vol. I, pp. 151–152): tadanabhyupagame ’pi tāvan na kiṃcid uparudhyata iti
darśayati. “[In this verse, Utpaladeva shows] that to begin with, even if one does not admit the [external
object,] nothing at all is impeded”. The reason why Abhinavagupta does not mention in his summary the
bādhakas or arguments against the external object (and in particular the “main” one, i.e., its complete absence
of manifestation, including in an inferential concept) seems to be that although it is already defined by
Abhinavagupta while he is commenting on the term anupapatti in ĪPK 1.5.6, in Utpaladeva’s kārikās its
explicit presentation occurs later, i.e. in ĪPK 1.5.8–9, and Utpaladeva’s short Vr̥ tti ad ĪPK 1.5.6 only explains
the term anupapatti in connection with what Abhinavagupta calls the “additional arguments”. Thus, as noted
by Raffaele Torella, ĪPK 1.5.6 might still be read entirely as the discourse of a Vijñānavādin (see Torella 2002,
p. 114, fn. 12), although Abhinavagupta warns his readers that the mereological arguments against the external
object alluded to in the Vr̥ tti are only “additional”, and although he already mentions the “main” argument in an
anticipation of the demonstration in ĪPK 1.5.8–9. Only fragments of Utpaladeva’s Vivr̥ ti on ĪPK 1.5.6 have
been recovered so far and none of them contains a distinction between the two kinds of arguments, but it should
be noted that ĪPVV, vol. II, p. 138 (quoted above, fn. 41) seems to imply that Utpaladeva himself had already
drawn (at least in part) this distinction.

123

372

I. Ratié

I find the Śaivas’ way of presenting the distinction between the two Buddhist
idealistic arguments quite extraordinary in that it reveals the Śaivas’ fascination for
the Dharmakı̄rtian philosophical tradition, but also their aptitude at transforming
subtly but profoundly the meaning of Buddhist concepts, and more generally, the
capacity of philosophical ideas to undergo the strangest metamorphoses when thus
imported from one religio-philosophical background to another: a Buddhist
argument which, according to Manorathanandin at least, serves to eliminate
ontological questions regarding the external object becomes the main means of its
complete ontological denial once set in a Śaiva conceptual frame. But I readily
admit that this Śaiva “ontologization” of a Buddhist epistemic argument is nothing
more than a hypothesis on my part (although, hopefully, a likely one): I do not know
in what exact measure the Śaivas really distorted the original import of the
epistemic argument, as I am not certain whether Manorathanandin was faithfully
expressing Dharmakı̄rti’s intention in his presentation of the distinction between the
two arguments; nor do I know with certainty to what extent the Śaivas took
advantage of an ambiguity in the formulation of this distinction by their Buddhist
rivals;66 and it is also possible that in fact Śaṅkaranandana’s Prajñālaṃkāra (which
may well have been one of the sources of the Śaivas’ acquaintance with this
distinction)67 contained an interpretation of the epistemic argument much closer to
Abhinavagupta’s than the explanation offered by Manorathanandin. But at any rate,
it seems to me that the very fact that some 10th- and 11th- century Śaiva authors
were aware of a distinction between two Buddhist types of idealistic arguments
should be of interest to historians concerned with Buddhist philosophical ideas
inasmuch as it shows that this distinction was well known at the time even among
non-Buddhist learned circles. I therefore find it hard to believe that it was not
discussed among Buddhist circles more than can be gathered from the currently
available Buddhist texts, and I can only hope that future studies on Buddhist
philosophical texts written around the turn of the second millennium (such as
66

See the remarks above on what I see as an ambiguity in Manorathanandin’s distinction—of course it is
quite possible that I only see such an ambiguity because I do not understand the passage correctly, and it
should also be noted (see fn. 67 below) that in all probability the Śaivas did not know Manorathanandin’s
commentary anyway.

67

As far as I know there is no compelling evidence that Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta were aware of
Manorathanandin’s commentary on the PV, and in fact such an acquaintance seems improbable given that
Manorathanandin is likely to have been active in the second part of the 11th century (see Steinkellner and
Much 1995, p. 105), i.e. after Abhinavagupta’s death. On the other hand, Abhinavagupta, who often
quotes Śaṅkaranandana’s works, mentions his Prajñālaṃkāra precisely in connection with the distinction
between the two kinds of arguments, and he specifies that he has not taken the trouble of explaining the
“additional arguments” in detail precisely because Śaṅkaranandana has already done so in his treatise (see
above, fn. 33). So from Abhinavagupta’s commentaries we can be sure that Śaṅkaranandana had
explained the second kind of arguments at length, but it is also possible that the same author had
distinguished them from the first kind of argument. It should be noted in this regard that according to
Vincent Eltschinger, establishing idealism on the basis of Dharmakı̄rti’s arguments was the very “raison
d’être” of the Prajñālaṃkāra (see Eltschinger 2010, pp. 108–111), and the sahopalambhaniyama in
particular seems to have played an important role in Śaṅkaranandana’s major work (see ibid., p. 108).

68

So far only one of Śaṅkaranandana’s treatises has been fully edited and translated (see Krasser 2002).
On the manuscript sources now available and the current state of studies on this author see Eltschinger
(2010).

123

Epistemic and Metaphysical Buddhist Idealisms

373

Śaṅkaranandana’s works)68 will soon afford us a few more certainties regarding the
way(s) in which the Buddhist philosophers themselves have understood and
distinguished their own arguments in favour of idealism.
Acknowledgments This article was written thanks to the generous financial help of the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft as part of project FR 2531/3-1. I am grateful to Vincent Eltschinger, Eli Franco,
John Taber and Birgit Kellner for carefully reading a previous version of it and providing insightful
remarks.

Bibliographical References
Editions
[Bhāskarī] Īśvarapratyabhijñāvimarśinī of Abhinavagupta, Doctrine of Divine Recognition. Vol. I & II:
Sanskrit text with the commentary Bhāskarī edited by K.A.S. Iyer and K.C. Pandey [Allahabad:
1938, 1950], Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1986.
[ĪPK, Vr̥ tti] Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikā of Utpaladeva with the Author’s Vr̥ tti. Critical edition and annotated
translation by R. Torella. [Roma: 1994], Corrected Edition, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2002.
[ĪPV] Īśvarapratyabhijñāvimarśinī. 2 vol. Edited with notes by M.R. Śāstrı̄/M.K. Shāstrı̄. Srinagar:
Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies 22 & 33, Nirnaya Sagar Press, 1918–1921.
[ĪPVV] Īśvarapratyabhijñāvivr̥ tivimarśinī by Abhinavagupta. 3 vol. Edited by M. K. Shāstrı̄. Bombay:
Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies 60, 62 & 65, Nirnaya Sagar Press, 1938–1943.
[Kāśikā] Ślokavārttika (of Kumārila) with Sucarita Miśra’s Kāśikā. Edited by K. S. Sastri & V. A.
Ramaswami Sastri. Trivandrum: Trivandrum Sanskrit Series 90, 99 & 150, 1926–1943.
[MŚV] Mālinīślokavārttika. See Hanneder 1998.
[NR = Nyāyaratnākara.] See ŚV.
[PV] Pramāṇavārttika. See PVM and PVS.
[PVM] Pramāṇavārttika-kārikā (Sanskrit and Tibetan). Edited by Y. Miyasaka, Acta Indologica, 2 (1971–
1972), 1–206.
[PVS, PVV] Dharmakīrti’s Pramāṇavārttika with a commentary by Manorathanandin. Edited by R.
Sāṅkrityāyana. Patna: Bihar and Orissa Research Society, 1938–1940.
˚
[PVin] Dharmakīrti’s
Pramāṇaviniścaya, Chapters 1 and 2. Critically edited by E. Steinkellner. Beijing/
Vienna: China Tibetology Publishing House/Austrian Academy of Sciences Press, 2007.
[ŚBh = Śābarabhāṣya, in] Frauwallner 1968, pp. 7–61.
[ŚV] Ślokavārttika of Śrī Kumārila Bhaṭṭa, with the Commentary Nyāyaratnākara of Śrī Pārthasārathimiśra. Edited and revised by G.S. Rai. Varanasi: Ratna Publications, 1993.
[TT = Tātparyaṭīkā] Ślokavārtikavyākhyā (Tātparyaṭīkā) of Bhaṭṭombeka. Edited by S.K.R. Sastri. New
˙ edition, Madras: Madras University Sanskrit Series 13, 1940.

Translations and Studies
Arnold, D. (2008). Buddhist idealism, epistemic and otherwise: Thoughts on the alternating perspectives
of Dharmakı̄rti. Sophia, 47, 3–28.
Bühnemann, G. (1980). Identifizierung von Sanskrittexten Śaṅkaranandanas. Wiener Zeitschrift für die
Kunde Südasiens, 24, 191–198.
Chu, J. (2006). On Dignāga’s theory of the object of cognition as presented in PS (V) 1. Journal of the
International Association of Buddhist Studies, 29(2), 211–253.
Dhammajoti, K. L. (2007). Ākāra and direct perception (Pratyakṣa). Paciﬁc World, Journal of the Institute
of Buddhist Studies, 9(Third Series), 245–272.
Dreyfus, G. B. (1997). Recognizing reality: Dharmakīrti’s philosophy and its Tibetan interpretations.
Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
Dunne, J. (2004). Foundations of Dharmakīrti’s philosophy. Somerville, MA: Wisdom Publications.

123

374

I. Ratié

Eltschinger, V. (2010). Les Œuvres de Śaṅkaranandana: nouvelles ressources manuscrites, chronologie
relative et identité confessionnelle. Annali dell’Istituto Universitario Orientale di Napoli, 66[2006],
83–122.
Frauwallner, E. (1968). Materialen zur ältesten Erkenntnislehre der Karmamīmāṃsā. Wien: Herman
Böhlaus Nachf./Kommissionsverlag der österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Hanneder, J. (1998). Abhinavagupta’s philosophy of revelation. An edition and annotated translation of
Mālinīślokavārttika I. Groningen oriental studies 14 (pp. 1–399). Groningen: Egbert Forsten.
Hattori, M. (1968). Dignāga, On perception, being the Pratyakṣapariccheda of Dignāga’s Pramāṇasamuccaya. Harvard oriental series 47. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Iwata, T. (1991). Sahopalambhaniyama: Struktur und Entwicklung des Schlusses von der Tatsache, daß
Erkenntnis und Gegenstand ausschließlich zusammen wahrgenommen werden, auf deren Nichtverschiedenheit (2 Vols.). Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag.
Kajiyama, Y. (1965). Controversy between the sākāra- and nirākāra-vādins of the Yogācāra school—
Some materials. Indogaku Bukkyōgaku Kenkyū, 14(1), 26–37.
Kano, K. (2008). Two short glosses on Yogācāra texts by Vairocanaraksita: Viṃśikāṭīkāvivr̥ ti and
˙
1. Sanskrit texts from
*Dharmadharmatāvibhāgavivr̥ ti. In F. Sferra (Ed.), Manuscripta Buddhica
Giuseppe Tucci’s collection, part I (pp. 343–380). Roma: Istituto Italiano per l’Africa e l’Oriente.
Kapstein, M. (2001). Reason’s traces. Identity and interpretation in Indian & Tibetan Buddhist thought.
Boston: Wisdom Publications.
Kawajiri, Y. (2011). A critique of the Buddhist theory of adhyavasāya in the Pratyabhijñā School. In H.
Krasser, H. Lasic, E. Franco, & B. Kellner (Eds.), Religion and logic in Buddhist philosophical
analysis. Proceedings of the fourth international Dharmakīrti conference, Vienna, August 23–27,
2005 (pp. 281–290). Wien: Verlag der österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Kellner, B. (1997). Nichts bleibt Nichts. Die buddhistische Zurückweisung von Kumārilas abhāvapramāṇa. Übersetzung und Interpretation von Śāntarakṣitas Tattvasaṅgraha vv.1647–1690 mit
Kamalaśīlas Tattvasaṅgrahapañjikā, sowie Ansätze und Arbeitshypothesen zur Geschichte negativer
Erkenntnis in der indischen Philosophie. Wiener Studien zur Tibetologie und Buddhismuskunde 39.
Wien: Arbeitskreis für tibetische und buddhistische Studien Universität Wien.
Kellner, B. (1999). Levels of (im)perceptibility: Dharmottara’s views on the dr̥ śya in dr̥ śyānupalabdhi. In
S. Katsura (Ed.), Dharmakīrti’s thought and its impact on Indian and Tibetan philosophy.
Proceedings of the third international Dharmakīrti conference, Hiroshima, November 4–6, 1997 (pp.
193–208). Wien: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Kellner, B. (2010). Towards a critical edition of Dharmakı̄rti’s Pramāṇavārttika. Wiener Zeitschrift für die
Kunde Südasiens, 52–53, 161–211.
Kellner, B. (2011). Dharmakı̄rti’s criticism of external realism and the sliding scale of analysis. In H.
Krasser, H. Lasic, E. Franco, & B. Kellner (Eds.), Religion and logic in Buddhist philosophical
analysis. Proceedings of the fourth international Dharmakīrti conference, Vienna, August 23–27,
2005 (pp. 291–298). Wien: Verlag der österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Krasser, H. (2001). On the dates and works of Śaṅkaranandana. In R. Torella (Ed.), Le Parole e i Marmi.
Studi in onore di Raniero Gnoli nel suo 70° compleanno (pp. 489–508). Roma: Istituto Italiano per
l’Africa e l’Oriente.
Krasser, H. (2002). Śaṅkaranandanas Īśvarāpākaraṇasaṅkṣepa. Teil 1: Texte, Teil 2: Annotierte
Übersetzungen und Studie zur Auseinandersetzung über die Existenz Gottes. Wien: Verlag der
österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Lusthaus, D. (2002). Buddhist phenomenology: A philosophical investigation of Yogācāra and the Ch’eng
Wei-shih lun. New York: Routledge-Curzon.
Matsumoto, S. (1980). Sahopalambha-niyama. Sōtōshū Kenkyūin Kenkyūsei Kenkyū Kiyō, 12, 265–298.
Mayer, A. L. (2009). [Review of] Buddhist phenomenology: A philosophical investigation of Yogācāra
Buddhism and the Ch’eng Wei-shih Lun. Journal of Buddhist Ethics, 16, 191–215.
McClintock, S. (2003). The role of the ‘given’ in the classification of Śāntaraksita and Kamalaśı̄la as
˙
Svātantrika-Mādhyamikas. In G. Dreyfus & S. McClintock (Eds.), The Svātantrika-Prāsaṅgika
distinction: What difference does a difference make? (pp. 125–171). Somerville, MA: Wisdom
Publications.
McClintock, S. (2010). Omniscience and the rhetoric of reason. Śāntarakṣita and Kamalaśīla on
rationality, argumentation, & religious authority. Boston: Wisdom Publications.
Moriyama, S. (2008). Sense data and ākāra. In M. K. Chakraborty, et al. (Eds.), Logic, Navya-Nyāya &
applications. Homage to Bilal Krishna Matilal (pp. 205–216). London: College Publications.

123

Epistemic and Metaphysical Buddhist Idealisms

375

Mimaki, K. (1976). La Réfutation bouddhique de la permanence des choses (sthirasiddhidūṣaṇa) et la
preuve de la momentanéité des choses (kṣaṇabhaṅgasiddhi). Publications de l’Institut de Civilisation
Indienne 41. Paris: de Boccard.
Oetke, C. (1992). Doctrine and argument in Vijñānavāda Buddhism. Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde
Südasiens, 36 (Archiv für indische Philosophie), 217–226.
Ratié, I. (2007). Otherness in the Pratyabhijñā philosophy. Journal of Indian Philosophy, 35(4), 313–370.
Ratié, I. (2010a). The dreamer and the yogin—On the relationship between Buddhist and Śaiva idealisms.
Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies, 73(3), 437–478.
Ratié, I. (2010b). Le non-être, une preuve de l’existence du Soi? La notion d’abhāva dans la philosophie
de la Pratyabhijñā. Journal Asiatique, 298(2)[2011], 421–493.
Ratié, I. (2011a). Le Soi et l’Autre. Identité, différence et altérité dans la philosophie de la Pratyabhijñā.
Jerusalem studies in religion and culture 13. Leiden: Brill.
Ratié, I. (2011b). Can one prove that something exists beyond consciousness? A Śaiva criticism of the
Sautrāntika inference of external objects. Journal of Indian Philosophy, 39(4–5), 479–501.
Ratié, I. (forthcoming). Some hitherto unknown fragments of Utpaladeva’s Vivr̥ ti (II): against the
existence of external objects. In D. Goodall & P. S. Filliozat (Eds.), Mélanges tantriques à la
mémoire de N. Ramacandra Bhatt.
Schmithausen, L. (2005). On the problem of the external world in the Ch’eng wei shih lun. Studia
Philologica Buddhica (occasional paper series) 13. Tokyo: The International Institute for Buddhist
Studies.
Steinkellner, E., & Much, M. T. (1995). Texte der erkenntnistheoretischen Schule des Buddhismus. In
Systematische Übersicht über die buddhistische Sanskrit-Literatur II [Systematic survey of Buddhist
Sanskrit-literature II]. Abhandlungen der Akademie der Wissenschaften in Göttingen. Göttingen:
Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.
Taber, J. (2010). Kumārila’s Buddhist. Journal of Indian Philosophy, 38, 279–296.
Torella, R. (1992). The Pratyabhijñā and the logical-epistemological school of Buddhism. In T. Goudriaan
(Ed.), Ritual and speculation in early Tantrism, studies in honor of André Padoux (pp. 327–345).
SUNY Series in Tantric Studies. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Torella, R. (2002). See ĪPK.
Torella, R. (2007). Studies on Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ ti. Part I: Anupalabdhi and apoha in a
Śaiva Garb. In K. Preisendanz (Ed.), Expanding and merging horizons. Contributions to South Asian
and cross-cultural studies in commemoration of Wilhelm Halbfass (pp. 473–490). Wien: Verlag der
Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Vetter, T. (1964). Erkenntnisprobleme bei Dharmakīrti. Wien: Österreichische Akademie der
Wissenschaften.

123

