WIENER STUDIEN ZUR TIBETOLOGIE UND BUDDHISMUSKUNDE 100

A Road Less Traveled
Felicitation Volume in Honor of John Taber

ARBEITSKREIS FÜR TIBETISCHE UND BUDDHISTISCHE STUDIEN
UNIVERSITÄT WIEN

WIEN 2021

A ROAD LESS TRAVELED
FELICITATION VOLUME IN HONOR OF
JOHN TABER

EDITED BY

VINCENT ELTSCHINGER, BIRGIT KELLNER,
ETHAN MILLS AND ISABELLE RATIÉ

WIEN 2021

ARBEITSKREIS FÜR TIBETISCHE UND BUDDHISTISCHE STUDIEN
UNIVERSITÄT WIEN

Herausgeberbeirat / Editorial Board
Jens-Uwe Hartmann, Leonard van der Kuijp, Charles Ramble,
Alexander von Rospatt, Cristina Scherrer-Schaub, Jonathan Silk,
Ernst Steinkellner, Tom Tillemans

Cover painting “Black Mesa Landscape / Out Back of Marie’s II, 1930”
by Georgia O’Keeffe, © Georgia O’Keeffe Museum, Santa Fe, New Mexico /
Bildrecht, Wien 2021

This book is published under the Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International Licence (CC BY 4.0).

ISBN: 978-3-902501-39-4

IMPRESSUM
Verleger: Arbeitskreis für Tibetische und Buddhistische Studien
Universitätscampus, Spitalgasse 2-4, Hof 2, 1090 Wien
Herausgeber und für den Inhalt verantwortlich:
B. Kellner, K.-D. Mathes, M. Viehbeck
alle: Spitalgasse 2-4, Hof 2, 1090 Wien
Druck: Ferdinand Berger und Söhne GmbH, Wiener Straße 80, 3580 Horn

Contents
Introduction........................................................................................................ix
Publications of John A. Taber............................................................................xvii
Dan Arnold, Location, Location, Location! Thoughts on the Significance of a Grammatical Point for Some Mādhyamika Arguments..............1
Hugo David, Action Theory and Scriptural Exegesis in Early AdvaitaVedānta (3): Maṇḍana Miśra on Ontology, Time and Commandment........37
Vincent Eltschinger, Dharmakīrti on the Origin of Suffering. An Annotated Translation of PV 2.179–189.............................................................95
Christopher Framarin and Stephen Harris, Pleasure, Desire, and Welfare
in Buddhist and Hindu Texts....................................................................127
Eli Franco, The Bhāvikāraṇavāda of Jitāri. A Tenth-Century Buddhist
Treatise on Backward Causation..............................................................147
Elisa Freschi, Mīmāṃsā between Epistemology and Hermeneutics:
The History of Arthāpatti..........................................................................175
Alessandro Graheli, Epistemology Meets Poetry: Jayanta on Dhvani.............219
Kunio Harikai, Kumārila on Sādhuśabda.........................................................247
Matthew T. Kapstein, The *Madhyamakaprajñāvatāra of a Late
Candrakīrti.............................................................................................269
Kei Kataoka, Bhāviveka and Kumārila on Omniscience and Scripture:
Reconsidering the New Chronology.........................................................279
Ethan Mills, “Prapañca” in Gauḍapāda and Nāgārjuna....................................301
Roy W. Perrett, Moral Motivation and Hindu Ethics........................................325
Isabelle Ratié, A History of Time in the Sāṃkhya Tradition............................341
Ernst Steinkellner, Analyse einer Sammelhandschrift von Werken
Dharmakīrtis......................................................................................421
Tom J. F. Tillemans, Reversing Śāntarakṣita’s Argument. Or Do
Mādhyamikas Derive Part-Whole Contradictions in All Things?...........443

viii

Contents

Alex Watson, Jayanta on the Question of God’s Existence..............................471
Kiyotaka Yoshimizu, Jaimini, Bādari, and Bādarāyaṇa in the
Mīmāṃsāsūtra and the Brahmasūtra........................................................505
Contributors.....................................................................................................541

A History of Time in the Sāṃkhya Tradition*
Isabelle Ratié

Pour John – remarquable savant, authentique amoureux des Idées,
merveilleux ami – avec mon admiration et mon affection profondes, ainsi que l’heureuse conviction que nous continuerons de
travailler ensemble aussi longtemps que nous serons tous deux là
pour constater l’ādityaparispanda.

The secondary literature on the definition of time in Sāṃkhya1 offers a somewhat
frustrating picture: most of those who have investigated this topic point out that
the position of Sāṃkhya is essentially a staunch denial of time’s existence as a
distinct causal power or substance, but they also insist on the puzzling variety
of views on time found in (or ascribed to) the Sāṃkhya tradition – views often
deemed irreconcilable, and sometimes presented as contradicting the basic tenet
The following text lacks many qualities that are typical of John Taber’s work, including
concision and a healthy balance between philosophical and historical considerations. My
only excuse for thus failing so spectacularly to follow his example is that I discovered too
late that the topic I had chosen for this contribution deserved a monograph, and this text
would probably have become one had I not written it from the start with John in mind,
as a sort of silent conversation with him; hence this bonsai of a study, which I prevented
from growing into the book that it aspired to be so that it could be included in this volume
in his honour (readers who have no time to explore its ramifications can go straight to
§9). Heartfelt thanks are due to the friends and colleagues who greatly helped improve
it: Marion Rastelli, to whom I owe many references from Purāṇas and Saṃhitās, and
who generously shared secondary literature and etexts; Bill Mak, who provided an article
that I could not find; Johannes Bronkhorst, Vincent Eltschinger, Harunaga Isaacson and
Philipp Maas, who read a draft of it, corrected typos and mistakes, and offered numerous
insightful remarks.
1
Studies discussing the Sāṃkhya view of time that were consulted include Garbe 1894:
286–287; Schayer 1938: 13–14; Chakravarti 1951: 254–257; Jhaveri 1955; Śastrī 1963:
190–193; Sen 1968; Shah 1968: 68–70; Sinha 1983; Balslev 1983: 44–47; Kumar 1983;
Prasad 1984a; Panda 1997: 108–109. Frauwallner (1953: 321–327) only mentions the
issue of time in connection with the Yoga tradition (on which see below, §7–8).
*

V. Eltschinger, B. Kellner, E. Mills, I. Ratié (eds.), A Road Less Traveled : Felicitation Volume in Honor
of John Taber. (Wiener Studien zur Tibetologie und Buddhismuskunde 100) Wien 2021, pp. 341–419.

342

Isabelle Ratié

that kāla has no existence of its own.2 It has been suggested that this confusing situation finds its explanation in the fact that Sāṃkhya was never actually
interested in defining time. Thus according to Stanislaw Schayer,
The classical Sāṃkhya manifested strikingly little interest in the Time-problem and…, apart from the negation of Time as a separate substance, it confined itself to copying the view of the rejected kālavāda. 3
This opinion – already voiced for instance by Theodore Stcherbatsky, who also
saw the Sāṃkhya position on time as hopelessly superficial and contradictory –4
is contrasted by Schayer himself with that of Richard Garbe, who judged the
Sāṃkhya viewpoint “superior” to that of Vedānta and Vaiśeṣika in that contrary
to them, it supposedly presented time and space as qualities rather than substances.5 Yet Garbe, just as Schayer and Stcherbatsky, considered the philosophical treatment of time in Sāṃkhya to be superficial and incidental.6
Garbe’s, Stcherbatsky’s and Schayer’s assessments – besides being probably
biased, to some extent at least, by the implicit belief in the superiority of the Kantian
approach of time –7 rested on scarce and late sources (namely, Vācaspatimiśra’s
tenth-century TK and the fifteenth- and sixteenth-century commentaries on the
SSū). Because they had so few sources at their disposal, they projected onto the
TK a view of time that only belongs to the much later commentators on the SSū,
See e.g. Panda 1997: 108–109: “The atheistic Sāṃkhya school does not accept the
existence of time. There are also several other views found within the system. According
to one view, kāla is not altogether non-existent, and is an evolute of Prakṛti. Another
view accepts time itself is Prakṛti. According to some other view, ‘action’ is designated as
time. The other view found there is – kāla is nothing besides, and independent of objects
spoken of as past, present and future. The way kāla is described in the Sāṃkhya school
also appears that it accepts kāla as both nitya (eternal) and anitya (non-eternal).” This
presentation is strikingly similar to Shah 1968: 68–70, and mentions the same sources
(but does not acknowledge Shah 1968).
3
Schayer 1938: 14.
4
Stcherbatsky 1926: 17: “En général, les questions relatives au temps et à l’espace ne
sont touchées qu’en passant et d’une façon très superficielle dans le système Sāṃkhya;
les contradictions résultant de ces conceptions sont insolubles.”
5
See Garbe 1894: 286 and n. 4.
6
See Garbe 1894: 287: “Merkwürdiger Weise wird das schwierige Problem in der SāṃkhyaLiteratur – wie überhaupt in der indischen Philosophie – nur ganz beiläufig und nebensächlich behandelt.”
7
See e.g., besides the remark by Garbe quoted in the previous note, Keith [1918] 1924:
212, which notes in passing that the SSū’s definition of time “is not much superior to the
view of the Nyāya and Vaiśeṣika, which call space and time substances, nor in any of the
cases is the real problem of either space or time seriously faced or realized.”
2

A History of Time in the Sāṃkhya Tradition

343

and, considering the Sāṃkhya notion of time sub specie aeternitatis, they could
not see that at least some of the doctrinal differences that they took to be pure
and simple contradictions result from the fact that the Sāṃkhya definition of time
underwent important changes in the course of Sāṃkhya’s long history. In the past
decades, research on time in the Sāṃkhya tradition has come to include many
other sources; but the studies of which I am aware still make use of a fraction
of the classical Sāṃkhya literature that is now available;8 some appear to treat
on a par Sāṃkhya sources and testimonies provided by other traditions;9 and
very few attempt even a cursory summary of the most important philosophical
development on time offered in a preserved Sāṃkhya work – namely, the YD.10
The following pages can offer nothing more than a tentative and incomplete
outline of the history of Sāṃkhya’s denial of time as an independent reality;
but hopefully this very imperfect attempt can convince other scholars that, although Garbe rightly pointed out that time is but a minor topic in the surviving
Sāṃkhya literature, the issue is not as nonexistent in this tradition as it is often
said to be; and that, more importantly perhaps, the history of the way in which
Sāṃkhya authors claimed to justify this relative silence in their tradition is, in and
of itself, a fascinating philosophical and historical issue that deserves a more
thorough study.

As far as I know, only Kumar 1983 attempts to review the definitions of time in all the
important phases of classical Sāṃkhya, but the order in which they are examined and
some of the conclusions offered seem at best debatable.
9
See e.g. Shah 1968 and Panda 1997.
10
Thus Jhaveri (1955: 1) asserts that among the commentaries on the SK, “only the
Sāṃkhya-tattva-kaumudī incidentally touches it.” Balslev 1983: 55 claims that “a search
through the available Sāṃkhya literature shows that a direct reference to the problem of
time is scarce” (cf. ibid.: 48); yet the book, which only mentions the SK, TK and SPraBh,
remains silent on the YD’s argument. Sen 1968 mentions the YD’s thesis but makes
no attempt to explain the reasoning that claims to establish it, contrary to Kumar 1983,
which, however, only offers a partial paraphrase of the YD’s most important argument.
Sinha 1983 is to my knowledge the only monograph devoted to the problem in “SāṃkhyaYoga;” however, not to mention its highly problematic chronology of Sāṃkhya works
(ibid.: 160–181, the author assumes that the GBh is the earliest commentary on the SK,
believes that the YD could be posterior to the TK, considers the latter to be “fixed beyond
doubt” to the 9th century, etc.), it overlooks many important passages in the Sāṃkhya
literature, including the main argument on time in the YD (although it mentions the YD
in several instances, it mainly rests in fact on the TK and the PYBh), and it makes no
mention at all of the PYV.
8

344

Isabelle Ratié

1. The earlier attitude towards time in the SK commentaries: time is
no cause and belongs to the vyakta category
The commentaries on the SK can be divided into three groups according
to the particular stanza(s) under which they discuss the nature of time: the
Suvarṇasaptati* 11 (only preserved in Chinese translation), the SV, SSV, GBh and
MV all deal with time under SK 61, whereas the YD, which discusses it under
stanza 15 and reminds its readers about it under stanza 50,12 is in a category of its
own;13 as for the JM and TK, they both mention it under SK 33. The three groups
also have strikingly different ways of dealing with the issue of time.
Despite a somewhat problematic chronology14 and the evidence pointing
to the fact that some of them must have been composed centuries apart,15 the
commentaries belonging to the first group are obviously based on a common
interpretation of the SK. Now, all of them, while explaining a stanza on the
cessation of the cosmic display by Nature (prakṛti), point out that the latter is the
only cause (kāraṇa), and in this connection they vigorously deny any merit to the
ideas that God (īśvara), the person (puruṣa), the nature [of things] (svabhāva) and
time (kāla) may be ascribed any causal role.16 As regards time, they all quote a
This is the Sanskrit title that the Chinese title translates according to Takakusu
1904: 4; I do not know Chinese, so I have to rely entirely on the French translation in
Takakusu 1904 for this source. According to Solomon 1974: 170, the work translated
into Chinese is the SV, and may have been composed by Īśvarakṛṣṇa himself; the author,
however, acknowledges some differences between the two texts (ibid.: 92) that she tries
to explain by postulating that the translator Paramārtha was also “acquainted” with the
SSV (ibid.: 171) – a justification that does not seem very convincing as far as the passages on time quoted below are concerned.
12
In fact all the preserved commentaries mention time under SK 50 (the very word kāla
appears in the stanza), but as will be seen below (n. 87), most of them do not discuss the
nature of time. Similarly, although SK 33 mentions the past, present and future, only the
JM and TK take this as an opportunity to discuss the nature of time.
13
It may also have discussed time under SK 61 (there is a lacuna from the midst of the
commentary on SK 59 to that of SK 64).
14
Solomon 1974 argues in favour of the sequence 1=SV, 2=SSV, 3=Suvarṇasaptati*,
4=GBh, 5=MV. This is questioned in Larson and Bhattacharya 1987: 21, according to
which, on the basis of the evidence adduced, one could as well argue for the priority of
the Suvarṇasaptati*, or postulate “some sort of original Ur-commentary upon which all
five commentaries are based.”
15
Paramārtha’s Chinese translation was produced between 557 and 569 (Takakusu 1904:
3), whereas the MV, which quotes the Hastāmalakastotra, Bhāgavatapurāṇa and VPu,
must have been composed several centuries later (Mishra 1930; Solomon 1974: 180).
16
SK 61: prakṛteḥ sukumārataraṃ na kiñcid astīti me matir bhavati | yā dṛṣṭāsmīti punar
na darśanam upaiti puruṣasya || “It seems to me that there is nothing more delicate than

11

A History of Time in the Sāṃkhya Tradition

345

verse from the MBh that presents it as an inescapable cosmic force responsible
for maturation and destruction:
Time makes beings mature; time destroys creatures; time is awake when
[all are] asleep; for time cannot be escaped.17
The SV, for its part, appears to distinguish those who defend this position from
“others” who simply state that “time is a cause:”
But other masters consider that time is the cause of the worlds. Since it
has been said: “Time makes beings mature; time destroys the world; time
is awake when [all are] asleep; for time cannot be escaped,” worlds arise
from time. Others say that time is a cause.18

Nature, who, [thinking]: ‘I have been seen,’ no longer shows [herself] to the person.”
The connection between this verse and the discussion on the causality of īśvara, puruṣa,
svabhāva and kāla is not obvious (one would rather have expected it e.g. under SK 15–16,
which show how prakṛti must be inferred as a cause – and indeed, the YD discusses
this under SK 15). Tilak 1915 attempts to explain this by postulating a missing stanza
immediately after SK 61 that may have denied the causality of īśvara, svabhāva, puruṣa
and kāla – which would explain why there are only 69 stanzas commented upon by
Gauḍapāda (whose commentary remains silent on SK 70–72) whereas the SK are supposedly 70. Suryanarayanan 1931: 636 has shown, however, that there are other ways of
solving the problem of the stanzas’ number and that the passage in question seems to fit
well at least within the commentary on SK 61 in the Suvarṇasaptati*: the latter understands
the verse as stating that Nature is the cause of the manifested world and of liberation,
because the puruṣa obtains liberation (and therefore ceases perceiving the manifested
world) as soon as it sees Nature for what it is, namely, the most subtle (sukumāra) cause
of the manifested world. The commentary therefore proceeds to examine a series of
objections according to which a certain entity more subtle than Nature (īśvara, etc.) is in
fact the cause in question, so that liberation cannot result from the correct understanding
of prakṛti.
17
According to the editors of the MBh, this verse is inserted in most of the manuscripts
belonging to the Northern recension after 11.2.14: kālaḥ pacati* bhūtāni kālaḥ saṃharate prajāḥ** | kālaḥ supteṣu jāgarti kālo hi duratikramaḥ*** || [*pacati MBh, SV, GBh;
sṛjati SSV, MV. **saṃharate prajāḥ MBh, SSV, MV; saṃharate jagat GBh; saṃkṣipate
jagat SV. ***kālo hi duratikramaḥ MBh, SV, GBh; tasmāt kālas tu karaṇam SSV, MV.]
Cf. Takakusu 1904: 1051: “Le temps mûrit tout ce qui existe, il détruit tout ce qui existe;
quand le monde dort, le temps veille; qui peut tromper le temps?” The verse is often
quoted, including in Buddhist and Jaina sources (see e.g. Lamotte 1949: 76; Frauwallner
1956: 75; May 1981: 83).
18
SV, p. 60 (unless otherwise stated, E. Solomon’s conjectures in the SV and SSV were
adopted): apare punar ācāryā manyante kālaḥ kāraṇaṃ lokānām iti, yasmād āha kālaḥ
pacati bhūtāni kālaḥ saṃkṣipate jagat | kālaḥ supteṣu jāgarti kālo hi duratikramaḥ || tasmāt
kālāl lokānām utpattiḥ. apare bruvate kālaḥ kāraṇam iti.

346

Isabelle Ratié

It is tempting to identify the “others” with the Vaiśeṣikas, who contend that time
is a cause in the sense that it produces our awareness that things are temporally
determined while also exerting a limited power on things themselves as one of
the conditions of their arising, existence and destruction.19 In any case, all the
other texts in this group of commentaries on the SK either entirely conflate the
positions seemingly distinguished by the SV, or at least remain ambiguous as to
whether they are understood as being held by the same persons.20 They reject the
idea that time may thus play any causal role by arguing that it is not a constitutive element of reality or a distinct category (padārtha), since – as pointed out
by the SK themselves from the outset –21 there are only three such categories: the
unmanifest (avyakta), the manifest (vyakta) and the person (puruṣa); and time,

See below, nn. 89 and 91. On the difference between time as an all-powerful cosmological force in the epic kālavāda and the Vaiśeṣikas’ understanding of time as one
causal condition among others – or, as Vyomaśiva puts it, an auxiliary cause (sahakārin) –,
see e.g. Keith 1921: 233; Frauwallner 1956: 111; Prasad 1984b: 235; Halbfass 1992:
212–213.
20
SSV, p. 73: kālacintakā bruvate kālaḥ kāraṇam iti yasmād āha kālaḥ sṛjati bhūtāni
kālaḥ saṃharate prajāḥ | kālaḥ supteṣu jāgarti tasmāt kālas tu kāraṇam || iti. “Those who
have pondered over [the nature of] time say that time is a cause, which is why it has been
said: ‘Time creates beings; time destroys creatures; time is awake when [all are] asleep
– therefore time is a cause.’” GBh, pp. 54–55: tathā keṣāṃcit kālaḥ kāraṇam ity, uktaṃ
ca kālaḥ pacati bhūtāni kālaḥ saṃharate jagat | kālaḥ supteṣu jāgarti kālo hi duratikramaḥ || “Thus according to some, time is a cause; and it has been said: ‘Time makes beings
mature; time destroys the world; time is awake when [all are] asleep; for time cannot
be escaped.’” MV, p. 56: kecit kālaṃ kāraṇatayā varṇayanti, kālaḥ sṛjati bhūtāni kālaḥ
saṃharate prajāḥ | kālaḥ supteṣu jāgarti tasmāt kālas tu kāraṇam || “Some explain time
as a cause: ‘Time creates beings; time destroys creatures; time is awake when [all are]
asleep – therefore time is a cause.’” Cf. Takakusu 1904: 1051: “Il y a encore quelques
autres opinions. Il y a des hommes qui considèrent le temps comme la cause; ainsi il est
dit dans une stance: ‘le temps mûrit tout ce qui existe, il détruit tout ce qui existe; quand
le monde dort, le temps veille; qui peut tromper le temps? Toute chose dérive du temps.’”
21
According to SK 2, the means of eliminating pain taught in Sāṃkhya is superior “due to
the knowledge of the manifest, the unmanifest and the knower” (vyaktāvyaktajñavijñānāt).
The commentaries identify the unmanifest with Nature; the manifest, with its evolutes;
the knower, with the person – and they add that these constitute the only twenty-five
principles (tattva). See e.g. SV, p. 6: buddhir ahaṅkāraḥ pañcatanmātrāṇy ekādaśendriyāṇi
pañcamahābhūtānīty etad vyaktam, avyaktaṃ pradhānam, jñaḥ puruṣaḥ. evam etāni
pañcaviṃśatitattvāni parisamāptāni. “The manifest is the intellect, the sense of ego, the
five subtle elements, the eleven organs [and] the five gross elements; the unmanifest is
matter; the knower is the person. Thus the twenty-five principles are complete (parisamāpta).” The parallel passage in Suvarṇasaptati*, p. 982, also specifies that “les vingtcinq vérités (tattva)… ne doivent pas être augmentées ou diminuées.”
19

A History of Time in the Sāṃkhya Tradition

347

far from having any reality of its own, is included (antarbhūta) within these
three. Thus the SV:
What [we] call time is not a constitutive element of reality: for the
Sāṃkhyas, the constitutive elements of reality are the manifest, the unmanifest [and] the person, [and] time is included in them; that is to say, it
is nothing distinct [from them]. Thus only matter is a cause.22
The parallel passages in the SSV,23 GBh24 and MV25 are almost identical. Oddly,
however, the translation of the Suvarṇasaptati* offered by J. Takakusu states
the contrary – namely, that the three categories do not include time –,26 and it
seems to rest on a Sanskrit reading that involved a negation of antarbhūta.27 One
might wonder whether the other commentaries are not faulty in this instance:
SV, p. 60: kālo nāma na kaścit padārtho ’sti. vyaktam avyaktaṃ puruṣa iti padārthāḥ
sāṃkhyānāṃ teṣu kālo ’ntarbhūtaḥ. nānyad* ity arthaḥ. evaṃ** pradhānam eva kāraṇam.
[*nānyad conj.; nātad ms.; nānya conj. Solomon. ** evaṃ conj.; evam etebhyaḥ ms.; evam
etebhyaḥ anyat conj. Solomon]. (I assume that etebhyaḥ was originally a marginal gloss
explaining nānyat).
23
SSV, p. 73: kālo nāma na kaścit padārtho ’stīti. vyaktam avyaktaṃ puruṣa iti trayaḥ
padārthās teṣu kālo ’ntarbhūtaḥ. evaṃ nāsty anyat kāraṇaṃ pradhānaṃ muktveti. “What
[we] call time is not a constitutive element of reality: there are three constitutive elements
of reality, [namely] the manifest, the unmanifest and the person, [and] time is included in
them. Thus there is no other cause besides matter.”
24
GBh, p. 55: vyaktāvyaktapuruṣās trayaḥ padārthās tena kālo ’ntarbhūto ’sti, sa hi
vyaktaḥ. sarvakartṛtvāt kālasyāpi pradhānam eva kāraṇaṃ. “The manifest, the unmanifest and the person are the three constitutive elements of reality; time is included in this,
for it is a manifest [entity] (vyakta). Only matter is a cause – [and it is the cause] of time
too, because it is the agent [that produces] everything.”
25
MV, p. 56: kālo nāma na kaścit padārtho ’sti, vyaktam avyaktam puruṣa iti traya eva
padārthāḥ. tatra kālo ’ntarbhūtaḥ. evaṃ pradhānaṃ hitvā nāsty anyat kāraṇam. “What
[we] call time is not a constitutive element of reality: there are only three constitutive
elements of reality, [namely] the manifest, the unmanifest and the person, [and] time is
included in them. Thus there is no other cause besides matter.”
26
Solomon 1974: 78, considers that all commentaries are in agreement here, and asserts
that Paramārtha’s translation of the commentary “explains that Kāla is not included in
the Sāṃkhya categories (– all say this much –)…” This is of course true in the sense that
all commentaries point out that there are only three categories, and that none of them is
time; but four of these texts also state that time is nothing over and above them because
it is included in them, in stark opposition to the Suvarṇasaptati* as translated in Takakusu
1904: 1051.
27
Takakusu 1904: 1051 (my emphasis): “L’opinion qui considère le temps comme étant
la cause est erronée, car le temps ne se trouve pas parmi les trois catégories, la Nature, ses
produits et l’Âme, qui renferment toute chose qui existe. En dehors des trois catégories il
n’y a rien; elles ne renferment pas le temps; nous savons donc que le temps n’existe pas.”
22

348

Isabelle Ratié

the argument might have originally pointed out that time cannot be considered a
cause because it does not exist, since it is excluded from the padārthas. It seems,
however, that it is rather the Suvarṇasaptati* (or its French translation?) that
should be corrected here, since immediately after this passage, the commentary
that Paramārtha translated into Chinese evidently specified (as does the GBh)28
that time does belong to the category of the manifest (vyakta): according to the
Suvarṇasaptati* itself, it is nothing but a “modality” or “epithet” of it –29 that is,
it has no reality of its own, independently of the three kinds of entities that constitute the universe, since it is but a part of the manifest.
So these texts are not so much concerned with defining time as they are with
denying its causality; they do so by asserting that time has no existence over and
above the three constitutive elements of reality acknowledged in Sāṃkhya, and
two of them explicitly connect it with the vyakta category. Besides, although the
SV possibly alludes to the Vaiśeṣika understanding of time as a second target of
this criticism, these commentaries first and foremost engage in the refutation of an
understanding of time as a distinct efficient force that is usually called kālavāda
in secondary sources30 and that, as pointed out by these works themselves, is
found in the MBh (often in connection with a svabhāvavāda, also criticized in the
same passage by this group of texts). It is unclear to what extent this so-called
kālavāda was in fact a unitary doctrine, or by whom it was defended; in any
case it is sometimes attributed in the Mokṣadharmaparvan to thinkers who are
presented as Sāṃkhya masters, such as Asita Devala. 31 It has also been pointed
See above, n. 24.
Takakusu 1904: 1051 (the translator renders the Chinese equivalent of vyakta by
“produit,” see e.g. ibid.: 993): “Ce qu’on appelle temps est une modalité d’un produit; le
temps passé, c’est un produit passé, et le présent et le futur sont de même des produits
présents et futurs. Nous savons donc que ‘temps’ n’est qu’une épithète des produits. Pour
cette raison nous considérons la Nature comme étant la vraie cause.”
30
On this kālavāda, see Schrader 1902: 16–30; Stcherbatsky 1926: 14–16; Schayer 1938:
4–12; Bedekar 1961; Halbfass 1992: 212–213; and Vincent Eltschinger’s contribution to
this volume.
31
The latter (whose name only seems to appear in the MV among commentaries on the
SK, but who is presented as a Sāṃkhya teacher in MBh 12: see Motegi 2007: 357–358),
explains that time creates all beings out of the five mahābhūtas (MBh 12.267.4): yebhyaḥ
sṛjati bhūtāni kālo bhāvapracoditaḥ | mahābhūtāni pañceti tāny āhur bhūtacintakāḥ ||
“Those who have pondered over [the nature of] beings (bhūta) say that it is from the
five great elements (mahābhūta) that time, impelled by [its own] nature, creates beings
(bhūta).” He also counts time among the eternal “elements” of the universe (MBh
12.267.9): pañcaiva tāni kālaś ca bhāvābhāvau ca kevalau | aṣṭau bhūtāni bhūtānāṃ
śāśvatāni bhavāpyayau || “Those [great elements,] which are only five, [plus] time,
existence and nonexistence – [that is,] arising and disappearing –, and nothing else, are the

28

29

A History of Time in the Sāṃkhya Tradition

349

out in this connection32 that according to the ABSaṃ, Sāṃkhya and Yoga count
four categories (presented as mere aspects of a single power), and that the fourth
happens to be time:
O wise one, it is the same power that is designated in Sāṃkhya and Yoga
by the four names “manifest,” “unmanifest,” “person,” and “time.”33
According to Shujun Motegi, “Although the role of Time is not clear here, the
testimony of the ABSaṃ suggests the possibility that in the earlier period there
was a certain Sāṃkhya or Yoga school which regarded Time as a basic principle.”34 The same author notices that the fourfold list also occurs in the VPu,
which, like the ABSaṃ, insists that its items are ultimately a single reality
– namely, Viṣṇu35 (in fact the same list appears in the LT36 as well as in a number
of Purāṇas,37 as an enumeration of aspects of a single divinity who is most often
eight eternal elements (bhūta) of beings (bhūta).” On this doctrine see Chakravarti 1951:
44–45, Brockington 1999: 476, and Motegi 2007; on the bhūtacintakas see Bhattacharya
2007 (which makes no reference to Sāṃkhya but distinguishes them from the Cārvākas).
32
Chakravarti 1951: 257; Motegi 2007: 360.
33
ABSaṃ 51.42: vyaktāvyaktapumākhyābhis tathā kālākhyayā mune | uktā catasṛbhiḥ
saiva śaktir vai sāṃkhyayogayoḥ ||
34
Motegi 2007: 360.
35
Ibid., n. 20, quoting VPu 1.2.18ab: vyaktaṃ viṣṇus tathāvyaktaṃ puruṣaḥ kāla eva ca.
36
LT 17.42cd (in an enumeration of epithets qualifying Viṣṇu): vyaktāvyaktajñakālākhyakḷptabhāvacatuṣṭaya || “O [You] who are the four states [the enumeration of
which is] complete? (kḷpta) [and that are] called the manifest, the unmanifest, the knower
and time…”
37
GPu 1.4.5ab: vyaktaṃ viṣṇus tathāvyaktaṃ puruṣaḥ kāla eva ca | “Viṣṇu is the manifest, as He is the unmanifest, the person, and time.” KPu 2.3.1: avyaktād abhavat kālaḥ
pradhānaṃ puruṣaḥ paraḥ | tebhyaḥ sarvam idaṃ jātaṃ tasmād brahmamayaṃ jagat ||
“From the unmanifest arose time, matter, the supreme person; all this [phenomenal reality]
has arisen from them; so the world is full of the Brahman.” LPu 2.16.3–5: kṣetrajñaḥ
prakṛtir vyaktaṃ kālātmeti munīśvaraiḥ | ucyate kaiścid ācāryair āgamārṇavapāragaiḥ ||
kṣetrajñaṃ puruṣaṃ prāhuḥ pradhānaṃ prakṛtiṃ budhāḥ | vikārajātaṃ niḥśeṣaṃ prakṛter
vyaktam ity api || pradhānavyaktayoḥ kālaḥ pariṇāmaikakāraṇam | tac catuṣṭayam īśasya
rūpāṇāṃ hi catuṣṭayam || “Certain masters who are the best among sages [and] have
crossed the sea of scriptures say that [He is] the knower of the field, Nature, the manifest,
[and] consists in time. The wise proclaim that the knower of the field is the person;
Nature is matter; the manifest is everything that results from Nature’s transformations;
time is the only cause of transformation of matter and the manifest. For these four are the
four forms of the Lord.” Cf. ŚPu 7.2.5.18–21ab: pradhānapuruṣavyaktakālātmā kathyate
śivaḥ | pradhānaṃ prakṛtiṃ prāhuḥ kṣetrajñaṃ puruṣaṃ tathā || trayoviṃśatitattvāni
vyaktam āhur manīṣiṇaḥ | kālaḥ kāryaprapañcasya pariṇāmaikakāraṇam || eṣām īśo
’dhipo dhātā pravartakanivartakaḥ | āvirbhāvatirobhāvahetur ekaḥ svarāḍ ajaḥ || tasmāt
pradhānapuruṣavyaktakālasvarūpavān | “Śiva is said to consist of matter, the person,

350

Isabelle Ratié

Viṣṇu). The hypothesis of an earlier Sāṃkhya tradition that included time as a
“basic principle” had already been put forward by Pulinbihari Chakravarti on
similar grounds,38 although the latter had rightly pointed out that the “Bhāgavata
colouring” of the ABSaṃ renders its testimony questionable;39 and the current
consensus that it must postdate the 11th century40 makes it even less trustworthy
in this respect. Yet it is striking that whereas the discourse of Asita Devala in
Chapter 267 of the MBh’s Śāntiparvan makes no mention of a list of four items
comprising vyakta, avyakta, puruṣa and kāla,41 all the commentaries on the SK
quoted above insist that kāla is not a fourth element.42 So although very little can
be said of Sāṃkhya views on time that largely predate the SK commentaries, it
seems probable that when the commentary on the SK translated into Chinese by
Paramārtha was composed, there were still competing views within movements
that called themselves Sāṃkhya43 as to whether time should be considered a distinct entity and causal power: this could explain the emphatic denial found in
all the SK commentaries quoted above. Besides, around the time of the SK’s
the manifest and time; they say that matter is Nature, and the person is the knower of
the field. The wise say that the manifest are the thirty-three principles; time is the only
cause of the transformation of the whole apparent unfolding (prapañca) of effects. The
Lord rules over these [four], arranges them, prompts them and stops them; He is the sole,
sovereign and unborn cause of their appearance and disappearance; therefore He possesses the forms of matter, the person, the manifest and time.”
38
Chakravarti 1951: 257.
39
Ibid.: 120; see also Motegi 2007: 360, n. 18. As already pointed out in Frauwallner
1953: 480, n. 177, and Oberhammer 1960: 85–86, n. 45, it is problematic to try to gain
any knowledge regarding the lost Ṣaṣṭitantra (of which the SK are, according to their
own author, a mere summary) from the list of “sixty topics” (ṣaṣṭitantra) enumerated in
the ABSaṃ (on which see Schrader 1914); for, not to mention that the ABSaṃ’s account
widely differs from the known fragments of the Ṣaṣṭitantra, it uses the term ṣaṣṭitantra
to designate the Sāṃkhya traditions in general, and while acknowledging their diversity,
it favours one that is clearly incompatible with the SK commentaries.
40
See Rastelli 2018: 423 for a synthetic account of this issue (Sanderson 2001: 35–38,
has shown that it must postdate Kṣemarāja; Begley 1973 had already argued on iconographical grounds that it could hardly be earlier than the 12th or 13th century).
41
This is already observed in Motegi 2007: 360.
42
Surprisingly, they are not taken into account by Chakravarti and Motegi as regards the
issue of time, who both merely remark (Chakravarti 1951: 257, Motegi 2007: 360) that
the conception of time found in Asita Devala’s discourse is rejected by the YD.
43
On the great doctrinal diversity of what is called Sāṃkhya in the MBh, and the process
of unification that it must have undergone, see Bakker and Bisschop 1999, which shows
that this process must have started in the course of the redaction, transmission and revision of the Mokṣadharma, and adds (ibid.: 468) that it “may have been concomitant
with the rise of the classical school of Sāṃkhya.”

A History of Time in the Sāṃkhya Tradition

351

composition and in the following centuries during which their commentaries
were written, Vaiṣṇava and Śaiva movements that did not define themselves as
Sāṃkhya but tended to absorb Sāṃkhya notions within their own metaphysical
frame developed various systems in which time was counted as a fourth padārtha
or distinct tattva,44 and the commentaries on SK 61 might have been responding
in part to this external pressure (hence, perhaps, the SV’s insistence that “for the
Sāṃkhyas,” there are only three categories).45 In any case, the early interpretation
of the SK seems to have offered little more than an argument of authority
regarding the ontological and causal status of time, namely: since the SK do not
mention kāla as a separate item in the enumeration of categories, it cannot be
one. And while emphatically denying kāla’s distinct reality or causality, it did not
offer any clear definition of it.

2. The YD’s thesis: time is nothing but actions
From this point of view, as often, the approach of the YD46 is strikingly different.
It discusses the nature of time under SK 15, and briefly comes back to it under
SK 50; its main target is no longer the epic kālavāda, but the Vaiśeṣika concept
of time; contrary to all other SK commentaries, it explicitly identifies time with
action (kriyā);47 and it advances arguments against the notion of an ontologically
44
On kāla as a tattva in Vaiṣṇava sources, see Brunner, Oberhammer and Padoux 2004,
s.v. kāla, §3; for Śaiva sources, see Torella 1998 and Goodall 2016. Torella 1998: 55
notes from the outset that the group of tattvas named kañcukas in Śaiva sources forms
“a foreign body with respect to the Sāṃkhya basis of tattvas, much more foreign for
example than the first five tattvas (Śiva, Śakti, Sadāśiva, Īśvara and Śuddhavidyā…)
also being an addition by the Śaiva tradition.” The article further notices (ibid.: 59, n. 23)
that kāla and niyati “are sometimes excluded from the list of the kañcukas” and “seem
generally to have a somewhat peripheral role with respect to the other cuirasses,” including on the ritual plane. This, however, might only be true of relatively late sources,
as shown in Goodall 2016, which, while analyzing the Uttarasūtra of the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā, points out that “there was an early Śaiva tradition in which kalā, vidyā and
rāga were omitted, and in which the only so-called kañcukas that existed were kāla and
niyati” (ibid.: 89).
45
It is also possible that some of the Vaiṣṇava texts mentioned above insisted on the
existence of a fourth padārtha as a reaction to this commentarial tradition on SK 61.
46
According to Wezler and Motegi 1988: xxviii, its author knew Dignāga but apparently
not Dharmakīrti, yet the work must be posterior to the Kāśikāvṛtti, which it quotes, and
so was probably composed ca. 680–720 CE; Bronkhorst 2003 has pointed out, however,
that the quotation in question was not necessarily borrowed from the Kāśikāvṛtti, so that
the YD could be somewhat earlier.
47
As will be seen below (§5), the TK’s reasoning rests on this idea, but does not actually
state it.

352

Isabelle Ratié

independent substance called “time” that are not found in any other surviving
commentary on the SK.
Under SK 1548 (which states the reasons why, as concluded in SK 16, “the unmanifest, which is the cause, exists,” kāraṇam asty avyaktam), the YD’s author
wants to show that indeed, Nature, although imperceptible, must be inferred as
the cause of the world because no other cause can account for it; he therefore
endeavours to demonstrate that other entities seen as causes in rival systems cannot in fact play such a role, and it is in this connection that he critically examines
the causality of atoms (paramāṇu), a creator God (īśvara), acts that require a retribution (karman), time (kāla), chance (yadṛcchā) and nonexistence (abhāva).
Here is how the passage on time begins:
As for what has been claimed, [viz.], that the world must arise due to time
– it is not possible either. Why? Because this word [“time”] only refers to
the movement of causes (kāraṇaparispanda). For according to us, what is
called “time” is not a [constitutive element of reality]; rather, actions that
are in the process of being performed – such as the movement of the sun,
the milking of cows, the ringing of a bell and so forth – are the causes of
the cognition that [something] similar [viz. another action] has a limited
duration (avadhi) that is particularized (viśiṣṭa) [by them];49 and nothing
else (eva) [causes this cognition].50
As the other SK commentaries examined above, the YD is concerned with showing that time has no reality of its own; but contrary to them, it attempts to explain
what the object of our awareness of time really is if time is not a distinct entity
– namely, “actions that are in the process of being performed.” We say that something lasts for a specific amount of time because we compare a given action to
See above, n. 13.
For a different interpretation of this sentence see Oberhammer 1977: 196: “Es gibt
nämlich für uns keine Zeit [als Realität], sondern lediglich den Umstand, daß die Veränderung sich verändernder [Gegebenheiten] wie zum Beispiel der Lauf der Sonne,
das Melken der Kühe, der Glockenschlag usw. Ursache einer einer bestimmten Abgrenzung entsprechenden Vorstellung ist.” My understanding of viśiṣṭāvadhisarūpapratyayanimittatvam is based on the parallel explanations in the PYV and ĪPVV (see
below, §7, nn. 168 and 171) as well as on the MBhāṣya passage (see below, n. 69) to which
the YD alludes.
50
YD, p. 161: yad apy uktaṃ kālāj jagadutpattir bhaviṣyatīti tad anupapannam. kasmāt.
kāraṇaparispandasyaiva* tadabhidhānasanniveśāt. na hi naḥ kālo nāma kaścid asti.
kiṃ tarhi kriyamāṇakriyāṇām evādityagatigodohaghaṇṭāstanitādīnāṃ viśiṣṭāvadhisarūpapratyayanimittatvam. [*kāraṇaparispandasyaiva is the reading found in all mss.
(see Ed., n. 7); the editors have emended it to karaṇaparispandasyaiva, although the compound appears again 12 lines below (kāraṇaspandasya, p. 162), and the manuscripts’
reading was kept in the second case.]
48
49

A History of Time in the Sāṃkhya Tradition

353

another one, such as the movement of the sun (as when we say that a trip takes
X days, or that an individual is X years old). Our awareness of time is therefore
nothing but our measuring one action in terms of other actions; or, as the reader
is reminded under SK 50:
What [we] call time is not a constitutive element of reality (padārtha);
rather, the word “time” [merely] refers to actions.51
Although the connection of this definition with what is said of time in the
commentaries examined above is far from obvious, it is certainly compatible
with the assertion that time is but an aspect of the manifest. Thus the definition
of the vyakta category in SK 10 specifies that the latter is “endowed with action”
(sakriya), and it is quite possible that the author of the YD saw this characteristics
as the very definition of time – unfortunately, the part of the YD that probably
discussed this term is currently missing.52 Besides, immediately after reminding
its readers that “the word ‘time’ [merely] refers to actions,” the YD points
out that the treatise has already shown that actions are the activity of organs
(karaṇavṛtti), so that those who believe in the distinct existence and causality
of time really confuse consciousness with their organs.53 This is probably an
YD, p. 247: na kālo nāma kaścit padārtho ’sti. kiṃ tarhi kriyāsu kālasaṃjñā.
YD, p. 127 gives a short gloss of it (saha kriyayā sakriyam), but the remainder of
the commentary as it has survived only examines the two first elements of definition
provided in the stanza, i.e., hetumat and anitya. The other commentaries (Takakusu 1904:
992; SV, p. 16; SSV, p. 19; GBh, p. 11; MV, p. 14) explain that the manifest is endowed
with action, understood here as movement – which is impossible for the unmanifest,
since prakṛti is omnipresent –, and they point out in this respect that this is also true of
the subtle body, the transmigration of which is a movement.
53
YD, p. 247: tāś ca karaṇavṛttir iti pratipāditam. na cānyā vṛttir vṛttimataḥ. tasmāt
karaṇacaitanyapratijñāḥ kālātmakā iti. “And [the treatise] has [already] demonstrated
that these [actions] are the activity of the organs; and this activity is not distinct from
its agent – therefore those who identify with time (kālātmaka) [are those who] think
that consciousness is the organs.” That is to say, those who believe in the distinct
existence and causal power of time are “content” with this idea that prevents them
from achieving liberation (on this “contentment,” tuṣṭi, see below, nn. 86–88). The
author of the YD is responding here to an interlocutor who has remarked that in the
case of other such contentments, the principle with which the yogin confuses his self is
clearly defined; the interlocutor therefore demands a similar explanation for time. See
YD, p. 247: prakṛtyātmakasya tāvad yogino ’ṣṭau prakṛtayo viṣaya ity uktaṃ purastāt,
upādānātmakasya ca pṛthivyādīni mahābhūtāni, kālabhāgyayos tu na tathoktam, tasmād
vaktavyaṃ kasya tattvasyaiṣā samākhyeti. ucyate: na, uktatvāt. prāg evaitad apadiṣṭam. na
kālo nāma kaścit padārtho ’sti. “[– Question:] To begin with, for a yogin who identifies
with Nature, it has been said previously that the object [of the contentment] is the eight
natures; and for one who identifies with the material cause (upādāna), [the object]
51

52

354

Isabelle Ratié

allusion to SK 33, which teaches that the external organs of action and perception
only have to do with the present, whereas the internal organ constituted by the
intellect (buddhi), sense of ego (ahaṃkāra) and mind (manas) pertains to the
past, present and future.54 The YD’s explanation of this stanza does not say anything of time’s nature, but under SK 13, which describes the constituent rajas
as a “prompter” and as “changing” (upaṣṭambhakaṃ calaṃ ca rajaḥ),55 the YD
states that action (kriyā) belongs to the nature of rajas56 (and later authors such
as Helārāja57 and Abhinavagupta58 present the Sāṃkhya thesis on time as boiling
is the great elements that are earth and so on; but for [the contentments called] time
and good fortune, no such explanation has been given. So [you] must explain to what
principle (tattva) [the words ‘time’ and ‘good fortune’ really] refer. – Answer: [this is] not
[necessary,] because it has [already] been explained; this has already been taught: what
we call ‘time’ is not a constitutive element of reality…”
54
See below, n. 118.
55
It is unfortunate that the commentary on SK 12, which already describes the goal of
rajas as “undertaking action” (pravṛtti), is not preserved in the YD.
56
YD, p. 135: yaḥ kaścid upaṣṭambhaś calatā copalabhyate tad rajorūpam ity avagantavyam. tatropaṣṭambhaḥ prayatnaś calatā kriyā. “Whatever prompting and change is
observed must be understood to be the nature of rajas. Among them, prompting is effort;
change is action (kriyā).”
57
Helārāja interprets VP 3.2.53 (dvau tu tatra tamorūpāv ekasyālokavat sthitiḥ | atītam api
keṣāṃcit punar viparivartate || “Among these [three powers that are the past, present and
future], two consist in darkness [and] one exists as light; for some, even the past returns.”)
as a depiction of time according to Sāṃkhya and explains (PP 2, p. 60): atītānāgatāv
adhvānau bhāvāvaraṇahetutvāt tamaḥsvabhāvau, varaṇaṃ hi tamodharmaḥ, guru varaṇakam eva tama ity uktam. vartamāno ’dhvā prakāśatulyaḥ sattvasadṛśaḥ, sattvaṃ
laghu prakāśakam iṣṭam iti. rajas tu pravṛttisāmānyaṃ kālasvarūpaṃ sarvatrānvayi
pratibandhābhyanujñābhyāṃ pravartakaṃ preraṇarūpaṃ rajaḥ kālātmakam eva. “The
past and future paths have tamas as their nature because they cause the concealment of
entities; for concealment is a property of tamas: it has been said [in SK 13] that ‘Tamas
is heavy, it is what conceals.’ The present path is similar to light, [that is to say,] it is
similar to sattva: ‘Sattva is admitted to be light, [it is] what illuminates’ [according to
the same stanza]. As for rajas, which is activity (pravṛtti) in general, the nature of which
is time (kālasvarūpa), it is present in everything [and] prompts [everything] by inhibiting and permitting (pratibandhābhyanujñā): rajas, which consists in prompting, is nothing but time.” Although Helārāja quotes the SK, his use of the word adhvan is rather
reminiscent of the PYBh (see PYBh 4.12, quoted below, n. 152), and he also uses a
terminology that belongs to the VP: it is Bhartṛhari who describes the “power of time” in
terms of abhyanujñā and pratibandha – i.e., as that which lets only certain events arise,
thus producing succession (see VP 3.9.4–5; cf. e.g. VPV on VP 2.22, p. 202; for more
references see Cardona 1991: 448–449, n. 20).
58
See ĪPVV, vol. III, p. 5: … kāpilānāṃ rajaḥsvabhāvaḥ pravartanātmakatvāt… “For the followers of Kapila, [time] has rajas as its nature, because it consists in activity (pravartana)…”

A History of Time in the Sāṃkhya Tradition

355

down to the statement that time is activity, which in turn is none other than the
rajas constituent). Now, while explaining the characteristics of rajas given in
SK 13, the YD proceeds to define action as either transformation (pariṇāma) or
movement (praspanda, a synonym for the parispanda with which time is identified); and it further defines the latter by distinguishing the movements that
are the activities of organs (the five kinds of breathing, which constitute the
common activity of the internal organ,59 and the respective activities of the five
organs of action) from those that belong to external substances –60 so the actions
with which time is identified must be both the movements of organs and those of
external substances.61
There is another important passage in the YD regarding the identification of
time with actions. Under SK 56, which mentions the stir (ārambha) performed by
Nature (prakṛtikṛta) and describes it with a verb in the present tense (pravartate),
the YD specifies that this action is never past or future, but only present:

See SK 29cd: sāmānyakaraṇavṛttiḥ prāṇādyā vāyavaḥ pañca || “The activity common
to the [internal] organs is the five breathings: inhaling, etc.”
60
YD, p. 135: sā ca dvividhā pariṇāmalakṣaṇā praspandalakṣaṇā ca. tatra pariṇāmalakṣaṇayā sahakāribhāvāntarānugṛhītasya dharminaḥ pūrvadharmāt pracyutiḥ
praspandalakṣaṇā prāṇādayaḥ karmendriyavṛttayaś ca vacanādyāḥ. bāhyānāṃ dravyāṇām utpatananipatanabhramaṇādīni. “And [action] is twofold: it consists either in
transformation (pariṇāma) or in movement (praspanda). Among these, the [action] consisting in transformation results in the fact that a property-bearer that is assisted by other
entities [constituting] auxiliary causes ceases to have a property formerly [possessed;
as for the action] consisting in movement, it is the [breathings constituted by] inhaling
and so on, and the activities of the organs of action (karmendriyavṛtti), [i.e.] talking,
etc.; for external substances, [action] is the movements up, down and around, etc.” The
YD is the only commentary to provide such a definition of action (and among the first
group of commentaries, only the SSV explicitly understands calatā as action; see SSV,
p. 26: calatā kriyety arthaḥ). Vācaspatimiśra, without providing any definition of action,
also insists on the identification of rajas with kriyā (TK, p. 112): sattvatamasī svayam
akriyatayā svakārye pravṛttiṃ praty avasīdantī rajasopaṣṭabhyete*, avasādāt pracyāvya
svakārya utsāham prayatnaṃ kāryete. [*rajasopaṣṭabhyete corr.; rajasopaṣṭbhyete Ed.]
“[The constituents] sattva and tamas, being incapable of undertaking [the production] of
their respective effects due to their being devoid of action (akriya) by themselves, are
prompted by rajas; [that is to say], they are made to make effort towards their respective
effects [and] to undertake [their production] after being made to abandon their inertia.”
61
Under SK 50, the YD seems to equate all actions with the sole activity of organs (see
above, n. 53), probably because those who “identify with time” (kālātmaka) confuse their
own organs (rather than substances that they apprehend as “external” to them) with their
true self.
59

356

Isabelle Ratié

This action never takes a past or future form; rather, it only takes a present
form, as in [the sentences] “rivers flow,” “mountains stand.”62
This is an allusion to Patañjali’s commentary on Aṣṭādhyāyī 3.123,63 according to
which a verb conjugated in the present tense refers to an action that is currently
happening.64 As pointed out by Kātyāyana, the definition could be seen as problematic “because, in cases where [an action] is eternally performed, there are
no temporal distinctions,”65 and the examples of such beginningless and endless
actions provided by Patañjali in this connection happen to be precisely those
given in the YD: “mountains stand, rivers flow.”66 Patañjali further clarifies the
nature of the problem thus:
In this respect, the present time is relative to its opposites (pratidvandva),
[namely,] the past and future; but in this case [of an eternal action], there
are no past and future times!67
Kātyāyana responds by asserting that “in fact there are temporal distinctions,”68
and Patañjali explains the reply as follows:
And there are actually time distinctions [in such cases]; [thus we may
say] “mountains stand,” [but also] “mountains will stand” [or] “mountains
stood.” How could such words be used [otherwise]? Therefore there are
indeed temporal distinctions. And this does not have to be so just because
of the usage [of these words]: the actions of kings who are past, future and
present in the [mountains’ area] are the point of reference (adhikaraṇa)
for the [mountains’] action of standing. To begin with, [we may say that]
“mountains stand” relatively to the present actions of the kings [who live]
there now; relatively to the future actions of kings who will live there later,
[we may say] “mountains will exist;” relatively to the past actions of kings
who lived there [before, we may say] “mountains stood.”69
YD, p. 261: neyaṃ kriyā kadācid api bhūtabhaviṣyadrūpā bhavati, kiṃ tarhi vartamānarūpā, yathā vahanti nadyas tiṣṭhanti parvatā iti.
63
As already noted by the editors of the YD (p. 261).
64
vartamāne laṭ. “The affix laṭ indicates the present.” On discussions about this rule see
Cardona 1991: 450ff.
65
Vārttika 3.123.2: nityapravṛtte ca kālāvibhāgāt.
66
MBhāṣya, vol. II, p. 123: tiṣṭhanti parvatāḥ, sravanti nadya iti.
67
Ibid.: iha bhūtabhaviṣyatpratidvandvo vartamānaḥ kālo na cātra bhūtabhaviṣyantau
kālau staḥ.
68
Vārttika 3.1.123.5: santi ca kālavibhāgāḥ.
69
MBhāṣya, vol. II, p. 123: santi khalv api kālavibhāgāḥ, tiṣṭhanti parvatāḥ, sthāsyanti
parvatāḥ, tasthuḥ parvatā iti. kiṃ śakyanta ete śabdāḥ prayoktum ity ataḥ santi kālavibhāgāḥ. nāvaśyaṃ prayogād eva. iha bhūtabhaviṣyadvartamānānāṃ rājñāṃ yāḥ kriyās
tās tiṣṭhater adhikaraṇam. iha tāvat tiṣṭhanti parvatā iti samprati ye rājānas teṣāṃ yāḥ

62

A History of Time in the Sāṃkhya Tradition

357

The author of the YD certainly had in mind this explanation of temporal distinctions, and his definition of time as a purely relative concept was probably
influenced by Patañjali’s statement that temporal determinations are always
relative and result from the comparison of several actions. It is also noteworthy
that according to Patañjali, even permanent actions can be subjected to temporal
distinctions because we can always think of them relatively to other actions,
whereas according to the YD, Nature’s action, that is, the universal pariṇāma,
as opposed to all local movements (parispanda/praspanda),70 can never take a
future or past form. Does the author of the YD mean that we can never speak
of Nature in the past and future tenses? In fact he seems to be highlighting a
similarity between Nature and the examples found in the MBhāṣya rather than
opposing them, and he cannot have ignored that Patañjali used these very examples to show that even permanent entities can be talked about in a temporal
way. He therefore seems to mean that Nature’s transformation never has a past or
future form (since Nature and its dynamism are one and the same ever present
entity), although it may be talked about as past or future relatively to other,
limited actions. In any case, it is noteworthy that under SK 15, the YD repeatedly
uses the word parispanda, and never pariṇāma, to describe the type of action
with which time is to be equated: although several sources that do not belong to
the SK commentarial tradition ascribe to Sāṃkhya the thesis that time is Nature’s
pariṇāma,71 the YD as it has come down to us never states this, and rather seems
kriyās tāsu vartamānāsu. sthāsyanti parvatā itīta uttaraṃ ye rājāno bhaviṣyanti teṣāṃ yāḥ
kriyās tāsu bhaviṣyantīṣu. tasthuḥ parvatā itīha ye rājāno babhūvus teṣāṃ yāḥ kriyās tāsu
bhūtāsu.
70
See e.g. YD, p. 163, which excludes that praspanda may be found in Nature itself:
dvividhā hi kriyā praspandalakṣaṇā pariṇāmalakṣaṇā ca, tatra praspandaḥ pradhānasya
saukṣmyāt pratiṣidhyate. “For action is twofold, [i.e.] it consists in movement and
transformation; among them, movement is excluded for Nature due to [the latter’s]
subtlety.”
71
This idea is found in the medical tradition: besides the SuSaṃ and its commentaries
mentioned below (§8, nn. 190–192), as pointed out to me by Philipp Maas, it occurs in
the first-century Carakasaṃhitā (Sūtrasthāna 11.42: kālaḥ punaḥ pariṇāma ucyate, “But
time is called transformation;” cf. Vimānasthāna 8.76), but without any explanation as
to how “transformation” should be understood, and according to Philipp Maas (personal
written communication, 06/09/2019), although “the eleventh-century commentator
Cakrapāṇidatta refers transformation to temporal changes like that of seasons rather than
to the transformation of Nature, in view of the general orientation towards pre-classical
Sāṃkhya, I would not rule out the possibility that pariṇāma may be understood… here as
referring to a transformation of Nature.” See also Rāmakaṇṭha’s depiction of Sāṃkhya’s
view on time in MatV, Vidyāpāda 12, p. 338: atha sāṃkhyadṛśā prakṛteḥ svabhāva eva
pariṇatyātmako ’sāv ity ucyate. yad āhuḥ: pariṇāmaḥ pṛthagbhāvo vyavasthākramataḥ
sadā | bhūtaiṣyadvartamānātmā kālarūpo vibhāvyate || “But according to the Sāṃkhya

358

Isabelle Ratié

to emphasize the fundamental distinction between transformation, understood
as the infinite dynamism of the ever active matter, and time, defined as the mere
sum of purely relative determinations (shorter and longer, prior and posterior,
etc.) that result from our measuring various limited actions with one another.
We cannot rule out the possibility that the thesis according to which time is
only a word for actions had already been formulated in the lost Ṣaṣṭitantra; but
the complete silence of the SK and the entire first group of their commentaries on
this point makes it very unlikely. The MBhāṣya, as shown above, was certainly a
source of inspiration for the YD; but although Patañjali did point out that temporal
distinctions result from a comparison of actions, apparently he did not consider
this as necessarily entailing a denial of the existence of time as a distinct entity
exerting a causal power.72 It therefore seems that the YD innovated in this regard,
or at least borrowed an idea that had first appeared outside Sāṃkhya circles and
integrated it to the system as a way of justifying the absence of time in the SK’s
list of realia. Thus it is striking that Jayanta Bhaṭṭa – who demonstrably knew
the YD –73 does not explicitly attribute this thesis to the followers of Kapila, and
ascribes at least a part of it (and possibly its entirety, although this is unclear) to
“experts on time” (kālavid), that is, “astrologers/astronomers” (jyotirgaṇaka).74
doctrine, what [we] call [time] is nothing but the nature of Nature, which consists in
transformation. This is what is declared in: ‘Transformation, which is the permanent
existence of individual [entities]? according to? the succession of [their] states, [and]
which is the essence of [what is] past, future and present, appears as time.’” Aghoraśiva
borrows the passage almost word for word (MṛVD, p. 266: nanu sāṃkhyaiḥ prakṛteḥ
pariṇatyātmako ’sāv ity ucyate. yad āhuḥ…, followed by the same quotation). The source
of the quotation is unknown to me (as it was to N.R. Bhatt, see MatV, p. 338, n. 9: ākaro
na labhyate; cf. Goodall, Kataoka, Acharya and Yokochi 2008: 360, n. 75, which mentions
it as an “unattributed Sāṃkhya verse”). The translation given here is very tentative and I
may well have misunderstood the gist of the quotation; cf. Hulin 1980: 229: “L’évolution
est une existence séparée, dérivant de la succession des états; elle est reconnue comme le
Temps qui revêt la forme du passé, du futur et du présent.”
72
See MBhāṣya, vol. I, p. 409: yena mūrtānām upacayāś cāpacayāś ca labhyante taṃ
kālam āhuḥ. tasyaiva hi kayācit kriyayā yuktasyāhar iti ca bhavati rātrir iti ca. kayā
kriyayā. ādityagatyā. tayaivāsakṛdāvṛttayā māsa iti bhavati saṃvatsara iti ca. “They
say that time is that thanks to which things endowed with a specific shape increase and
decrease. For this very [time] receives [the names] ‘day’ and ‘night’ [when it is] associated
with a certain action. Which action? The movement of the sun. And [it receives the
names] ‘month’ and ‘year’ [when associated] with the same [action] that is repeated many
times.” This, in fact, resembles a depiction of the position held in the VS (see below, §3).
73
On the quotation of the YD in the NM, already spotted by P. Chakravarti in YDP, p. 42,
n. 2, see in particular Wezler 1974: 451.
74
See below, §4 and n. 113.

A History of Time in the Sāṃkhya Tradition

359

The compound kālavid suggests that Jayanta had in mind the opinion already
mentioned by Bhartṛhari in the following way:
Others, who are experts on time (kālavid), know that time, which is the
movement of the sun, planets and stars, is differentiated according to the
varying number (bheda) of repetitions [of these movements]. With respect
to [any] action, the measurement of which is [already] known [and] which
is used to measure other actions, [we] use the word “time.”75
Helārāja explains:
The course of the sun and [other celestial bodies] is called “day,” etc.; and
a particular action such as the milking of cows is [also] given the name
“time” because, given that its measurement has [already] been determined,
it is the cause [that enables us] to measure a particular action such as sitting down, which is different from the [first action], and the measurement
of which is not well known.76
His testimony is unfortunately difficult to interpret as regards the identity of the
“experts on time;”77 but the Śaiva Saiddhāntika Rāmakaṇṭha (who may be influenced here by Jayanta) designates them as astronomers immediately before
quoting Bhartṛhari’s verse:
But in accordance with [what is] common knowledge in the tradition of
astronomical treatises (jyotiḥśāstra), [time] is admitted to be nothing but a
particular action. This is what they say [in]…78
75
VP 3.9.76–77: ādityagrahanakṣatraparispandam athāpare | bhinnam āvṛttibhedena kālaṃ kālavido viduḥ || kriyāntaraparicchedapravṛttā yā kriyāṃ prati | nirjñātaparimāṇā sā
kāla ity abhidhīyate ||
76
PP 2, p. 70: sūryādīnāṃ gatipracāro divasādiśabdavācyaḥ, godohādikriyāviśeṣaś ca
paricchinnaparimāṇatvāt tadaparāprasiddhaparimāṇāsyādikriyāviśeṣaparicchedahetutvāt kālākhyām āsādayati.
77
PP 2, p. 70: yataś ca jyotirgatyā kālanānātvavyavahāras tataḥ saiva kāla ity arvāgdarśanāḥ kecin manyante… “And some, whose perspective is mundane? (arvāgdarśana),
are of the [following] opinion: ‘since [we] talk about diversity as regards time due to the
movement of astral bodies, time [must be] this [movement] itself.’” The paraphrase
in Iyer 1974: 59, makes no mention of the meaning of arvāgdarśana; Sharma 1972:
100, translates “some modern (i.e. superficial, whose vision is directed to proximity)
(scholars).” Helārāja does mention astronomical/astrological treatises, but only to point
out that the various time units are defined there (ibid.): evam anyeṣām api grahanakṣatrāṇāṃ jyautiṣaśāstraprasiddhena gatipracārabhedena yugamanvantarakalpamahākalpādipravibhāgaḥ kālo ’nusartavyaḥ. “And time must also be thought of [as being]
divided into yugas, manvantaras, kalpas, mahākalpas and so on in accordance with the
variety of courses of other planets and stars that is well known from astronomical/astrological treatises.”
78
MatV, Vidyāpāda 12, p. 337: atha jyotiḥśāstraprasiddhyā kriyāviśeṣātmaka evā-

360

Isabelle Ratié

Whether Bhartṛhari did have astronomers in mind or not,79 it is hardly surprising
that later authors took the term kālavid to refer to astronomers, since those who
composed jyotiṣa works seem to have considered their own discipline to be primarily the science of measuring time,80 and mathematical and astronomical
treatises provide temporal units that are explicitly defined as actions: to take but
one example, the third chapter of the famous fifth-century Āryabhaṭīya, which is
devoted to the measures of time and entitled Kālakriyā, “the Action of Time” –
that is to say, as its seventh-century commentator Bhāskara explains, the action
that enables us to know time –81 uses as time units various actions constituted by
the movement of astral bodies, breaths or the pronunciation of syllables;82 and this
practice of measuring time with actions is explicitly acknowledged by authors
of philosophical treatises as the province of mathematicians and astronomers.83
Now, Bhāskara’s attitude with respect to the issue of the nature of time and its
relationship with action is quite telling:

bhyupagamyate. tad āhuḥ… The passage is immediately followed by VP 3.9.73.
Aghoraśiva (MṛVD, p. 265) borrows the sentence almost word for word (with °dṛṣṭyā for
°prasiddhyā and the omission of tad āhuḥ); Hulin 1980: 228, does not translate the word
kriyā, despite its crucial importance here (“Selon le point de vue des traités d’astronomie,
le Temps n’est qu’un aspect particulier des astres”).
79
The same compound appears for instance in the PYBh, where it does not designate
astronomers but yogins (see below, n. 144).
80
See e.g. the concluding verse in the Paitāmahasiddhānta: vedā hi yajñārtham abhipravṛttāḥ kālānupūrvā vihitāś ca yajñāḥ | tasmād idaṃ kālavidhānaśāstraṃ yojyotiṣaṃ
veda sa veda sarvam || “For the Vedas concern themselves with sacrifices; and sacrifices are prescribed according to [certain specific] times; therefore he who knows
jyotiṣa, this science of measuring time (kālavidhānaśāstra), knows all.” See Pingree
1967–1968: 506.
81
ĀBh, p. 172: kriyā vyāpāraḥ, kālasya kriyā kālakriyā. kālaparijñānārthā kriyeti yāvat.
sā ca kriyā gatiḥ. tayā kriyayā kālo jñāyata ity etat pratipādayiṣyati. “Action [means]
activity; [the compound] kālakriyā [is to be understood as] the action of time – that
is to say, the action the point of which is to make [us] know time. And this action is
movement; [the author] is going to show that time is known thanks to this action.” See
Shukla 1976: 85.
82
See Āryabhaṭīya 3.1–2ab: varṣaṃ dvādaśa māsās triṃśad divaso bhavet sa māsas tu |
ṣaṣṭir nāḍyo divasaḥ ṣaṣṭiś ca vināḍikā nāḍī || gurvakṣarāṇi ṣaṣṭir vināḍikārkṣī ṣaḍ eva vā
prāṇāḥ | “A year is twelve months; a month is thirty days; a day is sixty nāḍīs; a nāḍī is
sixty vināḍikās; a stellar vināḍikā is sixty long syllables or six respirations…”
83
See e.g. NK, p. 169 (about Praśastapāda’s mention of various conventional time units):
… akṣipakṣmakarmopalakṣitakālo nimeṣa ityādi gaṇitaśāstrānusāreṇa pratyetavyam.
“[The time unit called] nimeṣa is the time marked by the act of blinking – this and the
rest must be understood in accordance with the treatises of mathematics (gaṇitaśāstra).”

A History of Time in the Sāṃkhya Tradition

361

But what is time, or what is action? In this regard some say [that] time is
distinct from action; others [say] that time is action. Let [us] admit that
time is distinct from action – [still:] what is the point of [such an independent time]? Whereas for us [mathematicians], the sun and moon’s greatest
movement away from each other [after a conjunction] is a fortnight; and
their moving back towards each other is a month. Similarly, twelve months
are a year, and so on – this is time!84
Bhāskara’s position is resolutely – and somewhat sarcastically – pragmatic: he
seems to mock the metaphysicians who indulge in speculative debates on the
nature of time, pointing out in contrast that mathematicians do not care whether
time exists over and above actions or not, because they are only concerned with
measuring it. Yet his conclusion is clear: for Bhāskara and his peers, time is
actions, and nothing else.85 Whether or not the author of the YD borrowed this idea
from mathematico-astronomical works so as to give some substance to the denial
of time in classical Sāṃkhya, and whatever the actual identity of the “experts on
time” to which Bhartṛhari already ascribed a doctrine so close to that defended

ĀBh, p. 172: atha kaḥ kālaḥ, kā vā kriyā. atra kecid vadanti kriyāvyatiriktaḥ kālaḥ.
apare kriyā kāla iti. kriyāvyatirikto ’stu kālaḥ, kim etena. asmākaṃ tu sūryācandramasoḥ
paro viprakarṣaḥ so ’rdhamāsaḥ. yaś ca tayoḥ sannikarṣaḥ sa māsaḥ. evaṃ dvādaśa
māsāḥ saṃvatsara ityādi kālaḥ.
85
This is not to say, however, that all such works would conform to Bhāskara’s opinion.
See e.g. Ḍalhaṇa’s NiSaṃ (quoting the initial verse in Śrīpati Bhaṭṭa’s JRM), p. 285: kāla
eva jagataḥ sṛṣṭisthitiprayalanimittam iti kālakāraṇikāḥ, uktaṃ ca jyotiḥśāstravidā śrīpatinā prabhavaviratimadhyajñānavandhyā nitāntaṃ viditaparamatattvā yatra te yogino
’pi | tam aham iha nimittaṃ viśvajanmātyayānām anumitam abhivande pragrahaiḥ* kālam
īśam || iti. [*bhagrahaiḥ JRM, cf. Panse 1956: 377; pragrahaiḥ NiSaṃ.] “Specialists of time
[say] that it is time that is the cause of the world’s creation, maintenance and destruction;
and this has been said by the expert in astrology/astronomy Śrīpati: ‘I pay homage to Lord
Time, about whose birth, cessation and existence even the yogins who know the ultimate
reality are entirely clueless, [and] which is inferred in this [world] from the stars and
planets as the cause of the world’s arising and disappearance.’” Stcherbatsky 1926: 15,
suggests that the epic kālavāda may have been integrated in later times in astronomical
works, but the evidence adduced (that the compound kālavāda can designate astronomy,
and that Śrīdhara refers his readers to astronomical treatises when commenting on time
units: see above, n. 83) seems entirely inadequate. To my knowledge, the thorough study
of conceptions of time’s nature in jyotiṣa and siddhānta literature is still a desideratum.
84

362

Isabelle Ratié

in the YD, there is an undeniable similarity between the Sāṃkya’s understanding
of the nature of time and that found in some influential astronomical treatises.

3. The YD’s argument against the Vaiśeṣika inference of time
Under SK 50, while explaining the list of contentments (tuṣṭi) provided in the
stanza and presented by the commentaries as incomplete points of view above
which one must rise in order to achieve liberation, the first group of SK commentaries explains the contentment called “time”86 as a fatalistic belief that is
reminiscent of the MBh’s kālavāda, and according to which the effort to gain
knowledge is vain because only time may bring about liberation.87 In contrast,
the YD’s explanation of the item kāla in this list88 rings like a depiction of the
SK 50ab: ādhyātmikyaś catasraḥ prakṛtyupādānakālabhāgyākhyāḥ | “The four internal [contentments (tuṣṭi)] are called ‘nature,’ ‘material,’ ‘time’ and ‘good fortune.’”
87
Takakusu 1904: 1037: “On demande au troisième brahmane: ‘Quelle est la connaissance pour laquelle vous êtes devenu un ascète?’ Il répond: ‘Que peuvent faire la Nature
et les nécessaires? Je sais qu’ils ne nous procurent pas la Délivrance, [et je pense qu’elle
viendra avec le temps]. C’est pourquoi j’ai désiré devenir un ascète.’ Ce troisième
brahmane ne peut pas non plus atteindre la Délivrance. Pourquoi? Parce qu’il ignore le
sens des vingt-cinq catégories (padārtha [sic]). Voilà ‘le contentement relatif au temps.’”
SSV, p. 64: kālākhyā yathā kaścid anabhigatatattvajño bravīti kālena mokṣo bhaviṣyatīti,
jñānāgamaṃ na karoti kiṃ jñāneneti, evaṃ santuṣṭasya nāsti mokṣa ity eṣā kālākhyā
tṛtīyā tuṣtiḥ. “The [contentment] called ‘time’ is for instance when someone who has not
acquired the knowledge of the principles says ‘Liberation will come in time’ and does
not study [to acquire] knowledge, [thinking:] ‘What is the point of knowledge?’ There
is no liberation for him who is thus content; this is the third contentment called ‘time.’”
GBh, p. 46: kālena mokṣo bhaviṣyatīti kiṃ tattvābhyāsena, ity eṣā kālākhyā tuṣṭiḥ, tasya
nāsti mokṣa iti. “[Thinking:] ‘Liberation will come in time, what is the point of studying
the principles?’ – this is the contentment called ‘time.’ There is no liberation for him.”
MV, p. 49: kaścid evaṃ brūte kālena svayaṃ mokṣo bhāvī kiṃ tattvavijñāneneti. jñāne
’pravṛttyaiva tuṣṭaḥ. tasyāpi na mokṣa iti kālatuṣṭiḥ. “Someone speaks thus: ‘Liberation
will come by itself in time; what is the point of the knowledge of principles?’ It is the fact
that he does not make effort to [acquire] knowledge that makes him content. There is no
liberation for him either. This is the contentment of time.” The passage is not preserved
in the SV. On the tuṣṭis see Oberhammer 1977: 37ff.
88
YD, pp. 245–246: yadā ca saty upādānasāmarthye na tāvataiva bhāvānāṃ prādurbhāvaḥ, kiṃ tarhi sannihitasādhanānām api kālaṃ praty apekṣā bhavati. kālaviśeṣād bījād
aṅkuro jāyate ’ṅkurān nālaṃ nālāt kāṇḍaṃ kāṇḍāt prasava ityādi. anyathā tūpādānānāṃ sannidhānamātrāt kṣaṇenaivāmīṣām avasthāviśeṣāṇām abhivyaktiḥ syāt. kiṃ ca
kālaviparyayeṇotpattiprasaṅgāt, upādānapūrvakaṃ viśvam ity abhyupagacchataḥ śaradi
yavānāṃ vasante vrīhīṇām utpattiḥ prāpnoti, na caitad iṣṭam. kiṃ ca tadanuvidhānāt.
dṛśyante ca prāṇināṃ kālānurūpāḥ svabhāvāhāravihāravyavasthāḥ. tasmād asāv eva
kāraṇam. “And [the contentment of time occurs] when [one thinks that] although the
86

A History of Time in the Sāṃkhya Tradition

363

Vaiśeṣikas’ understanding of time as a causal condition or auxiliary cause in all
productions:89 the main target as regards the belief in time has clearly shifted.90
This is even clearer under SK 15, where, in order to justify its reduction of
time to actions, the YD examines the Vaiśeṣikas’ contention that time must be
inferred as a distinct substance because there has to be a cause for our awareness
of anteriority, posteriority, simultaneity and so on, and nothing else can be such a
cause.91 Here is the YD’s lengthy reply to this reasoning:
material cause is exerting its power, it is not sufficient to make things appear. Rather,
they require time even though the means of producing them are present: it is due to a specific time that the sprout arises from the seed, that the stalk arises from the sprout, that the
joints of the stalk arise from the stalk, that the flower arises from the stalk, etc. Otherwise,
these various states should appear in a single moment due to the mere presence of [their]
material causes. Moreover, [if it were not so,] as a consequence [things] would arise at
unsuitable times: for someone who claims that everything requires [nothing but] material
causes, barley must grow in the fall and rice in the spring – and this [can]not be admitted.
Besides, [time must be a cause] because [living beings] conform to it, and [we] see that
the various states of living beings conform to [specific times] as regards their nature, diet
and activities. Therefore time is indeed a cause.” (On āhāra and vihāra see Wezler 1990:
144; Angermeier [2007] 2010: 74, n. 340).
89
See PDhS, p. 165: sarvakāryāṇāṃ cotpattisthitivināśahetus tadvyapadeśāt. “And [time
must also] be the cause of the arising, existence and destruction of all effects, because
[they] are [all] described (vyapadeśa) in terms of [time].” Cf. Vyomavatī, p. 349: tathā
niyata eva kāle kusumādeḥ kāryasyopalambho na kālāntara ity anvayavyatirekābhyāṃ
tasya kāraṇatvaṃ vijñāyate. tathā hi vasantasamaya eva pāṭalādikusumānām udbhavo na
kālāntara ity evaṃ kāryāntareṣv apy ūhyam. tathā prasavakālam apekṣata iti vyavahārāt
kāraṇatvaṃ kālasya. tathā hi – sahakāriṇy apekṣopalabdheḥ kālasya sahakāritām antareṇa prasūtāv ayaṃ vyavahāro na syāt. “Thus, the perception of an effect such as a flower
[occurs] only at a specific time and not at any other; therefore the fact that this [specific
time] is a cause is known through invariable co-presence and co-absence. To explain:
the arising of flowers such as [those of] the pāṭala [tree] only [occurs] in the season
of spring, not at any other time[, so spring must be a cause of this arising; and this
causality] can be thus assumed [to exist] with respect to other effects as well. Similarly,
the causality of time [is inferred] from the fact that [we] say that [something] ‘requires
a time of maturation.’ To explain: because the perception [of an effect such as a flower]
requires an auxiliary cause (sahakārin), if time were not an auxiliary cause, [we] could
not talk thus about maturation.”
90
As pointed out e.g. in Motegi 1994, the YD is very much concerned with criticizing
Vaiśeṣika tenets.
91
VS 2.2.6: aparasmin paraṃ yugapad ayugapac ciraṃ kṣipram iti kālaliṅgāni. “The
inferential marks of time are: with respect to that which is close (apara), [the idea
that something is] distant (para); [the ideas that something is] simultaneous [or] not
simultaneous, slow [or] quick.” The words para and apara often mean “prior” and
“posterior,” but this is not quite how they are understood here, the idea being rather
that our awareness of time involves a distance or proximity that cannot be explained

364

Isabelle Ratié

If [our Vaiśeṣika opponent argues] that [we] understand [the existence of
time] from the presence of an inferential mark such as [things’ properties of being] distant and close,92 [we reply:] no; because these [properties] cannot occur in [things] that are not produced: it is only with respect
to that which is produced that [we] observe [having] such cognitions as
“distant” and “close.” If this [cognition] had a cause distinct from action
[itself], it would occur indifferently with respect to permanent (nitya) and
impermanent (anitya) [entities]! [Our opponent] could [reply] (cet): there
is no [such] fallacy [in our thesis,] because [time] is [only] capable [of
causing such properties as distant and close] in certain [entities], just as
[a new colour] resulting from heating [only arises in certain entities. The
opponent] might [thus put] the [following] reasoning [forward]: just as the
cause [of the new colour] resulting from heating is the conjunction with
fire, and yet, although there is no difference [as regards this conjunction,

in spatial terms. See VSV, p. 17: etāny aparatvavyatikarādīni kālaliṅgāni. tatra pareṇa
dikpradeśena saṃyukte yūni paratvajñāne jāte sthavire cāpareṇa dikpradeśena saṃyukte
’paratvajñānotpattau kṛṣṇakeśādivalīpalitādiparyālocanayā yena nimittena yūny aparatvajñānaṃ sthavire ca paratvajñānaṃ jāyate sa kālaḥ. tathā tulyakāryeṣu kartṛṣu yugapat
kurvanti, ayugapat kurvantīti yataḥ pratyayo jāyate sa kālaḥ. tathaikaṃ kriyāphalam
uddiśya odanākhyaṃ bhūyasīnām adhiśrayaṇādikriyāṇāṃ prabandhapravṛttau tulye
kartari ciram adya kṛtam, kṣipram adya kṛtam iti yataḥ pratyayau bhavataḥ sa kāla iti.
“These, [i.e.] the contrast between being close [and yet distant], etc., are the inferential
marks of time. With respect to that, when the cognition of distance has arisen [in us] with
respect to a young man who is connected with a distant place, and when the cognition
of proximity has arisen [in us] with respect to an old man who is connected with a place
that is close, time is the cause due to which, through [our] examination of [things] such
as [the young man’s] black hair and the [old man’s] wrinkles and grey hair, the cognition
of proximity arises with respect to the young man [despite his spatial distance], and
the cognition of distance, with respect to the old man [despite his spatial proximity].
Similarly, when some agents have similar effects, time is that thanks to which a cognition arises [in the form] ‘these are acting simultaneously’ [or] ‘these are not acting
simultaneously.’ Again, when one undertakes a series of numerous actions – placing
[a cooking pot] on the fire, etc. – with a view [to obtain] a single effect called ‘cooked
rice,’ when the agent is the same, time is that from which cognitions arise [in the form]
‘this has been done slowly today’ [and] ‘this has been done quickly today.’” Cf. PDhS,
p. 164: kālaḥ parāparavyatikarayaugapadyāyaugapadyacirakṣiprapratyayaliṅgaḥ. teṣāṃ
viṣayeṣu pūrvapratyayavilakṣaṇānām utpattāv anyanimittābhāvād yad atra nimittaṃ sa
kālaḥ. “Time has as its inferential marks the cognitions of the contrast between [being]
distant and [yet] close, of being simultaneous or not, and of [being] slow or quick. Since
these [cognitions] arise with respect to objects while being distinct from [all the other]
cognitions already [described], their cause must be time because they [can]not have any
other cause.”
92
See above, n. 91.

A History of Time in the Sāṃkhya Tradition

365

which occurs in all cases,] the [additional] cause (nimitta)93 of this arising
of [a new colour] resulting from heating is only found in the earth, not in
ether and [the other elements]; in the same way, time too is the cause [of]
such [properties] as “distant” and “close,” and yet [such a property] can
only occur in impermanent [entities], not in eternal ones. But this [argument] is not sound. Why? Because [as regards fire,] the difference [between cases where it produces a new colour and cases where it does not]
can be rationally accounted for: fire is the cause of the change regarding
[qualities] such as colour, so it is right [to say] that it may bring about
[qualities] resulting from heating in a substance that possesses this [quality
such as colour] and not in a [substance] such as ether, which does not possess it; but time [supposedly] plays a causal role merely through [its] relation [with all entities, and] it is not the [very] cause of change[, which you
admit to be e.g. fire in the case of the new quality of colour!]94 Therefore
this [reasoning] is incorrect. Thus if [you] hold that time is different from
actions, [you end up showing that] the [property of] causing the world belongs to the movement of causes [and not to time], but it is something quite
different that [you were] trying to prove!95

Halbfass 1992: 210 has rightly pointed out that the usual translations “efficient cause”
and “instrumental cause” for nimitta seem “too strong and potentially misleading, as far
as the terminology of Praśastapāda and his commentators… is concerned,” and renders
it as “regulative cause.” It seems to me that the latter expression is also potentially misleading because of some of its uses in Western philosophy, but I cannot think of a better
equivalent, so I prefer to translate nimitta in such contexts as “[additional] cause” or
simply as “cause.”
94
According to Chakravarti 1951: 257, the idea that time is sambandhamātropakārin
(understood as the thesis that it only helps bring about relations) is the very position
defended by the YD (see also e.g. Sinha 1983: 49; Prasad 1984a: 37). It seems to me,
however, that this interpretation – according to which the YD concedes a causal role,
however limited, to an entity called time – cannot be accepted, because the whole point
of the passage is to show that in the Vaiśeṣika perspective, time can only have a causal
role through its relation with all things (since it is allegedly all-pervasive, and since
Vaiśeṣikas themselves admit that fire for instance is the cause of change in the case at
hand), but then the reason why it only affects produced things remains a mystery.
95
YD, p. 161: parāparādiliṅgasadbhāvāt pratipattir iti cen na, akṛtakeṣu tadanupapatteḥ. yad eva kṛtakaṃ tatraiva param aparam ityādiḥ pratyayo dṛṣṭaḥ. sa yadi kriyāvyatiriktanimittaḥ syād aviśeṣān nityānityeṣu syāt. kvacit sāmarthyāt pākajavad adoṣa iti
cet, syān matam – yathāgnisaṃyogaḥ pākajahetus tathā cāviśeṣe ’pi pṛthivyām eva pākajotpattinimittaṃ bhavati nākāśādiṣu. evaṃ kālo ’pi parāparādihetur atha cānityeṣv eva
syān na nityeṣv iti. tac cāyuktam. kasmāt? viśeṣopapatteḥ. rūpādivikriyāhetur agnis tad
yuktaṃ yad asau tadvati dravye pākajān ādadyāt, nātadvaty ākāśādau. kālas tu sambandhamātropakārī na vikriyāhetuḥ. tasmād asad etat. evaṃ yadi kriyābhyo ’nyaḥ kāla
iṣyate kāraṇaparispandasya jagatkāraṇatvam athānyat sādhyam.
93

366

Isabelle Ratié

Since, according to the Vaiśeṣika himself, temporal determinations are only
observed to exist in things that are impermanent and therefore produced, the
Vaiśeṣika’s so-called demonstration of time only proves the thesis held by
Sāṃkhya that time is nothing but actions, given that things that are not produced
– and are therefore alien to action – are free of any temporal determination,
whereas all produced entities are temporally restricted; there is thus no good
reason to assume that temporal determinations have any other cause besides
action itself. The Vaiśeṣika opponent could argue in response that, just as a
conjunction with fire is the cause of the arising of a new colour within atoms, and
yet fire only produces this colour if the element being heated is earth,96 similarly,
although the connection with time is always the cause producing the arising
of cognitions such as anteriority, time only produces temporal awareness with
respect to impermanent entities. According to the author of the YD, however,
there is an important difference between the two cases that the Vaiśeṣika presents
as equivalent, because fire is a cause that produces a change in certain substances
only, whereas time cannot produce change, since the Vaiśeṣika acknowledges that
this role has to be played by the cause itself – i.e., in the Vaiśeṣika’s own example,
the fire heating the earth atoms. Time must therefore be efficient merely through
its being in relation with the things that it determines; but if it is all-pervading, as
the Vaiśeṣika surmises, and therefore in a relation with everything, why should
it not determine permanent entities as well as impermanent ones? The Vaiśeṣika
claims to demonstrate the existence of time as the cause enabling us to account
for effects that could not be explained otherwise, while also acknowledging that
all effects in the world result from the action of the cause(s) that bring them
about – his position is therefore untenable.
The YD’s argument, which rests on the fact that the Vaiśeṣika himself admits
that temporal determinations are only found in entities that are anitya, is certainly
an allusion to VS 2.2.9–11:
The diversity (nānātva) [in temporal determinations] is due to the fact that
[they] are particularized by the effects (kārya); since [this diversity] does
not exist in permanent (nitya) entities, [whereas] it exists in impermanent
(anitya) ones. The word “time” refers to [their] cause.97
The translation just given is based on what seems to be Praśastapāda’s understanding of the passage; for according to the latter,

On this point see e.g. Bhaduri 1947: Chapter 5.
VS 2.2.9–11: kāryaviśeṣeṇa nānātvam. nityeṣv abhāvād anityeṣu bhāvāt. kāraṇe kālākhyā.

96
97

A History of Time in the Sāṃkhya Tradition

367

Although literally speaking, [time] is one since [all] its inferential marks
[can] indifferently [be called] “time,” [we] talk [about time] figuratively
(upacāra) as if it were diverse (nānā) due to the variety in extrinsic properties (upādhi) [which are superimposed onto time, and which consist in]
the undertaking of all effects (kārya), the performance of the action [that
produces them, their] persisting existence and destruction – just as, in the
cases of a gem or a cook, [we talk figuratively of a diversity whereas these
entities are really one].98
According to the VS, the diversity in temporal determinations is not due to time
itself but rather, to a particularization brought about by effects, and Praśastapāda
describes this particularization as the superimposition onto time of extrinsic
properties that really belong to the process of production of impermanent entities. He therefore seems to understand VS 2.2.10 (“since [it] does not exist
in permanent entities, [whereas it] exists in impermanent ones”) as the reason
why we should admit that the apparent diversity in time does not belong to time
itself and is only due to this superimposition onto time of extrinsic properties
that are the various actions:99 we should do so because these various temporal
determinations are only ascribed to things that are produced. The author of
the YD can thus point out that the Vaiśeṣikas themselves admit that temporal
determinations only affect impermanent (and therefore produced) entities, and
he can accuse them of not seeing that if it is the case, there is no valid reason
for postulating the existence of an additional cause of these determinations that
would be time, since action itself is enough to account for their existence.

98
PDhS, p. 170: kālaliṅgāviśeṣād añjasaikatve ’pi sarvakāryāṇāṃ prārambhakriyābhinirvṛttisthitinirodhopādhibhedān maṇivat pācakavad vā nānātvopacāra iti.
99
Cf. e.g. Vyomavatī, p. 351: atha kathaṃ nānātvam upacaryata ity āha maṇivat
pācakavad veti. yathā maṇeḥ svarūpāparityāgenaivopādhibhedād upacaryate nānātvaṃ pīto rakta iti, tadvad ihāpi bhinnakriyopādhivaśād vartamānādibheda iti. yathā
vā svarūpāparityāgenaiva puruṣasya nānākriyāvaśāt pācakādibhedas tadvad ihāpīti.
“But how is this diversity figuratively applied to [time]? [Praśastapāda] answers: ‘just as
in the cases of a gem or a cook.’ [That is to say,] a [transparent] gem is said to be diverse
figuratively [in such sentences as] ‘it is yellow, it is red,’ due to a variety of extrinsic
properties [superimposed onto it owing to the proximity of coloured objects], whereas
the gem does not abandon its [unitary] nature at all; in the same way, in the [case of time]
too, the difference between ‘present,’ [‘past’ and ‘future’] is due to the extrinsic properties that are the various actions; or again, for a man, the difference between such [a
property] as being a cook [and the properties of being the agent of any other action] is
[simply] due to [his] diverse actions, whereas he does not abandon [his unitary] nature at
all; the same goes in the [case of time] too.”

368

Isabelle Ratié

4. Reactions to this argument in Vaiśeṣika and Nyāya
Now, Candrānanda, who is heavily indebted to Praśastapāda and usually follows
his interpretations,100 has a very different way of understanding VS 2.2.9–11:
[VS 2.2.9 says:] “The diversity [in time] is due to the particularity of the
effects.” [Here] “effect” [stands for] “action;” [that is to say:] after seeing
the actions of beginning, subsisting and disappearing of a real entity particularized by [these] actions, [we] talk about “the time of beginning” [and
other such times] because [we] figuratively ascribe [this] diversity to time,
although [in fact it remains] one. [– Objection:] But [then] time is nothing
but actions! The reason why [one might formulate this objection is stated
in VS 2.2.10]: “Because of [its] absence in permanent [entities and]
because of [its] presence in impermanent [entities].” [That is to say: because of the absence] of the inferential marks [of time in permanent entities,
and because of their presence in impermanent entities. For] if there were a
permanent time over and above actions, then the inferential marks of time
would be manifest in permanent [entities] such as ether as well; but they only
exist in impermanent [entities]. Therefore time is only the limited duration
(avadhi) of [things] that are being produced; so time is nothing but action.
[– We answer this objection as follows]: This is not [true]; the inferential
marks of time [only] exist in impermanent [things simply] because [these
marks] arise after the completion of a real entity [i.e. after its beginning,
subsisting and disappearing], and not because action [itself] would be
time. On the contrary, [VS 2.2.11 says that] “The word ‘time’ refers to
the cause” – [that is to say, the word “time” refers to the cause] of the [inferential marks]. Since these inferential marks could not arise if they were
causeless, [they must have a cause, but] if their cause were action, [we]
would not [say] that [something occurs] “simultaneously,” but [only] that
“[it] has been done” – therefore the word “time” refers to their cause.101
Candrānanda reads VS 2.2.10 as the reason adduced by an opponent whose thesis
is strikingly close to that held by the author of the YD: we must admit that time
is the limited duration (avadhi) of things that are being produced, i.e., it is action
(kriyā) itself, because temporal determinations are only found in impermanent,
See e.g. Isaacson 1995: 142.
VSV, pp. 17–18 with VS 2.2.9–11: kāryaviśeṣeṇa nānātvam. kāryaṃ kriyā, kriyāviśeṣeṇāviṣṭasya vastuna ārambhasthitivināśakriyā dṛṣṭvaikasyāpi kālasya nānātvopacārād ārambhakālādivyapadeśaḥ. nanu kriyāmātraṃ kālaḥ, kutaḥ. kālaliṅgānāṃ
nityeṣv abhāvād anityeṣu bhāvāt. yadi kriyāvyatiriktaḥ syān nityaḥ kāla evaṃ nityeṣv
apy ākāśādiṣu kālaliṅgāni pratibhāseran. anityeṣv eva tu bhavanti. tasmād abhinirvartyamāneṣv evāvadhiḥ kālaḥ. tasmāt kriyaiva kāla iti. naitat, vastunirvṛttyuttarakālabhāvitvāt
kālaliṅgāny anityeṣu bhavanti, na tu kriyāyāḥ kālatvāt. teṣāṃ tu kāraṇe kālākhyā. eṣāṃ
kālaliṅgānāṃ nirnimittānām asambhavāt kriyānimittatve kṛtam iti syāt, na yugapad iti.
tasmād eṣāṃ yat kāraṇaṃ tasmin kālākhyā.
100
101

A History of Time in the Sāṃkhya Tradition

369

i.e., produced, entities. The commentator has to supply the entirety of this objection so as to make the reason in VS 2.2.10 sound like that of an opponent;
and if his interpretation sounds forced,102 it could very well be because he is
aware that the YD targets this passage, and because he is trying to rescue it from
this attack by presenting the targeted aphorisms themselves as an anticipation
of the objection and a response to it. This response, according to him, consists
in pointing out that temporal determinations are only found in impermanent
entities owing to the fact that we distinguish different times after seeing the
different stages undergone by a produced entity, but this does not mean that time
would be nothing but actions, because if actions were the sole cause for temporal
determinations, our awareness of time could not be distinguished at all from our
awareness of action, so that we would not say that something is simultaneous or
successive, slow or quick, etc., but only that it “has been done.”

Apparently it was not very successful. Thus in the recension of the VS that pertains
to Śaṅkaramiśra’s fifteenth-century commentary, nityeṣv abhāvād anityeṣu bhāvāt
forms a single sūtra (VS 2.2.9) with kāraṇe kālākhyā – which by itself suggests that
nityeṣv abhāvād anityeṣu bhāvāt was not read as part of an opponent’s discourse; and
Śaṅkaramiśra simply takes it as the reason showing that time plays a causal role for
all produced entities. See Upaskāra, p. 102: idānīṃ sarvotpattimatāṃ kālaḥ kāraṇam ity
āha nityeṣv iti. “Now, [the next aphorism beginning with] nityeṣu explains that time is a
cause of all produced [things].” Cf. ibid.: nityeṣv ākāśādiṣu yugapaj jātaḥ, ciraṃ jātaḥ,
kṣipraṃ jātaḥ, idānīṃ jātaḥ, divā jātaḥ, rātrau jāta ityādipratyayasyābhāvād anityeṣu ca
ghaṭapaṭādiṣu yaugapadyādipratyayānāṃ bhāvād anvayavyatirekābhyāṃ kāraṇaṃ kāla
ity arthaḥ. na kevalaṃ yaugapadyādipratyayabalāt kālasya sarvotpattimannimittakāraṇatvam api tu puṣpaphalādīnāṃ haimantikavāsantikaprāvṛṣeṇyādisaṃjñābalād apy etad
adhyavaseyam. “Because with respect to permanent [things] such as ether, there are no
cognitions such as ‘this has arisen simultaneously,’ or ‘slowly,’ or ‘quickly,’ ‘now,’ ‘during
the day,’ ‘at night,’ etc., and because with respect to impermanent [things] such as pots
or cloths, there are cognitions such as simultaneity, [we establish] through co-presence
and co-absence that time is a cause – this is what this [aphorism] means. And [we] must
conclude that time is a cause of all produced things on the grounds of the cognitions
of simultaneity and so on, but also on the grounds that we say of [produced entities]
such as flowers or fruit that they belong to the winter, spring, monsoon, etc.” As for
Vādīndra’s thirteenth-century discussion of time under these sūtras (Tarkasāgara, pp.
232–235), it is too long and problematic to be examined here, but it seems at least clear
that Vādīndra (who knows of several readings of the sūtra, see p. 232: yadā tu nityeṣu
bhāvād iti pāṭhaḥ…) does not take nityeṣv abhāvād anityeṣu bhāvāt as the reason invoked
by an objector who would deny the distinct existence of time and identify it with action,
but as the Vaiśeṣika’s response to an objection (which is not entirely clear to me, in part
due to a lacuna in the previous sentence).
102

370

Isabelle Ratié

This brief rebuttal of the reduction of time to actions sounds very close to
Vyomaśiva’s strategy103 in his lengthy commentary on the portion of Praśastapāda’s PDhS devoted to time: the Vyomavatī argues that if temporal determinations only arose from actions, we could not talk about time or temporal distinctions
but only of action, since there would be no grounds for distinguishing time from
action.104 Vyomaśiva further endeavours to show that action and time must be distinct, because we do not think of action as time,105 and because our awareness of
temporal particularities affecting a given agent or effect cannot be accounted for
solely thanks to the generic notions of agent or effect.106 Śrīdhara, who knows
Vyomaśiva’s work,107 also mentions in passing in his commentary on the PDhS
I am in no position to judge which author predates the other. For a synthetic account
of the scant information regarding Candrānanda’s date, see Isaacson 1995: 140–141
(after Uddyotakara, before Helārāja); on Vyomaśiva’s date and for more bibliographical
references, see Slaje 1986, according to which Vyomaśiva must have been a contemporary of Jayanta active around 900 CE.
104
Vyomavatī, p. 343: athādityaparivartanam evāstu kiṃ kāleneti cet, na, yugapadādipratyayānumeyatvāt, na cādityaparivartanād eva yugapadādipratyayāḥ sambhavantīti,
ekasminn evādityaparivartane sarveṣām anutpādāt, vyapadeśābhāvāc ca, tathā hi, yugapatkāla iti vyapadeśo na yugapadādityaparivartanam iti. “But if [the opponent says]: let
[us] admit that only the movement of the sun exists – what is the point of time? [We
reply: we can]not [admit this], because [time] can be inferred from cognitions such
as ‘simultaneous,’ and cognitions such as ‘simultaneous’ cannot arise from the mere
movement of the sun, because all [simultaneous events] do not occur within one single
revolution of the sun, and because this is not how we talk; to explain: [we] talk about
‘a simultaneous time,’ not ‘a simultaneous revolution of the sun!’”
105
Ibid.: na ca kriyā kāla iti pratīyate. “And action is not cognized as time.”
106
Ibid.: tathā hi yugapad ete kurvantīti kartrālambanaṃ jñānaṃ yugapad etāni kṛtānīti kāryālambanaṃ ca dṛṣṭam. na cātra kartṛmātraṃ kāryamātraṃ cālambanam atiprasaṅgāt… “To explain: [we] observe that [when we think:] ‘these [agents] are acting
simultaneously,’ or ‘these [effects] were produced simultaneously,’ these cognitions respectively rest on objects that are agents and effects; and these objects on which they rest cannot
be just agents or just effects, because there would be an overextension.” Cf. ibid., p. 344:
ayugapad ete bruvantīti kartrālambanaṃ jñānam ayugapad etat kṛtam iti kāryālambanaṃ
jñānam. atrāpi viśiṣṭayoḥ kartṛkarmaṇor ālambanatvāt kṣityādivilakṣaṇaṃ nimittaṃ
vācyam iti kālasiddhiḥ. “The cognition ‘these [people] are talking in turn (ayugapad)’
rests on an object [consisting in] the agent; the cognition ‘this [result] has been achieved
one step at a time (ayugapad)’ rests on an object [consisting in] the effect; [and] in these
cases too, because [these cognitions] rest on objects [that are] the agent and object [but
are] particularized (viśiṣṭa), [we] must state a cause [for this particularization] distinct
from [the substances] earth and so on – this is the demonstration of time.” Cf. VSV,
p. 17, quoted above, n. 91.
107
See Varadachari 1961.
103

A History of Time in the Sāṃkhya Tradition

371

that time cannot be just action, because the cognitions of time and action are
distinct.108
On the Nyāya side, as far as I know, the first to have criticized something
comparable to the YD’s position on time is Jayanta; but as mentioned above, although he must have known the YD, Jayanta seems to attribute the thesis, or at
least one version of it, to astronomers/astrologers, so that it is not certain whether
he intended at all to target Sāṃkhya. After arguing that temporal determinations
cannot merely result from actions because the latter themselves may be affected
by temporal determinations such as being slow or quick,109 he dismisses as follows the suggestion that this can be accounted for by the very nature of actions:110
This [explanation] is far from pleasing; for the quickness and slowness in
the movements too must in turn be produced by some other cause! Even
with respect to the movement [that you present as the cause of a temporal
determination, we] see [that people have] cognitions such as “slow” or
“quick” [when they think for instance] that someone “is walking slowly”
[or] “is running quickly.”111
If temporal differences result from movements endowed with different speeds,
the very fact that they are endowed with different speeds must still be explained.
The opponent therefore tries to avoid the implicit charge of infinite regress by
NK, p. 171 (commenting upon the last words of the passage in PDhS, p. 170, quoted
above, n. 98): yathaikasya puruṣasya pacanādikriyāyogāt pācaka iti pāṭhaka iti vyapadeśas tathā kālasyāpi, na tu prārambhādikriyaiva kālo vilakṣaṇabuddhivedyatvād iti.
“Just as a single man may be called [both] ‘cook’ and ‘reader’ due to [his] association
with the acts of cooking and [reading], similarly time too [may be called diversely due
to its association with actions]; but [it is] not [true that] time is nothing but the action of
undertaking, etc.; because [time and action] are the objects of distinct cognitions.”
109
NM, vol. I, p. 365: kriyamāṇasya paṭādeḥ kāryasya tadutpādakasya ca tantuturīvemaśalākākuvindādikāraṇavṛndasya sāmye ’pi kvacit tūrṇaṃ kṛtam, kvacic cireṇa kṛtam iti
pratibhāsabhedadarśanān nimittāntaraṃ cintanīyam. “Although an effect such as a cloth
that is [in the process of] being done is the same, and although all [the causes] that bring
it into existence, such as the threads, shuttle, loom, needle and weaver, are the same, in
some cases [we say] that [this effect] was done quickly, and in others, that it was done
slowly; so since [we] observe this difference in the way in which [these effects] appear
[to us, we] must think of an additional cause.”
110
NM, vol. I, p. 366: nanu parispandādikriyābheda evātra nimittam. kaścit parispandaś
caturaḥ, kaścin manthara iti kvacit kṣiprabuddhiḥ, kvacic cirabuddhir iti. “[– Objection:]
But the cause of this [temporal determination] is only the difference in actions such as
movements: because a certain movement is quick, and another one slow, in some cases
[we] have the cognition [that something] is quick, and in others, that it is slow.”
111
Ibid.: naitac cāru, parispandagatayor api cāturyamāntharyayor nimittāntarakāryatvāt.
parispande ’pi cireṇa gacchati, śīghraṃ dhāvatīti cirakṣiprādipratītir dṛśyate.

108

372

Isabelle Ratié

arguing that the foundation of our awareness of time is not just any movement,
but rather, the specific type of movement that pertains to astral bodies, and that
the latter are the ultimate measure for all other actions:
[The opponent] replies: cognitions of such [temporal determinations] as
succession and simultaneity are not based on the movement of [any ordinary entity] such as Devadatta, but rather, on that of planets, stars and so
on; and what [we] call time is [nothing but] the movement of planets, stars
and so on.112
It is the latter position that Jayanta explicitly ascribes to astronomers,113 and he
refutes it thus:
In [experiences that we may describe as] “The sun has slowly set,” “The
moon has quickly arisen,” “Mars and Venus seem to have arisen simultaneously,” [we] perceive a [temporally determined] appearance, and [this
appearance] cannot be explained as having as its cause the movement of
some other planet, because there would follow an infinite regress (anavasthā); therefore time is not the movement of planets, etc., but some other
real entity that is responsible for [our conventional] usage (vyavahāra) [of
words denoting] succession, simultaneity, etc.114
This line of argument was adopted by other authors, notably by the Śaiva
Rāmakaṇṭha, who explicitly mentions Sāṃkhya and the astronomers as upholders
of the idea that our awareness of time has actions as its sole cause, and who
accuses them in passing of falling into an infinite regress.115 It is likely that the
NM was one of Rāmakaṇṭha’s sources for his analysis of time, and that, whether
this was Jayanta’s intention or not, Rāmakaṇṭḥa read the NM as targeting both
112
Ibid.: āha na devadattādiparispandanibandhanāḥ kramākramādipratyayāḥ, kintu
grahanakṣatrādiparispandanibandhanāḥ. sa eva ca grahatārādiparispandaḥ kāla ity
ucyate.
113
NM, vol. I, p. 367: iti kālavidaś ca jyotirgaṇakās ta evainaṃ budhyante. “And it is the
astrologers/astronomers (jyotirgaṇaka), these experts on time (kālavid), who understand
it [i.e. time] thus.”
114
NM, vol. I, pp. 366–367: cireṇāstaṃgato bhānuḥ śītāṃśuḥ śīghram udgataḥ | uditāv
iva dṛśyete yugapad bhaumabhārgavau || iti dṛśyate pratibhāsaḥ, na ca grahāntaraparispandakāraṇaka eṣa śakyate vaktum anavasthāprasaṅgāt; tasmān na grahādiparispandaḥ
kālaḥ, kintu vastvantaraṃ yatkṛto ’yaṃ kramākramādivyavahāraḥ.
115
Immediately after explaining that according to the Sāṃkhyas, time is not distinct from
Nature (see above, n. 71), Rāmakaṇṭha adds (MatV, Vidyāpāda 12, p. 338): iti tadāpy
anavasthitaḥ kālaḥ, pariṇateḥ kriyātvenāvasthānāsambhāvād iti. “In that case too, [as in
the astronomers’ view that time is just a particular type of action], time is subjected to an
infinite regress (anavasthita), because there is no possibility of a foundation (avasthāna)
[where the regress would end], since the transformation [of Nature itself] consists in
action.” Cf. MṛVD, p. 266.

A History of Time in the Sāṃkhya Tradition

373

the astronomers and the Sāṃkhyas (perhaps as those who claim that time is just
any action, and not necessarily the movement of celestial bodies).

5. The JM and TK – a conflation with the Buddhist criticism of the
Vaiśeṣika notion of time?
The JM116 and TK117 both deal with time far more cursorily than the YD, while
discussing time under SK 33, which specifies that the external organs of perception and action are related to the present time whereas the internal organ is
related to the past, present and future;118 yet the two commentaries have very
different ways of tackling the issue.
Thus according to the JM,
It is the object (viṣaya) [of the organs] itself, past, future and present, that
[we] call “time,” [and we call it thus] because it is divided? (kalyate); there
is no time over and above the [organs’ object], because one cannot accept
the consequence [that would follow otherwise – namely,] that there would
be twenty-six principles.119
This brief remark, which apparently encapsulates everything that the JM has to
say on time, highlights what is at stake in this debate for all the SK commentators:
the SK’s teaching that the entire universe boils down to twenty-five principles.
It brings to mind the identification of time with the vyakta category found in the
first group of commentaries on the SK, but it makes no mention at all of the
reduction of time to actions that appears in the YD, and it merely presents time as
an aspect of the objects grasped by the organs of thought, perception and action.
As the JM, the TK emphasizes that time is no distinct tattva; contrary to the
JM, however, it offers an argument to prove that it must be the case:
Its date and authorship are still debated (see e.g. Larson and Bhattacharya 1987: 21
and 271 for further references). Chakravarti 1951: 164–168, has argued that the JM
presupposes the YD and that one of its interpretations is criticized in the TK. At any rate
there is a close relationship between the JM and TK (for instance they are the only two
SK commentaries to discuss the nature of time under SK 33).
117
Vācaspatimiśra was active in the second half of the 10th century (see Acharya 2006:
xviii–xxviii).
118
SK 33: antaḥkaraṇaṃ trividhaṃ daśadhā bāhyaṃ trayasya viṣayākhyam | sāmpratakālaṃ bāhyaṃ trikālam abhyantaraṃ karaṇam || “The internal organ is threefold;
the external [organ], which is said [to be] the object of the three[fold internal organ],
is tenfold; the external organ is related to the present time, [whereas] the internal organ
is related to the three times.”
119
JM, p. 40: kalyata iti kālo viṣaya evātīto ’nāgato vartamānaś cocyate. na tadvyatirekeṇa
kālo ’sti, mā bhūt ṣaḍviṃśatitattvaprasaṅga iti.
116

374

Isabelle Ratié

And [since] time [as it is] admitted by the Vaiśeṣikas is one, [it is] incapable of causing the diversity in [our] talking about [things as being past,
present] and future; therefore let [us] admit that only the various extrinsic
properties through which this [time allegedly] produces the variety [of
temporal determinations] such as [“past,” “present”] and “future” are [in
fact] the causes of our talking about [things as being past, present] and
future: regarding this [variety of temporal determinations,] what could be
the point of [the Vaiśeṣikas’] time, which is [as useless as] a humpback?120
– This is what the masters of Sāṃkhya [declare]. Therefore [they] do not
acknowledge an additional principle that would consist in time.121
The YD did not use the word upādhi, but argued that since the Vaiśeṣikas themselves acknowledge – as VS 2.2.10 does – that temporal determinations only occur
in produced or impermanent entities, they cannot legitimately infer the existence
of time as their imperceptible cause, because the fact that temporal determinations
only (and always) occur in produced entities rather shows that actions must be
the source of temporal determinations. The TK, for its part, points out that since
the Vaiśeṣikas themselves acknowledge – as Praśastapāda does –122 that time is
one and that the apparent diversity of time is due to actions defined as extrinsic
properties that we superimpose onto time, they ipso facto admit that time, which
they claim to infer as the cause of temporal determinations, plays no causal role
in the production of these determinations; we can and should therefore dispense
with such a useless speculative entity and consider that temporal determinations
have no other cause besides the extrinsic properties themselves.123
On the compound antargaḍu (lit. an “internal growth”), see e.g. the commentaries
on Utpaladeva’s ĪPK 1.2.5cd (yady evam antargaḍunā ko ’rthaḥ syāt sthāyinātmanā ||
“If it is the case, [then] what could be the point of a permanent self [as useless as] a
humpback?”). Abhinavagupta comments (ĪPV, vol. I, p. 64): evaṃ tarhy antargaḍur
yathāyāsāya param, tadvad ātmā sthiraḥ kalpanāyāsamātraphala iti kiṃ tena. “If it is
the case, just as a humpback only results in weariness, in the same way, a permanent self
results in nothing but a weariness of the speculative faculty – so what is the point [of
assuming its existence]?” The Bhāskarī further explains (vol. I, p. 98): gaḍuḥ – kubjapṛṣṭhastho māṃsapiṇḍaḥ, sa hi sphuṭam evāyāsakārī. “gaḍu [designates] a mass of flesh
on the back of [someone] whose back is humped; for obviously, this causes weariness!”
See also below, n. 130.
121
TK, p. 140: kālaś ca vaiśeṣikābhimata eko nānāgatādivyavahārabhedaṃ vartayitum
arhati. tasmād ayaṃ yair upādhibhedair anāgatādibhedam pratipadyate santu ta evopādhayo ’nāgatādivyavahārahetavaḥ, kṛtam atrāntargaḍunā kāleneti sāṃkhyācāryāḥ. tasmān na kālarūpatattvāntarābhyupagama iti.
122
See above, n. 98.
123
Cf. the similar objection in ĪPVV, vol. III, p. 4: nanu ko ’sau kālo yo bhāvānām avacchedaka ucyate. yo hi kaiścin nityadravyaviśeṣātmopagataḥ, sa ekatvāt saṃyogaviśeṣāc citrākāracirakṣiprādidhīhetuḥ katham. upādhibalāt tathābhidhāne ta evopādhayaḥ santu,
120

A History of Time in the Sāṃkhya Tradition

375

This might at first sight appear to be a summary of the YD’s strategy, since
as the latter, the TK argues that the Vaiśeṣikas do not manage to infer the
existence of time and that only the extrinsic properties that Praśastapāda admits
to cause temporal diversity are real. Yet it is striking that Vācaspatimiśra never
uses the word “action” (kriyā), whereas the identification of time with actions
indubitably constitutes the core of the YD’s reasoning; and one could argue that
the TK’s formulation of the argument – often presented in secondary literature as
Sāṃkhya’s standard criticism of the Vaiśeṣika notion of time –124 has a somewhat
Buddhist ring to it. Thus the eighth-century Buddhist philosopher Śāntarakṣita
criticizes the Vaiśeṣika substance of time as follows:
The cognition [that something is] “distant,” “close” and so on is based on
a mental apprehension that arises from specific conventions – it is not due
to time or space: because their nature is partless and one, [they] cannot
produce [the cognition] that [something] is close, distant and so on. If [you
reply that this cognition arises] due to the diversity [of the differentiated
entities] that are in relation with [time and space], then surely the [latter]
are useless!125
Vācaspatimiśra’s presentation of what the “Sāṃkhya masters” have to say about
time sounds very close to this, in part because he does not describe as actions
the “extrinsic properties” that are said to be enough to produce temporal determinations; for this is precisely where the Buddhist criticism of time diverges
from the YD’s, as the Buddhists refuse to ascribe reality to action (which they
view as a mental construct)126 and consider that the differences that produce
kiṃ tena. “[– Objection]: But what is this time that is alleged to be what measures [objective] entities? For how could this [time], acknowledged by some to consist in a
particular eternal substance, be the cause of cognitions such as ‘slow’ and ‘quick,’ with
their diverse aspects, since it is one [and] has a particular conjunction [with all the substances endowed with a material shape]? If it is said to be thus [what measures things]
because of extrinsic properties [and not because of its own nature], [then] let [us admit]
that only these extrinsic properties exist, [and no distinct substance called time]; what is
the point of this [time]?”
124
See e.g. Jhaveri 1955: 1, or Balslev 1983: 44–48.
125
TSŚ 628–629/TSK 629–630: viśiṣṭasamayodbhūtamanaskāranibandhanam | parāparādivijñānaṃ na kālān na diśaś ca tat || niraṃśaikasvabhāvatvāt paurvāparyādyasambhavaḥ || tayoḥ sambandhibhedāc ced evaṃ tau niṣphalau nanu || The argument is
not found in the earlier Buddhist criticisms of time (on which see May 1981; de Jong
1949: 37–42) by Āryadeva or Candrakīrti, who both target the MBh’s kālavāda rather
than the Vaiśeṣikas’ view.
126
See e.g. AKBh 9, pp. 134–136: kathaṃ ca pradīpo gacchati. pradīpa ity arciṣāṃ santāna upacaryate. sa deśāntareṣūtpadyamānas taṃ taṃ deśaṃ gacchatīty ucyate. “And how
does a lamp[’s flame] move? [We] talk about ‘the lamp[’s flame]’ in a figurative way,

376

Isabelle Ratié

temporal differentiations are, rather than actions, the momentary entities themselves. This is obvious from Kamalaśīla’s commentary on Śāntarakṣita’s verses
(which presents the source of temporal differences as the entities),127 but also
for instance from the demonstration that “what [we] call time is nothing”128 by
[when we actually mean] the series of [different, momentary] flames; [and we] say of
the [new flame] arising [at every moment] in different places that it ‘moves’ to this or
that place.” Cf. TSŚ 704–706/TSK 705–707: dṛśyatvābhimataṃ karma na vastuvyatireki
ca | dṛśyate ’to ’pi* naivāsya sattā yuktyanupātinī || asthire vā sthire vaivaṃ gatyādīnām
asambhavaḥ | prāktanāparadeśābhyāṃ vibhāgaprāptyayogataḥ || deśāntaropalabdhes tu
nairantaryeṇa janmanaḥ | samānāparavastūnāṃ gatibhrāntiḥ pradīpavat || [*’to ’pi TSŚ;
so ’pi TSK.] “Action, [inasmuch as we] regard [it] as [something] perceptible [and not as
a mental construct], is nothing over and above the real thing [itself], and no existence
of this [action] that would be compatible with reason is [ever] perceived [in addition]
to this [real thing]. Thus [actions] such as going cannot occur in [anything,] whether
impermanent or permanent, because no[thing] can be separated from the place [it]
former[ly occupied] or reach another place. Rather, just as in the [case of] a lamp[’s
flame], the illusion [that there is such a thing as an action] of going is due to the arising
in a contiguous series of real things that are similar [yet] different, because [we] perceive
[each of them] in different places.”
127
TSPŚ, vol. I, pp. 259–260/TSPK, vol. I, p. 209: atha matam – dikkālasambandhino bhāvā bāhyādhyātmikāḥ pradīpaśarīrādayas teṣāṃ paurvāparyādi vidyate, tatas tayor api
dikkālayoḥ sambandhigatam etat paurvāparyādi nirdiśyate, tasmān na viruddhatā hetor
iti bhāvaḥ. atrottaram āha evaṃ tau niṣphalau nanv iti. evaṃ hi kalpyamāne tau dikkālau
niṣphalau syātām, tatsādhyābhimatasya kāryasya tair eva sambandhibhir niṣpāditatvāt.
tathā hi kālaḥ pūrvāparakṣaṇalavanimeṣakāṣṭhākalāmuhūrtāhorātrārdhamāsādipratyayaprasavahetuḥ. dik ca pūrvottarādivyavasthāhetur iṣyate. ayaṃ ca bhedaḥ sakalas tayor
na svātmani vidyate. bhedeṣu punar astīti vyarthaiva tatparikalpanā. “But the [following]
opinion [might be urged]: ‘The entities (bhāva) that are in relation with space and time –
whether [they are] external [to us], such as a lamp, or belonging to us, such as [our] body
– have [properties] such as being anterior and posterior; therefore these [properties] such
as being anterior and posterior, which reside within that which has a relation with space
and time, are ascribed to these [space and time] as well, so the reason [in our inference]
is not contradictory’ – this is the implied gist [of the opponent’s objection]. [Śāntarakṣita]
states the response to this [when he says] ‘Then surely the [latter] are useless!’ For [‘then,’
i.e., if] one imagines that it is so, these space and time must be useless, because the effect
supposedly brought about by them is accomplished solely by these [entities] that are in
relation [with the so-called space and time]. To explain: [according to you,] time is the
cause that produces the cognitions ‘anterior,’ ‘posterior,’ [or the cognitions of the time
units called] lava, nimeṣa, kāṣṭhā, kalā, muhūrta, day and night, fortnight and so on; and
[you] consider space to be the cause of states such as ‘east,’ ‘north,’ etc. Now, this whole
diversity is not intrinsic to [space and time] (tayor na svātmani vidyate): on the contrary,
it exists in the differentiated [entities that are supposedly in relation with space and time]
– so the assumption of [space and time’s existence] is entirely vain.”
128
PVA, p. 112: na kālo nāma kaścit. For a summary of Prajñākaragupta’s refutation of

A History of Time in the Sāṃkhya Tradition

377

Prajñākaragupta (active around 800). For according to the latter, those who claim
that time is nothing but actions such as the sun’s revolution are wrong:
If [our opponent says that] time is nothing but the movement of the sun
and so on, [we reply:] no, because there is no movement [that would exist]
over and above the nature of the sun or [any other entity that we consider
to be moving].129
Vācaspatimiśra may have avoided mentioning the reduction of time to actions
for the sake of brevity; one could suspect, however, that he purposefully made
the two criticisms sound identical by remaining silent about the YD’s distinctive
line of argument (i.e., since temporal determinations are only found in effects,
they are produced by actions), by refraining from defining what the “extrinsic
properties” in question are (i.e. actions), and perhaps also by using the compound
antargaḍu, that the Buddhists often employ to mock the useless speculative inventions of their Brahmanical opponents.130 As will be seen shortly, he himself
seemed to dislike the Sāṃkhya position on time, and it is not impossible that in
this particular instance he chose to present the Sāṃkhya position as boiling down
to the Buddhist one in an attempt to disqualify it in Brahmanical eyes.

6. Nyāya and Vaiśeṣika reactions to the TK’s argument: Vācaspatimiśra’s
response
Thus, quite amusingly, it is Vācaspatimiśra himself who, in his commentary on
Uddyotakara’s Nyāyavārttika, offered a response to the TK argument that eventually became the standard form of the inference of time in Nyāya-Vaiśeṣika (so
much so that Vācaspatimiśra is sometimes presented in secondary sources as
having invented the inference of time).131 Since the NVTṬ is referred to at least
three times in the TK,132 Vācaspatimiśra must have been perfectly aware, while
explaining the Sāṃkhya argument in favour of the reduction of time to actions,
time as a substance see Franco 2011: 94–96.
129
PVA, p. 112: athādityādigatir eva kālaḥ. na, ādityādisvarūpavyatirekeṇa gatyabhāvāt.
130
Although it is occasionally encountered in Brahmanical texts as well, it seems to have
been favoured by Buddhist authors; Dharmakīrti for instance uses it when emphasizing
the Veda’s uselessness as a means of knowledge (see Eltschinger, Krasser and Taber 2012:
39, n. 32), and the passages quoted above from Śaiva texts (n. 120) put the word in the
mouth of a Buddhist opponent who points out the inability of a hypothetical unchanging
self to account for the variety of our momentary cognitions.
131
See Prasad 1984b: 237: “it was Vācaspati (980 AD) who first suggested the method
of inference of time.”
132
See Acharya 2006: xxxii.

378

Isabelle Ratié

that it laid itself open to a scathing criticism – his own –; and his silence in the
TK is certainly an indication that he deemed the Sāṃkhya position weak.133 For
in the NVTṬ, Vācaspatimiśra points out as follows the defect inherent in the
thesis that he ascribes to the “masters of Sāṃkhya” in the TK:
[Someone] may [object]: “[The properties of] being [temporally] close
and distant can occur thanks to the sole body [of an individual] that is
particularized by a smaller or greater amount of actions of the sun’s rising
and setting; what could be the point in this respect of another substance
that would be time?” [We answer:] This is not [acceptable,] because the
action that inheres in the sun has no relation (sambandha) with the body
[of that individual].134
Actions can be compared with each other and measured by each other only if they
can enter in some kind of relation with each other; but when we say that someone
is X years old, and thus evaluate this person’s age relatively to the movement of
the sun, what kind of relation can there be between the body of the individual,
in which an action such as breathing, walking, etc., inheres, and that of the extremely distant sun, where the motion of the sun inheres? Movements inhere in
substances, and only substances can be connected or conjoined (saṃyukta) with
each other, but how could the two substances that are an individual’s body and the
sun be in any way connected?

According to Acharya 2006: lxvi–lxvii, Vācaspatimiśra “can be said to be trying to
promote all of the orthodox Brahmanical philosophies independently, even if he is not
aiming at harmonising them… Vācaspatimiśra authored his works on rival philosophies
without taking sides…” In contrast, according to Phillips 2015: 7, he is to be compared
to “the analytic philosopher who incorporates a broad inheritance while forging her
own position,” such as “Rawls studying previous social-contract theorists, or Chisholm
studying Descartes, Hume, and Russell.” Although it seems to me, perhaps wrongly,
that the latter model is inadequate, Phillips 2015: 6 is certainly right in pointing out
Vācaspatimiśra’s “deafening silence” regarding some aspects of instrumental causality in
the TK: it seems that his discrete but efficient way of indicating when he thinks little of
a thesis is to remain silent about possible objections to it while commenting on a treatise
that defends it (instead of examining such objections so as to demonstrate that the thesis
withstands all potential criticism), and to voice these objections in another treatise. This
complex game of silences in Vācaspatimiśra’s works and the overall agenda that governs
them still await a thorough study (cf. e.g. his attitude in the debate on the Sāṃkhya notion
of abhivyakti: see Ratié 2014: 145 and 165–166).
134
NVTṬ, p. 357: sūryodayāstamayakriyāpracayālpatvabahutvaviśiṣṭāt* piṇḍād eva paratvāparatve bhaviṣyataḥ kṛtam atra dravyāntareṇa kāleneti cet, na, savitṛsamavetāyāḥ
kriyāyāḥ piṇḍenāsambandhāt. [*°kriyāpracayālpatvabahutvaviśiṣṭāt corr.; °kriyā pracayālpatvabahutvaviśiṣṭāt Ed.]
133

A History of Time in the Sāṃkhya Tradition

379

On the other hand, [we can explain this by saying that] this relation is
the inherence of the [sun’s action in a substance, i.e. the sun,] which is
conjoined with time, [the latter being] omnipresent; and ether, although
omnipresent [as well], cannot produce the contrast between [the properties
of being] distant and close, because there is no difference in its nature; besides, the ether and the self, [despite their omnipresence,] are not the cause
of the contrast between [the properties of being] distant and close, because
as the earth for instance, [which does not share the quality of smell with
any other substance,] they have some uncommon properties.135
In order to account for the relation between the sun’s revolutions and the
individual said to be X years old, we must assume that the substance in which the
motion of the sun inheres, i.e. the sun, is connected with a second substance that
is omnipresent, and therefore connected with anything of which we may say that
it is X years old. Ether and the self could be this second substance since they are
both omnipresent; but ether merely contains things without relating them with
each other, so that it cannot be responsible for our awareness of spatial closeness
or distance (which requires a distinct cause, namely space, diś),136 let alone for
our awareness of the contrast between spatial proximity and temporal distance
in one and the same entity;137 besides, both ether and the self have qualities that
belong to no other substance (such as sound for ether, or cognition for the self),
which disqualifies them as a neutral medium capable of relating all substances to
the movement of the sun.138 We therefore have no choice but to infer an eternal,
all-pervading locus devoid of any specific qualities and capable of producing a
relation between any given body and the sun’s movement, and this is precisely
what time is:
Therefore the sun’s movement and the movement of, say, Devadatta, both
have a relation with time, which is omnipresent; [this relation] consists in
[their] inherence in [substances, i.e. the sun and Devadatta’s body,] that are

135
Ibid.: saṃyuktasamavāyas tv asyāḥ sambandhaḥ kālena sarvagatenāsyāsti, na cākāśaṃ
sarvagatam api parāparavyatikarāya kalpate tasya svarūpeṇābhedāt. api cākāśātmānau
na parāparavyatikarakāraṇam asādhāraṇaguṇayogitvāt pṛthivyādivat.
136
See e.g. Bhaduri 1947: 214, on this fundamental difference between ākāśa and diś.
137
Cf. NVTP, p. 371: tasya svarūpeṇābhedād iti dikkālakṛtayoḥ parasparaviruddhayoḥ
paratvāparatvayor abhinnenākāśena sampādayitum aśakyayor aparam api dravyāntaraṃ
kalpanīyam ity arthaḥ. “‘Because there is no difference in its nature’ – this means that
since the [properties of] being close and distant, which are mutually contradictory [and]
result from space and time, cannot be produced by ether, which is undifferentiated, yet
another distinct substance must be postulated.”
138
This, at least, is how I understand the argument; cf. Bhaduri 1947: 228.

380

Isabelle Ratié

[respectively] conjoined [with time]; and through this intermediary (dvār),
the two movements also have a relation [with each other].139
Vācaspatimiśra’s reasoning was adopted, in part or in totality, by many later
authors, including Śrīdhara140 and Udayana, whose reformulation of Vācaspatimiśra’s thesis is often taken as the main source for the inference of time in secondary literature.141
NVTṬ, pp. 357–358: tasmāt sūryaparispandasya devadattādiparispandasya cāsti
kālena sarvagatena saṃyuktasamavāyalakṣaṇaḥ sambandhaḥ, etayā ca dvārā parispandayor apy asti sambandha iti.
140
NK, p. 166: ādityaparivartanālpīyastvanibandhano yuvasthavirapiṇḍābhyāṃ* parāparavyavahāra ity eke, tad ayuktam, ādityaparivartanasya yuvasthavirayoḥ sambandhābhāvād asambaddhasya nimittatve cātiprasaṅgāt. [*yuvasthavirapiṇḍābhyāṃ corr.;
yuvasthavipiṇḍābhyāṃ Ed.] “Some [say] that our talking about something [temporally]
close or distant has as its [sole] basis the fact that two bodies, one of which is young and
the other old, have a smaller [or greater] number of revolutions of the sun. [But] this is
not correct, because [then] there [can] be no relation between the revolution of the sun
and the young and old [bodies], and because if [something] unrelated [to the temporally
determined bodies] were a cause [of their temporal determinations], the [thesis would
suffer from] an overextension.” On the fact that, contrary to what is assumed in
Bhattacharyya 1945: 352–353, Śrīdhara certainly knew several works by Vācaspatimiśra,
including the TK, see Acharya 2006: xxii–xxvi; on divergences in Śrīdhara’s justification
of the existence of time with Vācaspatimiśra’s inference see Bhaduri 1947: 189–190,
although I doubt whether these differences are to be explained as a result of the fact
that “the postulation of indirect relation through the intervention of a tertium quid, and
calling this intervening factor time, evidently, did not appeal to him” (ibid.: 189). Prasad
1984b: 238 even reads the passage quoted above as a denial of “any possibility of
establishing a relation between the notions of temporal priority… and posteriority…
and the movement of the sun.” It seems to me, however, that the sentence in question
is a response to an opponent who wants to dispense with the very idea of time, and
that Śrīdhara is simply alluding here to Vācaspatimiśra’s strategy (namely: we cannot
accept that temporal determinations have actions are their sole cause, otherwise there is
no possible relation between the sun’s movement and a temporally determined body).
I also doubt whether Śrīdhara’s other arguments (there must be a specific cause for our
awareness of temporal determinations, and causality itself would be impossible without
time) should be considered in any way incompatible with Vācaspatimiśra’s reasoning.
141
See KĀ, pp. 76–77, and e.g. Bhaduri 1947: 185–189, or Prasad 1984b: 237–238. In
particular, Udayana points out the absurd consequences that would ensue if ether or the
self were capable of making a property that inheres in a given substance pass into a
distant body by the sole virtue of their proximity with both (KĀ, p. 77): tathātve caikatra
bheryām abhihatāyāṃ sarvabherīṣu śabdotpattiprasaṅgāt…; “And because if it were the
case, as a consequence any sound [occurring] when one drum is beaten would occur
in all drums;” ibid.: anyathā vārāṇasīsthitena nīlena pāṭaliputrasthitasya sphaṭikamaṇe
rūparañjanaprasaṅgāt, “Otherwise as a consequence a crystal in Pāṭaliputra would be
tinted by the [colour] blue found in Vārāṇasī!” Cf. e.g. Upaskāra (on VS 2.2.6), p. 99,
139

A History of Time in the Sāṃkhya Tradition

381

7. The issue in the Pātañjalayoga tradition: the PYV’s reduction of
time to actions vs. Vijñānabhikṣu’s interpretation of the moment’s
reality
Before turning to the SSū and their commentaries, a few words are in order
regarding the Pātañjalayoga tradition; for in much of the secondary literature
on time in Sāṃkhya, the identity of the two traditions is taken for granted, but
depictions of time in “Sāṃkhya-Yoga” seem somewhat unconvincing because
Sāṃkhya and Pātañjalayoga have strikingly different attitudes with respect to
time, so that studies claiming to cover at once the two traditions usually end up
juxtaposing their respective concepts without being able to show any unity in
them.142 Thus contrary to Sāṃkhya works, the PYSū and PYBh show no interest
at all in criticizing the kālavāda or the Vaiśeṣika substance of time, which is why
they have not been examined here so far. Admittedly, the PYBh, commenting on
an aphorism about the moment (kṣaṇa) and succession (krama),143 argues that
succession, rightly called time,144 is a mere mental construct (buddhinirmāṇa),
and this – which brings to mind the assertion in SK 33 that past and future are
objects for the sole internal organ –145 might have had a bearing on the YD’s
understanding of time:146
which gives the same arguments, including those of the drums and crystal in Pāṭaliputra
coloured by a safflower (mahārajana) residing in Vārāṇasī.
142
See e.g. Jhaveri 1955, Sen 1968, Kumar 1983 and Prasad 1984a. According to Sinha
1983: 173, “there are important differences between YSū and SK, and the PYBh only
accentuates those points on which they tend to differ. But in the presentation of the
classical Sāṃkhya-Yoga understanding of the time and temporality we do not find evidence of their fundamental difference” (see also ibid.: 16 and 175). This is a problematic assertion, both because it forces its author to declare that Vijñānabhikṣu’s explicit
distinction between the Sāṃkhya and Yoga views on time is simply wrong (ibid.: 174ff.)
and because I have yet to come across a single clue that the acknowledgement in the
PYBh of the reality of the moment (kṣaṇa) as opposed to that of sequence (krama) finds
any correspondence in a Sāṃkhya work – yet Sinha 1983 constantly assumes that all
Sāṃkhya and Yoga works are in full agreement in this crucial respect.
143
PYSū 3.52: kṣaṇatatkramayoḥ saṃyamād vivekajaṃ jñānam. “A knowledge caused
by discrimination [arises] from the concentration on moments and their succession.”
144
PYBh, p. 171: kramaś ca kṣaṇānantaryātmā taṃ kālavidaḥ kāla ity ācakṣate yoginaḥ.
“And succession consists in the contiguous series of moments; the yogins who are experts
on time (kālavid) call this ‘time.’”
145
See above, n. 54.
146
Cf. Oberhammer 1977: 196, which remarks about the following PYBh passage (before
quoting in part the one from the YD given above, n. 50): “Dieser Auffassung entspricht
die Definition der Zeit, wie sie sich in der YD findet.”

382

Isabelle Ratié

Succession, for its part, is the continuity of the [moments’] flow. There
cannot be any real combination of moments and their succession, so [time
units] such as muhūrta or night-and-day are [mere] mental combinations
(buddhisamāhāra); indeed, this time, although devoid of reality, appears
to have the nature of a real thing to ordinary [people] whose views keep
going astray, [whereas in fact] it is a mental construct that conforms to a
verbal cognition.147
Yet the PYBh also defends the thesis that the moment, understood as an atom of
time, is real:
The moment, on the other hand, belongs to reality and is the basis of succession.148
As far as I know, neither the criticism of krama per se nor the assertion that kṣaṇa
is real appears in any of the Sāṃkhya works examined here, and one wonders if
and how they are compatible with the Sāṃkhya views presented so far. This is
not to say that the Sāṃkhya and Yoga views on time are in fact irreconcilable,
or that they were elaborated in isolation from each other; it is notable for instance, with respect to the YD’s understanding of time, that the PYBh defines
the moment as a kind of minimal or atomic action,149 or that it specifies that the
universe’s pariṇāma must occur in a single moment,150 and that this moment
only exists in a present form;151 it is also of interest in this respect that the PYBh
PYBh, pp. 170–171: tatpravāhāvicchedas tu kramaḥ. kṣaṇatatkramayor nāsti vastusamāhāra iti buddhisamāhāro muhūrtāhorātrādayaḥ. sa khalv ayaṃ kālo vastuśūnyo
’pi buddhinirmāṇaḥ śabdajñānānupātī laukikānāṃ vyutthitadarśanānāṃ vastusvarūpa
ivāvabhāsate.
148
PYBh, p. 171: kṣaṇas tu vastupatitaḥ kramāvalambī. Cf. TV, p. 171: vastupatitaḥ –
vāstava ity arthaḥ, and on kramāvalambī, ibid.: krameṇāvalambyate vaikalpikenety arthaḥ.
See von Rospatt 1995: 97: “Whereas in Buddhism conditioned entities are atomized
temporally, in the PYSBh time is atomized into moments which alone are considered
to be real.” Cf. Vijñānabhikṣu’s remark below (n. 157), according to which the main
difference is that in the Pātañjalayoga tradition, only the moment is impermanent.
149
PYBh, p. 170: yathāpakarṣaparyantaṃ dravyaṃ paramāṇur evaṃ paramāpakarṣaparyantaḥ kālaḥ kṣaṇo yāvatā vā samayena calitaḥ paramāṇuḥ pūrvadeśaṃ jahyād
uttaradeśam upasampadyeta sa kālaḥ kṣaṇaḥ. “Just as the atom is the smallest possible
substance, the moment is the smallest possible time, [i.e.] the ultimate [particle of time];
or a moment is the time taken by a moving atom to abandon one place and to reach a
second one.” On the probable Buddhist influence on this definition, see below, n. 154.
150
PYBh, p. 171: tenaikena kṣaṇena kṛtsno lokaḥ pariṇāmam anubhavati. “Therefore the
entire world experiences transformation in a single moment.”
151
PYBh, p. 171: tasmād vartamāna evaikaḥ kṣaṇo na pūrvottarakṣaṇāḥ santīti. “Therefore one moment is only present; there are no past or future moments.”

147

A History of Time in the Sāṃkhya Tradition

383

defines the present, past and future relatively to the performance of action.152
Yet it seems very difficult to say anything definite about a connection between
the PYBh’s and YD’s statements on time (for instance the Naiyāyikas too define
the future, past and present relatively to action,153 which does not prevent them
from postulating a substance called time beyond them); and the impact of some
Buddhist conceptions of time on the PYBh is in fact much more conspicuous154 than the relationship between the definitions of kāla in Pātañjalayoga and
Sāṃkhya. It is striking in particular that Vācaspatimiśra does not mention at all
in his TV the argument against the Vaiśeṣika definition of time that he himself
presents in the TK as the core view of the “Sāṃkhya masters” on this topic. Nor
does it appear in Bhoja’s commentary on the PYSū. Vijñānabhikṣu, for his part,
briefly mentions it in his PYVā, but he does so to point out that this is not what
the PYBh means, as evidenced by the fact that it upholds the moment’s reality:
[One could object the following:] “But if thus [succession is a mere mental
construct], let [us] admit that the moment too is nothing but a concept, because
[we] talk indifferently about [succession and the moment as being] time,
and because [our] talking about the moment is possible on the mere basis of
[something] such as the action of a [moving] atom.” [The author] answers
this [by saying] “The moment, on the other hand, [belongs to reality…].”155
152
PYBh, p. 196: bhaviṣyadvyaktikam anāgatam anubhūtavyaktikam atītaṃ svavyāpāropārūḍhaṃ vartamānam… “Future is that whose manifestation is yet to come; past is
that whose manifestation has been experienced; present is that which is engaged in its
own activity.” In the Sāṃkhya perspective, the cause’s activity only brings about the
effect’s manifestation ([abhi]vyakti) rather than its existence, so that here the three times
appear to be entirely defined in terms of action. This is the beginning of the commentary
on PYSū 4.12: atītānāgataṃ svarūpato ’sty adhvabhedād dharmāṇām. “What is past and
future exists by nature, because properties are divided along the [three temporal] paths.”
On the PYBh thereon see Bronkhorst 2011: 58–59.
153
See e.g. NSūBh, p. 81: nādhvavyaṅgyaḥ kālaḥ. kiṃ tarhi kriyāvyaṅgyaḥ patatīti yā
patanakriyā sā yadoparatā bhavati sa kālaḥ patitaḥ kālaḥ, yadotpatsyate sa patitavyaḥ
kālaḥ, yadā tu dravye vartamānā kriyā gṛhyate sa vartamānaḥ kālaḥ. “Time may be
revealed not by the distance [covered by something in movement], but rather, by action:
the time when the action of falling [expressed as] ‘X is falling’ has ceased is the past
time; the [time] when [this action] has yet to begin is the future time; whereas [the time]
when the action is apprehended as taking place in a substance is the present time.”
154
See e.g. Keith [1918] 1924: 66; Stcherbatsky 1923: 43–47; Frauwallner 1953: 321–
327; Shah 1968: 68; Sinha 1983; Halbfass 1992: 216; Bronkhorst 2011: 59; Maas 2014.
The definition of kṣaṇa quoted above (n. 149) is also found in Buddhist sources; von
Rospatt 1995: 102–104, while conjecturing that it might have originated in Jainism,
notes (ibid.: 297, n. 215) that in this respect “the position of the PYBh bears the mark of
the Buddhist theory of momentariness;” see also Eltschinger 2007: 279, n. 257.
155
PYVā, p. 382: nanv evaṃ kṣaṇo ’pi vikalpamātro bhavatu kālavyavahārāviśeṣāt kṣaṇa-

384

Isabelle Ratié

Vijñānabhikṣu thinks that the PYBh’s main point is the reality of kṣaṇa, defined
as a particular transformation (pariṇāma) of Nature and as a substance (dravya).156
He distinguishes this thesis from the Buddhist doctrine of momentariness
by explaining that while the Buddhists hold all entities to be momentary, the
followers of Yoga believe that nothing besides the moment itself is momentary;157
yet ultimately, the moment is no distinct padārtha since it is in fact nothing but
an aspect of Nature’s infinite mutability.158 Vijñānabhikṣu insists that as a consequence, the PYBh cannot be denying the reality of time itself, but only that of
succession:
Therefore in this treatise, time is the moment itself – this is the thesis [held
here]; whereas a certain [person]’s idle discourse to the effect that in this
[tradition], time is not admitted [to exist at all], is based on a misunderstanding of the Bhāṣya’s meaning.159
The PYVā thus highlights a divergence within the Pātañjalayoga tradition as to
whether the PYBh admits that time is a mere word for actions (which could be
supported, as Vijñānabhikṣu himself points out, by the definition of the moment
as a minimal atomic movement), or whether it concedes the existence of time
by proclaiming the moment’s reality. Vijñānabhikṣu defends the latter interpretation (which he sees as one of the fundamental differences between the Yoga
and Sāṃkhya traditions)160 and scornfully alludes to another person who held
vyavahārasya ca paramāṇukriyādibhya eva sambhavād iti tatrāha kṣaṇās tv iti.
156
PYVā, p. 382: sa ca kṣaṇākhyaḥ kālaḥ sattvādīnāṃ dravyarūpaḥ pariṇāmaviśeṣa iti.
“And the time called ‘moment’ is a particular transformation (pariṇāma) – which consists
in a substance – of [the constituents] sattva, [rajas and tamas].”
157
PYVā, pp. 382–383: bauddhamatāc cāsmākam ayaṃ viśeṣo yad asmābhir dharmigrāhakapramāṇabalāt kṣaṇa evāsthira iṣyate, kṣaṇasthairyapratyabhijñādyabhāvāt, na
kṣaṇātiriktaḥ kṣaṇikaḥ padārthaḥ kaścid iṣyate, tais tu kṣaṇamātrasthāyy eva padārthaḥ
sarva iṣyata iti. “And here is the difference between our [doctrine] and the Buddhists’:
because means of knowledge grasp [lasting] property-bearers (dharmin), we consider
that only the moment is impermanent, since there is no [means of knowledge] such as
recognition [that would establish] the moment’s permanence, [and we] do not admit any
entity (padārtha) that would be momentary while being something over and above the
moment [itself]; whereas [the Buddhists] consider that every entity only exists for just
a moment.”
158
See PYSā, p. 71, quoted below, n. 241.
159
PYVā, p. 383: tad asmiñ śāstre kṣaṇa eva kāla iti siddhāntaḥ. kālo ’tra nābhyupagamyata iti kasyacit pralāpas tu bhāṣyārthāvivekamūla iti.
160
From his PYSā – which does not mention the reduction of time to actions but openly
criticizes (see below, n. 241) the SSū’s definition of time (on which see §8) –, it is clear
that asmiñ śāstre in PYVā, p. 383, designates Yoga as opposed to Sāṃkhya. Cf. the conclusion of the discussion on time in PYSā, p. 383: evam anye ’py asmacchāstrasiddhāntāḥ

A History of Time in the Sāṃkhya Tradition

385

the former. This unnamed exegete cannot be identified with Vācaspatimiśra,
who does not discuss this issue in the TV’s succinct gloss of this passage;161 nor,
apparently, is he the author of the PYV, who also acknowledges, however tersely,
the reality of kṣaṇa.162 In any case two points are noteworthy here: first, Patañjali’s
acceptance of the moment’s reality was seen at least by some as an unacceptable
departure from the blanket denial of time found in the Sāṃkhya commentarial
tradition, and an attempt was made in consequence to read the PYBh passage as
a complete negation of time’s reality.163 Second, while explaining why, according
to the PYBh, succession is “devoid of reality” and is in fact a “mental construct,”
one Pātañjalayoga commentary, namely the PYV, explicitly links the YBh’s
reflections on time with Sāṃkhya’s denial of time as an eternal substance; and
while doing so, it elaborately defends the YD’s thesis. Here is the passage in
question, which has been entirely overlooked in the secondary literature on time
in “Sāṃkhya-Yoga:”164
sāṃkhyādipratiṣiddhāḥ subudhibhir upapādanīyāḥ. “Yet other theses of our tradition
(asmacchāstra) that are contradictory with the Sāṃkhyas’ and others are to be rationally justified in the same way by the intelligent.” Kumar 1983: 131, according to which
the PYVā “concludes that the Sāṃkhya-Yoga theory is that the moment itself is time,”
should therefore be considered with caution: Vijñānabhikṣu thinks that this conclusion
is not a Sāṃkhya theory.
161
The TV merely confirms that according to the PYBh the moment is “real” (vāstava,
see above, n. 148).
162
PYV, p. 310: kṣaṇas tu vasturūpaḥ vāstavikas taddravyānyathātvenānumīyamānaḥ
kramāvalambī. “‘The moment, on the other hand, consists in a real entity’ – [i.e.] it is
real [inasmuch as it is] inferred as the transformation? (anyathātva) of that substance
[which is itself real] – ‘and is the basis of succession.’” Philipp Maas (personal written
communication, 06/09/2019) has pointed out to me that vasturūpaḥ is a variant reading for
the vulgate PYBh vastupatitaḥ, and suggested that taddravyānyathātvenānumīyamānaḥ
means that it is “inferred from the fact that it is different from its substance, i.e. the
existing entity.” I have no certainty at all as to the meaning of °anyathātvena here; it
seems to me, perhaps wrongly, that it rather points to the notion of pariṇāma (Philipp
Maas himself has suggested ibid. a link between this passage and PYSū 3.13, which
discusses transformation); cf. Vijñānabhikṣu’s definition of kṣaṇa as a pariṇāmaviśeṣa
(see above, n. 156).
163
Perhaps this was done by suggesting that the moment does not in fact belong to time;
thus it might not be a coincidence that while Vijñānabhikṣu explicitly equates kāla and
kṣaṇa, the PYV for instance does not, and it is not impossible that the PYBh’s assertion
that it is krama that the “experts on time” call time was taken by some as suggesting that
in fact kṣaṇa, although admittedly real, is beyond time, so that time (exclusively defined
as sequence in the last analysis) must be considered to have no reality at all.
164
This has enabled such statements as the one in Prasad 1984a: 43: “Yoga, like Sāṃkhya,
admits that time is not an independent reality. But whereas the latter identifies time with

386

Isabelle Ratié

But for him who [considers that] time is distinct from actions, eternal [and]
all-pervasive, even such [properties as] being slow or quick cannot be an
inferential mark for the existence of time as a distinct [entity], because
[these properties] amount to nothing but action; for what defines (lakṣaṇa)
an action the measure of which is not [yet] known is [simply] an action
the measure of which is [already] determined,165 as [when we say] that
[someone] sleeps until the milking of cows [is done], or that he studies
until the cooking of rice [is completed] – and time is nothing but this.
For the eternal, all-pervasive, unchangeable (kūṭastha) [time postulated by
the Vaiśeṣikas] cannot be that which measures (paricchedaka) something
else – as for instance the [measure called] prastha [determines a weight or
capacity] –,166 because it can have no relation (sambandha) [with anything
else]. If [our opponent replies] that time does [constitute] a measure, as for
instance the [measure called] prastha, [but only inasmuch as it is] endowed
with action, [then,] because it too is endowed with action, and because
that which is endowed with action must [in turn] be measured, there must
be another time endowed with action that measures [the first one], and a
third [one measuring] the second [one] – and an infinite regress ensues!
Besides, if [time] is endowed with action, its being impermanent must
ensue as well. But if [the opponent responds] that [there is no such infinite
regress because] a [given] time can be measured by its own activity, [then]
since [he must accept that] the other [times] too can be measured by their
respective activities, the supposition of time as a distinct entity is useless!
And thus let [us] admit that time is nothing but action. If [the opponent]
still [argues] that time measures [things] by its mere existence, [then] since
it is not different as regards existence from all [other existing things], the
same ensues. If [the opponent retorts] that this dilemma (vikalpa)167 also
change or action, the former nowhere explicitly does so.”
165
Cf. (as an example of divergence among many others) the translation of this sentence
in Rukmani 2001, vol. II: 115: “Action has a fixed measure as there is no knowledge of
action as something that does not take notice of the measure.”
166
Cf. ĪPVV, vol. III, p. 4 (quoted below, n. 171), which also mentions a well-known
measure. Leggett 1990: 357, leaves prasthādivat untranslated (twice); Rukmani 2001,
vol. II: 115 understands “like a journey (prasthā).”
167
Given the Sanskrit formulation, I do not think that Leggett 1990: 357, is right in understanding that the objection means “Your ‘action-time’ too is a mere logical construct,”
although the answer provided could at first sight seem to confirm the latter interpretation.
It seems to me that here the vikalpa said to ensue also in the case of the thesis that time
is action is the dilemma just put forward by the author of the PYV against his Vaiśeṣika
opponent, i.e.: either his time is not endowed with action, but then this unitary, immutable
time cannot measure anything; or it is endowed with action and therefore must be measured by another time endowed with action, and so on ad infinitum. The opponent is
arguing that the author of the PYV leaves himself open to the same criticism: either
the action that measures another action is not itself limited (and therefore cannot help

A History of Time in the Sāṃkhya Tradition

387

ensues in [our] perspective according to which time is action, [we answer:]
no; because the action [used to measure a given time] is well known by all,
and because its being a measure is established in [ordinary experiences]
such as “he stays until the milking of cows [is completed]:” it is an action
that [we] grasp [as] the measure [of time], and [we do] not [grasp] any
other time that would be such a measure. And the cognition “slow” [or]
“quick” results from the varying intensity of the effort [involved in the action]: it does not have as its cause a time that would be a distinct [entity].168
The passage takes aim at a Vaiśeṣika opponent, showing that temporal determinations cannot be considered an inferential mark for an eternal, all-pervasive
time because they are simply the result of our measuring a given action with
another, well-known action; whereas the Vaiśeṣika’s substance is incapable of
measuring anything because it is devoid of limits (so that it cannot assign limits
to anything else) and because, being utterly immutable, it cannot enter into a
relation with anything else and behave like a measure determining other entities. If the Vaiśeṣika replies that time can measure things inasmuch as it is “endowed with action” (i.e., in Praśastapāda’s terms, inasmuch as we superimpose
onto it the extrinsic property that is a specific action), he falls into an infinite
regress, because this time endowed with a limited action must itself be measured
by another time endowed with action, etc, and because its possessing action
entails its becoming impermanent.169 The Vaiśeṣika cannot dodge the criticism
by arguing that a given time may be measured by the sole action defining it,
measure another action), or it must be measured by another action, and so on ad infinitum.
168
PYV, p. 310: yasya tu kriyāvyatiriktaḥ kālaḥ nityo vibhus tasya cirakṣipratvādy api
kriyāmātre paryavasitatvāt pṛthakkālāstitve na liṅgaṃ ghaṭate, niyataparimāṇā hi kriyānavagataparimāṇāyāḥ kriyāyā lakṣaṇam, yathā – āgodohanaṃ svapiti, audanapākam
adhīta iti. sa eva ca kālaḥ. na hi nityayasya vibhos tasya kūṭasthasyāsambandhatvād
vastvantaraparicchedakatvaṃ prasthādivad upapadyate. kriyāvān kālaḥ paricchedakaḥ
prasthādivad iti cet, tasyāpi kriyāvattvāt kriyāvataś ca paricchedanīyatvād anyena kriyāvatā paricchedakena kālena bhavitavyam, tasyāpy anyenety anavasthāprasaṅgaḥ, kriyāvattvāc cānityatvam api prasajyeta. atha svavyāpāreṇaiva kālaḥ paricchedanīyatvaṃ*
yāyād iti cet, anye ’pi svavyāpāreṇaiva paricchedyā iti kālapṛthaktvakalpanā nirarthikā.
tathā ca kriyaivāstu kālaḥ. athāpi sadbhāvamātreṇa kālaḥ paricchedaka iti, sarveṣām
api sadbhāvāviśeṣād evaṃ prasaktam. kriyākālapakṣe ’py eṣa vikalpaḥ prāpta iti cet,
na, kriyāyāḥ sarvaprasiddhatvāt paricchedakatvasya cā godoham āsta ityādiṣu siddhatvāt kriyaiva paricchedikā labhyate, nāparaḥ kālaḥ paricchedaka iti. ciraṃ kṣipram iti
ca prayatnamandimapāṭavakṛtaḥ pratyayo na vyatiriktakālanibandhanaḥ…[*paricchedanīyatvaṃ conj.; paricchedanīyakaṃ Ed.]
169
A Vaiśeṣika would certainly object that time only seems to possess action, the latter
being only an upādhi superimposed onto it; it is not impossible that the PYV’s author
avoided using the word upādhi, however, precisely to emphasize that if it does not really
possess action, it cannot be what really measures things temporally.

388

Isabelle Ratié

because this would mean that any time can be measured solely by its own action,
and if thus only actions produce temporal determinations, there is no reason to
infer time as their cause. Nor can time be measured by its own existence, otherwise one might as well consider that any existing entity has this power, and the
assumption of time would again be useless. The Vaiśeṣika then replies that those
who identify time with action are also doomed to the very infinite regress in
which they accuse their opponents of falling, because any action A used to measure an action B is itself in need of an action C capable of measuring it, and so
on ad infinitum; the PYV’s author answers that there is no such infinite regress
in his perspective. The reason for this latter answer is best explained with the
help of a remark made in passing by the Śaiva Abhinavagupta as he sets out to
explain the thesis, mentioned by Utpaladeva, that “Time is the movement of the
sun, etc.:”170
It is by a [particular] weight for instance, the measurement of which is
[already] determined, that gold is measured; and there is no infinite regress
or logical circle in that. In the same way, Caitra’s movement [is measured]
by an[other] action the measurement of which is [already] well known,
[and] which consists in the rising and setting of the sun – so [we] say [such
things as] “Caitra goes for the day.” And if [we] want to measure the sun’s
action too, [we may] measure it with the flows [of water called] nālikās
that are well known, [as when we say] “The sun is seen during thirty nālikās.”171
Just as the PYV’s author, Abhinavagupta explains that temporal determinations
arise from our measuring a given action with another, well-known (prasiddha)
action, so that, although any measuring action can in turn be measured, this entails no infinite regress, because, being already well known, the measuring action
need not be measured. In saying so Abhinavagupta is following Utpaladeva’s
own explanation of the point in his Vivṛti on the Pratyabhijñā treatise, which
also underscores that the action with which we measure another action is “well
known;”172 and Abhinavagupta’s commentary shares with the PYV, besides the
ĪPK 2.1.3: kālaḥ sūryādisaṃcāraḥ…
ĪPVV, vol. III, p. 4: niyataparimāṇaṃ yat prativartakādi tena kanakaṃ mīyate; na
cātrānavasthānyonyāśrayo vā. tadvat prasiddhaparimāṇayā kriyayārkodayāstamayamayyā caitragamanam. tad ucyate divasaṃ caitro gacchatīti. ādityakriyāpi yadā parimitsitā
bhavati tadā prasiddhābhir nālikāsrutibhir mīyate – triṃśataṃ nālikāḥ sūryo dṛśyata iti…
Cf. ibid., p. 8, where a māṣaka (a well-known measure of gold) is mentioned as a variety
of prativartaka.
172
See the explanation of sā sā prasiddhā kriyā kālaḥ (“Time is this or that well-known
action,” ĪPVṛtti, p. 42) in Utpaladeva’s hitherto unpublished ĪPVivṛti, Chapter 2.1
(as edited in Ratié 2021: 348–349): … bahutarapratipādyapratipādakaprasiddho nālikā-

170

171

A History of Time in the Sāṃkhya Tradition

389

simile of a measure of capacity or weight, the specification that this action “has
its measurement [already] determined” (niyataparimāṇa). The idea presented in
all these texts is evidently the one that Bhartṛhari already knew as that of kālavids,
and that he had formulated thus: “with respect to [any] action, the measurement
of which is [already] known (nirjñātapariṇāma) and which is used to measure
other actions, [we] use the word ‘time’;”173 Helārāja, for his part, uses the compound paricchinnaparimāṇa.174
Now, where should we place the PYV’s spirited defense of the YD’s thesis
within the chronology of the other works examined here? This is a major difficulty, as the debate on the authorship of the PYV is not settled: it has been ascribed to Śaṅkara (the eighth-century proponent of Advaitavedānta) but it has
also been suggested that it could be as late as the 14th century, if its author is to
be identified with one of the members of the Payyur family.175 In any case a few
remarks are in order.
First, although it has been suggested that the PYV was composed by the author
of the JM (also attributed to a Śaṅkarabhagavat and transmitted in Kerala), as
noted by Wilhelm Halbfass, “readers of this work will hardly feel tempted to
attribute it… to the author of the PYV,”176 and the approaches of the two works
regarding the topic of time indeed make this identification extremely unlikely: as
seen above (§5), the JM ignores the identification of time with action.

divyapadeśyasūryādisaṃcāraviśeṣo nirdiṣṭaḥ prasiddhakriyopalakṣaṇārthaḥ, tad āha
sā sā prasiddheti. viśiṣṭāpi kramanirvartyatayā prasiddhatvāt tasyāḥ saiva kālaḥ. tena
godohādīnām api grahaṇam sūryādīti… “The thing referred to [by the word time]
is taught to be [simply] a characterizing mark (upalakṣaṇa), [namely,] a well-known
action (prasiddhakriyā): it is a particular movement of [something] such as the sun –
[a movement] that [in turn] may be described in terms of nālikās and [other units of
measure made of other actions; and this movement] is well known [insofar it] has [already] enabled [us] to obtain numerous [things] that [we] wanted to obtain [by measuring
them with it] – this is what [the Vṛtti] means with ‘[Time is] this or that well-known
[action].’ [And another action] too, which is particularized inasmuch as it is well known
that it can be accomplished in a [specific] succession, is [in turn] nothing but the time
of the [first action]. So there is an [implicit] mention [in ĪPK 2.1.3] of such [other wellknown actions] as the milking of cows…”
173
See above, n. 75.
174
See above, n. 76.
175
On this debate, and for more bibliographical references, see Halbfass 1991, Rukmani
1992, Maas 2013: 72–78 and Harimoto 2014: 225–252.
176
Halbfass 1991: 220.

390

Isabelle Ratié

Second, the point made in the PYV regarding the fact that the thesis is not
liable to an infinite regress could be seen as a response to Jayanta;177 and even the
initial remark that the eternal and immutable substance that the Vaiśeṣikas call
time can have no “relation” with the actions that it is supposed to measure could
be seen as an answer to Vācaspatimiśra’s argument that time is needed as an allpervasive substance enabling the “relation” between distant moving bodies –178
these elements might therefore be taken as clues in favour of a late date for the
PYV, in any case one that would largely postdate Śaṅkara the Advaitin. These
points, however, are hardly conclusive, since the PYV arguments do not necessarily presuppose Jayanta’s and Vācaspatimiśra’s criticisms; besides, not to mention that at least one passage in the NM could be read as mocking the dilemma
in which the PYV claims to lock its opponents,179 the very fact that the PYV thus
upholds the YD’s view on time could be used as an argument in favour of a
relatively early date, since this view, barely acknowledged and perhaps willfully
distorted in the TK, entirely disappears in fourteenth-century Sāṃkhya works
onwards (see §8). At any rate, the PYV clearly defends the very thesis ascribed
by Bhartṛhari to “experts on time” – a thesis also supported by the YD, and presented by tenth- and eleventh-century authors in terms strikingly similar to those
used in the PYBh. The brevity of the remark in the ĪPVV suggests that the Śaiva
was summing up a point already made elsewhere; so Abhinavagupta, who had

See above, §4.
See above, §6.
179
NM, vol. I, pp. 367–368: nanu bhavatkalpito ’pi kālaḥ kiṃ svata eva kramākramasvabhāvaḥ, hetvantarād vā. svatas tasya tatsvabhāvatve kāryasyaiva paṭādeḥ paridṛśyamānasya tatsvābhāvyaṃ bhavatu, kiṃ kālena. hetvantarapakṣe tv anavasthā, tasyāpi hetvantarāpekṣatvād iti tad etad bāliśacodyam, śuklaguṇādāv apy evaṃ vaktuṃ śakyatvāt.
guṇasya svataḥ śuklasvabhāvatve dravyasyaiva tad bhavatu, kiṃ guṇena guṇāntarakalpane tv anavastheti. “[– Objection:] But does the time that you imagine [as a distinct
entity] have the nature of succession and simultaneity all by itself, or due to some other
cause? If it has this nature by itself, let [us] admit that the sole effect [of an action] that
[we] see [being done], such as a cloth, has this nature [all by itself] – what is the point of
time? But if [you choose] the option of the other cause, [you are doomed to] an infinite
regress, because this [other cause] in turn requires another cause[, etc.]. [– Answer]: This
is a simpleton’s objection; because [if we followed] such [a reasoning we] could say the
same of the quality ‘white’ for instance: if this quality has the nature ‘white’ by itself, let
[us] admit that only the substance [is white all by itself], what is the point of the quality?
But if one postulates another quality [to account for the fact that a first quality is white,
we fall into] an infinite regress!”
177
178

A History of Time in the Sāṃkhya Tradition

391

much interest in the Pātañjalayoga tradition,180 either knew the PYV181 or shared
with the PYV’s author a source of which I am not aware; in any case, the idea
alluded to by Bhartṛhari was defended both in the Sāṃkhya and Yoga traditions
– although in both cases, judging from the works that have come down to us, it
only seems to have been adopted by a minority.

8. The SSū and its commentaries: how time came to be identified with
ākāśa – and how Vijñānabhikṣu the Yogin criticized Vijñānabhikṣu
the Sāṃkhya commentator
In the last creative phase or “renaissance” of Sāṃkhya, to which the SSū (14th
century?)182 and their commentaries belong,183 the definition of time undergoes
a spectacular change. In the SSū, the reduction of time to actions has vanished,
replaced with the following claim:
Space and time are from ether, etc.184
Space and time are still described as aspects of reality that do not constitute
distinct tattvas;185 but the explanation as to what the words “space” and “time”
really denote is obviously different from the one found in the YD – although less
transparent is the meaning of the SSū definition. Given that ākāśa is the first of
the five great elements, one may assume that the “etc.” (ādi) refers to the four
other mahābhūtas; but it has often been pointed out that the association of time
with the great elements appears nowhere in the classical Sāṃkhya literature that
has come down to us.186 Not to mention, however, that it is not altogether absent
See e.g. the ĪPVV’s impressive number of quotations from the Pātañjalayogaśāstra
recorded in Maas 2006: 111.
181
This would go against the assumption in Halbfass 1991: 220, that the PYV “did not
have any significant impact outside Kerala.”
182
See Garbe 1894: 69–71.
183
I could not find any discussion on the nature of time in the TSS or Vijñānabhikṣu’s
SSā.
184
SSū 2.12: dikkālāv ākāśādibhyaḥ.
185
Aniruddha, while introducing this sūtra, makes clear that this is still what is at
stake (SSūV, p. 94): nanu dikkālau sakalavyavahārasiddhau, kuto na gaṇitau, tatrāha…
“[– Objection:] But space and time are established in all [conventional] usages; [so]
why are they not counted [among the principles]? This [is what the following aphorism]
answers.”
186
See e.g. Chakravarti 1951: 257: “It is strange to notice that in the SSū both ‘time’ and
‘space’ have been mentioned to be the products of ether. Such a view is not even hinted
anywhere in the more authentic texts of Sāṃkhya.” Cf. Prasad 1984a: 39: “Here both time
and space… have been said to be the products of ‘ether’…, though we do not encounter
180

392

Isabelle Ratié

from the MBh,187 there is an intriguing description of the Sāṃkhya view of time
in the commentary on the SuSaṃ by Ḍalhaṇa,188 who must have lived in the
second part of the 12th century.189 The remark occurs as Ḍalhaṇa is explaining
the SuSaṃ’s statement that “the far-seeing ones consider that nature, God, time,
chance, fate and transformation are Nature”190 – i.e., in a context quite similar
to the one encountered here in §1, where we saw Sāṃkhya authors preoccupied
with showing that certain entities that include time have no distinct ontological
status. In this respect, Ḍalhaṇa says:
As for time, it is defined as actions that are the movements of the moon,
sun, etc.; but in it, [such properties as] “cold” or “hot” occur due to a particular transformation of the great elements. This has been said in: “Those
who follow the path of reason call ‘time’ the particular [transformations
of]? the great elements on account of the difference between two [properties such as] cold and hot.” Because of the transformation of the constituent rajas in the form of action, and because of the specific transformation
of the great elements, time is not [an entity] other than Nature.191
Some elements of the above definition sound familiar: the YD does state that
time is the movements of astral bodies and that actions are transformations of
the constituent rajas. But Ḍalhaṇa adds that nonetheless, properties such as cold
or hot arise due to a transformation of the great elements, and he quotes a verse
according to which the word time refers to the great elements (or to particular
transformations of the great elements?) owing to the difference between cold
and hot. As far as can be guessed from this very short quotation (whose source
is unknown to me), the gist of the reasoning is that time can be identified with
any such view in the rest of the Sāṃkhya-Yoga literature.” (Both articles ignore the ādi and
only mention ether, evidently under the influence of the SSū’s commentaries: see below).
187
According to Asita Devala, time creates beings “from the great elements” (yebhyaḥ…
mahābhūtāni… tāni, see above, n. 31); see also e.g. MBh 12.244.2: ākāśaṃ māruto jyotir
āpaḥ pṛthvī ca pañcamī | bhāvābhāvau ca kālaś ca sarvabhūteṣu pañcasu || “Ether, wind,
fire, water and earth as the fifth [are the elements]; and existence and nonexistence, as
well as time, are within these five universal elements.”
188
My attention was brought to it by Śāstrī 1963: 161, which quotes a part of it but does
not notice its difference from previous Sāṃkhya definitions of time or its possible relationship with SSū 2.12.
189
Meulenbeld 1999: 378–379.
190
SuSaṃ, Śārīrasthāna 1.11: svabhāvam īśvaraṃ kālaṃ yaddṛcchāṃ niyatiṃ tathā |
pariṇāmaṃ ca manyante prakṛtiṃ pṛthudarśinaḥ ||
191
NiSaṃ, p. 286: kālo ’pi candrārkādigatikriyālakṣaṇaḥ, tatra tu mahābhūtānāṃ pariṇāmaviśeṣāc chītoṣṇādayo bhavanti, tad uktaṃ: mahābhūtaviśeṣāṃs tu śītoṣṇadvayabhedataḥ | kāla ity adhyavasyanti nyāyamārgānusāriṇaḥ || iti, kriyātvena rajoguṇapariṇāmatvān mahābhūtapariṇāmaviśeṣatvāc ca na kālasya prakṛter anyatvam.

A History of Time in the Sāṃkhya Tradition

393

the great elements on the grounds that the appearance of new properties and
the disappearance of former ones, which make us notice change, are due to the
mahābhūtas’ transformations. Ḍalhaṇa’s testimony is of great interest, because
the views that he reports are probably much older than his own work,192 and he is
aware of the thesis defended by the YD and PYV, but he also records a second,
somewhat conflicting view193 (although he presents it as completing the former
rather than cancelling it); and it is very tempting to see in SSū 2.12 an echo of
the second doctrine (which, by the time of SSū’s compilation, may have entirely
superseded the YD’s): SSū 2.12 may well have originally meant that although
time is no distinct reality, our conventional understanding of time arises fom the
various transformations of the five great elements.
Be it as it may, the terse SSū was found problematic by its commentators, not
because of the absence of any allusion to action (the commentaries never mention
the reduction of time to actions found in the YD and PYV, although, as mentioned
above, Vijñānabhikṣu at least seems to have been aware of it), but because the
ablative in “from ether, etc.” could be understood as implying an emanative
process from the great elements, which would of course go against the dogma
of the twenty-five tattvas. To avert such an interpretation, one could surmise
that according to the SSū, time and space are mere words that we use owing to
the five great elements’ transformations. This is not, however, how Aniruddha
(active in the second half of the 15th century)194 explains the aphorism:
It is ether itself that is referred to with the words “space” and “time,”
because of the difference pertaining to the various extrinsic properties;
therefore [space and time] are included (antarbhūta) within ether; the word
Philipp Maas has brought to my attention the fact that shortly before this passage
Ḍalhaṇa refers to the (now almost entirely lost) commentary by Jejjhaṭa, who must have
lived in the 6th or 7th century.
193
As seen above (§2), the YD specifies that time is only movements (parispanda/
praspanda) and not transformations (pariṇāma), the latter being precisely defined as
the loss of a former property and the acquisition of a new one by a property-bearer (see
above, n. 60; cf. YD, p. 111 and PYSū 3.13, both examined in Bronkhorst 1994: 316–317;
on PYSū 3.13 see also Maas 2014). Of course, the two views are nonetheless in agreement
inasmuch as they both emphasize that time is no distinct entity and has no distinct causal
power. As pointed out to me by Philipp Maas (personal communication, 06/09/2019),
there was nonetheless a diversity of views on this issue in the SuSaṃ commentarial
tradition, since Ḍalhaṇa further mentions (NiSaṃ, p. 286) the view of Gayadāsa (active
around 1000), according to whom the five entities under discussion have a distinctive
causal power insofar as they are additional causes (nimittakāraṇa) as opposed to Nature’s
transformation being the material cause (upādānakāraṇa).
194
See Garbe 1888: viii–ix; cf. Garbe 1892: xxiv.
192

394

Isabelle Ratié

“etc.” is an interpolation (sampātāyāta);195 the ablative is [here] in the
sense of a locative.196
According to Aniruddha, both space and time are ether itself – and no other
mahābhūta. His interpretation sounds forced, since in order to have the aphorism say this, he must claim that the ablative has the sense of a locative and
that the word “etc.,” which indicates that ether is only the first element of a list,
is to be discarded as a corruption of the original text. The fact that he uses the
word “included” (antarbhūta) to highlight that space and time are subsumed
under one of the tattvas acknowledged by the Sāṃkhya tradition is probably no
coincidence: admittedly, the notion of antarbhāva is often used in Aniruddha’s
time to reject a category by arguing that it is already “included” within a broader
one;197 still, the passage seems to echo a phrasing already found in a similar
context in the Suvarṇasaptati*, SV, SSV, GBh and MV –198 with this significant
difference, however, that the earlier texts merely argue that time is “included” in
the category of the manifest, and they never mention ākāśa in this connection.
Aniruddha, who, as noted long ago by Richard Garbe, was familiar with the
TK,199 also makes use of the concept of extrinsic property (upādhi) mentioned
in the latter; but the idea summed up by Vācaspatimiśra has also undergone
an important change. For the point is no longer to say that time is in fact the
various actions that the Vaiśeṣikas wrongly see as extrinsic properties being
superimposed onto a single substance: Aniruddha now explains that time, space
and ether are one single reality, which is a substance apprehended as space, time
or ether depending on the extrinsic properties that happen to be projected onto
it (that is, presumably, actions as far as time is concerned, and bodies endowed
with a fixed shape as regards space).200 From his use of the words antarbhūta
and upādhi, we may surmise that Aniruddha knew, besides the TK, at least one
work in the first group of commentaries on the SK examined above; but the YD’s
conspicuous absence among Aniruddha’s sources, and the ambiguity pointed out
above (§5) in the TK’s formulation, enable this strange shift of meaning in the
use of the notion of “extrinsic property” as it was understood in earlier debates
on time.
Garbe 1892: 96, translates “is added to no perceptible purpose.”
SSūV, p. 94: tattadupādhibhedād ākāśam eva dikkālaśabdavācyam. tasmād ākāśe
’ntarbhūtau. ādiśabdaḥ sampātāyātaḥ. saptamyarthe pañcamī.
197
See e.g. Ganeri 2011: 207, on the success of this strategy in the philosophical literature
of the 15th century onwards.
198
See above, nn. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26 and 29.
199
See Garbe 1888: vii.
200
On mūrtas as digupādhis, see e.g. Keith 1921: 236; Matilal 1968: 44.
195
196

A History of Time in the Sāṃkhya Tradition

395

As for Vijñānabhikṣu (active in the second half of the 16th century),201 after
specifying as an introduction that the aphorism “explains the creation of limited
(khaṇḍa) space and time,”202 he comments on it in the following way:
The space and time that are eternal (nitya), being [simply] the nature of
ether, are just particular qualities (guṇaviśeṣa) of Nature. From this, the
omnipresence of space and time is rationally established; so is that of ether,
which is declared in the scriptural statement “And just as ether, it is omnipresent and eternal.” As for the space and time that are limited (khaṇḍa),
they arise from ether due to [its] association with various extrinsic properties – this is the meaning [of the aphorism], since one must understand that
extrinsic properties are part of [the definition] due to the [presence of the]
word “etc.” Even though the limited space and time are nothing but ether
[inasmuch as it is] particularized by various extrinsic properties, nonetheless, in this [aphorism they] are said to be the effect of [ether], just as, in the
Vaiśeṣika doctrine, the auditory [organ] is [said to be] the effect [of ether],
in accordance with a discourse that admits that [something] particularized
is distinct [from that same thing when it is not particularized].203
Vijñānabhikṣu explicitly accepts the existence of eternal and unlimited or partless space and time (a statement patently at odds with the YD’s doctrine) but he
argues that they are not distinct tattvas since they are nothing but ether, and as
such, only a particular aspect of Nature itself. As for specific places and times,
they are also ether, but ether inasmuch as it as associated with extrinsic properties
that seemingly impose limits on it. He manages to explain away the presence
of the word “etc.” in the sūtra without discarding it as an interpolation (i.e. by
assuming that the “etc.” refers to the extrinsic properties that, once associated
with ether, make space and time appear), and his explanation of the ablative (as
indicating the source from which space and time emerge, which is not ultimately
distinct from them but can be thought of as different inasmuch as it is not particularized) is certainly more ingenious than Aniruddha’s.204 In both commentaries,
Garbe 1894: 74.
SPraBh, p. 77: khaṇḍadikkālayoḥ sṛṣṭim āha.
203
SPraBh, p. 77: nityau yau dikkālau tāv ākāśaprakṛtibhūtau prakṛter guṇaviśeṣāv eva.
ato dikkālayor vibhutvopapattiḥ, ākāśavat sarvagataś ca nitya ityādiśrutyuktaṃ vibhutvaṃ
cākāśasyopapannam. yau tu khaṇḍadikkālau tau tu tattadupādhisaṃyogād ākāśād
utpadyeta ity arthaḥ, ādiśabdenopādhigrahaṇād iti. yady api tattadupādhiviśiṣṭākāśam
eva khaṇḍadikkālau, tathāpi viśiṣṭasyātiriktatābhyupagamavādena vaiśeṣikanaye śrotrasya kāryatāvat tatkāryatvam atroktam.
204
The SVS by Mahādeva Vedāntin (active at the end of the 17th century, see Garbe
1892: xxiv–xxv) simply sums up this interpretation. See SVS, p. 94: ādiśabdenopādhayo
gṛhyante. tathā ca tattadupādhibhya ākāśāc ca dikkālāv utpadyeta ity arthaḥ. yady apy
upādhiviśiṣṭākāśa eva dikkālau, tathāpi viśiṣṭasyātirekaṃ viśeṣaṇaviśeṣyobhayajanyatvaṃ
201
202

396

Isabelle Ratié

however, space and time are identified with ether – a point that, to my knowledge,
occurs nowhere in the commentaries on the SK, and has caused much puzzlement in the secondary literature on Sāṃkhya.205 It seems probable that Aniruddha
and Vijñānabhikṣu distorted the meaning of SSū 2.12, which may have originally
referred to the doctrine of time’s identity with the five mahābhūtas that, as seen
above, is already attested in the 12th century; but why were they so keen on identifying time and space with the sole ākāśa, while disregarding the other great
elements?
One could suspect that this was a result of the massive process of vedānticization undergone by the Sāṃkhya tradition in this last phase,206 all the more since
Vijñānabhikṣu appeals to a well-known scriptural statement often discussed by
Vedāntins;207 and Theodore Stcherbastky saw the SSū’s understanding of time as
the expression of an ancient upaniṣadic doctrine208 stated e.g. in the BAU, which
presents spatially and temporally determined things as “woven back and forth”
cābhyupetyāyaṃ janyatvavyavahāraḥ. “The extrinsic properties are [to be] understood
from [the use of] the word ‘etc.;’ and thus, the meaning [of the aphorism] is that space
and time arise from these various extrinsic properties and ether. Even though space and
time are nothing but ether [inasmuch as it is] particularized by these extrinsic properties,
one thus talks about the fact that [a thing A] arises [from a thing B although A is only a
particularized form of B] if one admits that [A] is something distinct [from B inasmuch
as it is] particularized and that [A] arises from both the particularizing [properties] and
that which is to be particularized [i.e. B].”
205
See above, n. 186, and Prasad 1984a: 39: “Vijñānabhikṣu… adds a quite different
meaning to this sūtra, which definitely does not fit in with the traditional Sāṃkhya-Yoga
doctrines.” Cf. e.g. Sen 1968: 415, which contrasts the YD definition of time with that
of the commentators on the SSū by saying that the latter view “seems to give time some
reality. When it is said that time is ākāśa itself or is a modification of prakṛti, at least
this much seems to be granted that it is not nothing. The advocates of this view nowhere
explicitly say that time is just a word signifying nothing positive. But then there is no
explanation given why time should be regarded as being nondistinct from ākāśa and
how ākāśa or prakṛti gives rise to our notions of time. This view, therefore, though less
radical, is the more difficult to understand.”
206
A process already pointed out e.g. in Garbe 1895: xi ff.
207
I do not know its source; it is for instance quoted by Śaṅkara as he attempts to
demonstrate that ākāśa too is ultimately a product, the sole ultimate reality being the
Brahman. His opponent quotes ākāśavat sarvagataś ca nityaḥ (BSūBh, vol. 2, p. 580)
to show that ether, just as the Brahman, possesses omnipresence and eternity; Śaṅkara,
however, argues that the point of this statement is only to highlight the “absolute greatness” (niratiśayamahattva) of the Brahman in contrast with the “well-known greatness”
(prasiddhamahatva) of ether (ibid., p. 586).
208
See Stcherbatsky 1926: 15–18.

A History of Time in the Sāṃkhya Tradition

397

on ākāśa.209 It is nevertheless striking that Vijñānabhikṣu’s commentary on this
passage is pervaded by doctrinal features that belong to Nyāya and Vaiśeṣika
rather than Vedānta: his use of the compound khaṇḍadikkāla (“limited space
and time,” or “partitioned space and time”) is common in Navya-Nyāya,210 and
he explicitly mentions the “Vaiśeṣika doctrine” while justifying the use of the
ablative, as he argues that space and time, although they are in fact ether, can
be said to arise “from” ether, just as the Vaiśeṣikas sometimes talk about the
auditory organ as an effect of ākāśa whereas they believe that this organ is
just a particularized aspect of ākāśa itself.211 In fact, time as it is described in
Vijñānabhikṣu’s SPraBh is now in many ways similar to time as it is understood
in Vaiśeṣika: as mentioned above, Vijñānabhikṣu acknowledges the distinction
between an eternal substance called time and the temporal segments measured
thanks to this substance’s association with extrinsic properties. Besides, according to Aniruddha, the aphorism “[Bondage] is not due to the association with
time, because, [being all-]pervading [and] permanent, it has a relation with all”212
means that bondage cannot be due to the association with time, because the
puruṣa, eternal and all-pervading, is related with all times;213 but according to
BAU 3.8.7: yad ūrdhvaṃ gārgi divo yad avāk pṛthivyā yad antarā dyāvāpṛthivī ime
yadbhūtaṃ ca bhavac ca bhaviṣyac cety ācakṣata ākāśa eva tad otaṃ ca protaṃ ceti.
“The things above the sky, the things below the earth, and the things between the earth
and the sky, as well as all those things people here refer to as past, present, and future –
on space (ākāśa), Gārgī, are all these woven back and forth.” (Trans. Olivelle 1998: 91).
210
See e.g. Ingalls 1951: 78–79, on “portions of time” that are nothing but upādhis (translated there as “imposed properties” or “calibrations”). See also Potter 1957: 22ff. (who
translates mahākāla as “big-time” and khaṇḍakāla as “little-time”).
211
On the homogeneity of the auditory organ with ākāśa, see e.g. PDhS, p. 162: sarvaprāṇināṃ ca śabdopalabdhau nimittaṃ śrotrabhāvena. śrotraṃ punaḥ śravaṇavivarasaṃjñako
nabhodeśaḥ śabdanimittopabhogaprāpakadharmādharmopanibaddhaḥ. “And as the auditory organ, [ether] is the cause of all living beings’ perceptions of sound. As for the
auditory organ, it is the area of ether that is called the ‘aperture of the ear,’ which is dependent on merit and demerit [inasmuch as the latter] bring about the experiences [of pleasure and pain] that have sound as their cause.” Vijñānabhikṣu’s point is that this does not
prevent Vaiśeṣikas (or Naiyāyikas) from using the ablative and explaining that the auditory organ arises from ākāśa (see e.g. NSū 1.1.12: ghrāṇarasanacakṣustvakśrotrāṇīndriyāṇi
bhūtebhyaḥ. “The organs of smell, taste, vision, touch and hearing [arise] from the elements.”).
212
SSū 1.12: na kālayogato vyāpino nityasya sarvasambandhāt.
213
SSūV, p. 10: bhavatv ayaṃ yadi tasya kadāpi kālayogaḥ syān na syād vā, nityasya
vyāpinaḥ sarvakālasambandhopādhitvāt… “This [bondage of the person] could be
[due to the association with time] if the [person] only had an association with time
occasionally; [but ‘it is not due to the association with time,’] because this eternal, allpervading [person] has as its extrinsic property a relation with all times.”
209

398

Isabelle Ratié

Vijñānabhikṣu, the reason why bondage cannot have as its cause the association
with time is the fact that time itself is eternal (nitya), all-pervading (vyāpin)
and in a relation with all (sarvasambandha).214 In other words, Vijñānabhikṣu’s
conception of time – at least in his commentary on the SSū – has much to do with
the Vaiśeṣika definition of kāla as an eternal, all-pervading substance that only
appears to be limited owing to extrinsic properties and that enables all bodies
to be in relation with the revolutions of the sun; and his main concern is to
show that the Sāṃkhya view of time is not incompatible with that of Vaiśeṣika,
despite the fact that Sāṃkhya denies its independent status as a distinct tattva –
a strategy that he himself has clearly defined earlier in his commentary, while
explaining the list of twenty-five principles enumerated in SSū 1.61: rather than
criticizing the Vaiśeṣika categories, the SPraBh endeavours to show that they are
all contained in nuce in the principles of Sāṃkhya –215 a way of highlighting the
superiority of Sāṃkhya while appropriating Vaiśeṣika concepts.216 And at first
glance, one might believe that Aniruddha and Vijñānabhikṣu, when equating
SPraBh, p. 11: nāpi kālasambandhanimittakaḥ puruṣasya bandhaḥ. kutaḥ, vyāpino
nityasya kālasya sarvāvacchedena sarvadā muktāmuktasakalapuruṣasambandhāt, sarvāvacchedena sadā sakalapuruṣāṇāṃ bandhāpatter ity arthaḥ. “Nor does the person’s
bondage have as its cause its relation with time; why? Because time, which is all-pervading [and] eternal, is always in relation with all persons, whether liberated or not, due
to the fact that [time] determines everything; i.e., because [if the association with time
were the cause of bondage,] as a consequence the bondage would occur eternally for all
persons due to the fact that [time] determines everything – this is what [the aphorism]
means.”
215
SPraBh, p. 30: ayaṃ ca pañcaviṃśatiko gaṇo dravyarūpa eva. dharmadharmyabhedāt tu guṇakarmasāmānyādīnām atraivāntarbhāvaḥ, etadatiriktapadārthasattve hi tato
’pi puruṣasya vivektavyatayā tadasaṅgrahe nyūnatāpadyeta. etena sāṃkhyānām aniyatapadārthābhyupagama iti mūḍhapralāpa upekṣaṇīyaḥ. dikkālau cākāśam eva, dikkālāv
ākāśādibhya ity āgamisūtrāt. “And this group of twenty-five [principles] only consists
in substances; but given that there is no difference between a property-bearer and its
properties, [we should consider that] qualities, actions, universals and [the other Vaiśeṣika
categories] are included (antarbhāva) within these [enumerated substances]; for if these
[categories] existed as constitutive elements of reality (padārtha) distinct from the
[enumerated substances], since [in order to reach liberation,] the person would need to
be discriminated from them too, the fact that they are not enumerated [in the aphorism]
would constitute a [defect of] incompleteness. This [shows that] the idle discourse of
the deluded [who claim] that the Sāṃkhyas admit a fluctuating [number] of constitutive
elements of reality must be disregarded; and space and time are nothing but ether, [as
will be made clear] from the aphorism in the remainder [according to which] ‘Space and
time are from ether, etc.’”
216
On Vijñānabhikṣu’s inclusivistic strategy with respect to Nyāya-Vaiśeṣika see
Nicholson 2010: 87.
214

A History of Time in the Sāṃkhya Tradition

399

space and time with ether, simply borrow from a Vaiśeṣika source, namely, a
manual by Śivāditya (12th century?)217 that says the following:
As for ether, which is differentiated by the differences between the ether
[existing within the limits] of a pot and [that existing within the limits of
other objects], it is in fact infinite; whereas time is threefold [inasmuch
as it is] characterized by arising, continuous existence and destruction;
[and] space is elevenfold [inasmuch as it is characterized as the directions
called] Aindrī, Āgneyī, Yāmyā, Nairṛtī, Vāruṇī, Vāyavī, Kaiverī, Aiśānī,
Nāgī, Brāhmī and Raudrī. But in reality, the three [substances] that are
ether, [time and space] are only one; they become diverse owing to the
difference in the extrinsic properties.218
Many modern historians have read this passage as professing a radically new
position in Vaiśeṣika, i.e., as upholding the thesis that ether, space and time are
not in fact three distinct substances but a single one.219 Wilhelm Halbfass, who
also understood it in this way,220 even suggested a parallel with the definition of
time in the last phase of Sāṃkhya.221 Should we, then, surmise that fifteenth- and
According to Larson and Bhattacharya 1987: 642.
SP 14–17, pp. 21–22: ākāśas tu ghaṭākāśādibhedabhinno ’nanta eva. kālas tūtpattisthitivināśalakṣaṇas trividhaḥ. dig aindry āgneyī yāmyā nairṛtī vāruṇī vāyavī kaivery
aiśānī nāgī brāhmī raudrī cety ekādaśavidhā. ākāśāditrayaṃ tu vastuta ekam evopādhibhedān nānābhūtam.
219
See e.g. Gurumurti 1932: 19: “Here we come upon one of the most profoundly
meaningful remarks of Śivāditya. The identity of Time and Space and Ether when dissociated from their limiting conditions is one of the most debated questions of modern
metaphysical, physical and mathematical speculation…;” Potter 1957: 25: “In the SP of
Śivāditya we are told explicitly that these three individuals are actually one and are only
distinguished by their limiting conditions;” Ramanujam 1979: 13–14: “Śivāditya identifies the three substances namely Ākāśa, Kāla and Dik as one and the same substance,
their apparent difference being considered as due to the difference of conditions. This is
a revolutionary idea put up boldly by Śivāditya;” Larson and Bhattacharya 1987: 91: “The
first writer who clearly identifies ākāśa with time and space is, surprisingly, Śivāditya in
the SP – a rather unoriginal work in other respects.” See also e.g. Bhattacharya 1934: xxv.
220
Halbfass 1992: 217–218: “Even within the Vaiśeṣika and Nyāya tradition, the status
of kāla as a special substance was not universally accepted. It was questioned and reinterpreted not only by the radical innovator Raghunātha Śiromaṇi…, but also by the
generally rather conservative Śivāditya. In his SP, Śivāditya suggests that ether, time, and
space are in reality one and the same substance…” See also Halbfass 2001: 104–105.
221
Ibid.: 226, n. 72: “This view is also found in later Sāṃkhya literature, for instance
Aniruddha’s SSV and Vijñānabhikṣu’s SPraBh on SS 2.12.” Cf. Halbfass [1997] 2007:
484, where the parallel with the SSū commentaries is replaced with the suggestion of a
Vedāntic or Śaiva nondualistic influence (the latter being seemingly understood as a subcategory of the former): “Also, the identification of the three unitary substances space
217
218

400

Isabelle Ratié

sixteenth-century Sāṃkhya authors simply imported Śivāditya’s new definition
of time into their own system?
In this respect, it should be noted that the interpretation adopted in the secondary literature on Śivāditya’s work does not quite fit with Śivāditya’s own
assertion in the same work that there are nine substances, including space and
time.222 There is, however, another way of understanding the passage – one that
is in accordance with both the Vaiśeṣika basic tenets and the rest of the SP: it
can be read as simply stating that each of these three substances is one, although
they each appear to be diverse owing to extrinsic conditions. This is in fact how
the commentaries that seek to explain this particular passage seem to understand
it;223 besides, one of the commentaries has been transmitted along with a mūlatext containing a reading that leaves no room for the first interpretation –224 and
August Winter, whose 1898 German translation seems to have been overlooked
by the subsequent secondary literature, also understood the passage as meaning
that each of the substances is one.225 It is not absolutely impossible that Śivāditya
did reduce time, space and ether to a single substance and that later Vaiśeṣika
authors shied away from this bold move by reinterpreting his text; it seems far
more probable, however, that in fact, the “rather conservative”226 Śivāditya did
not introduce in this brief passage of his manual the “revolutionary” position
within Vaiśeṣika with which he is often credited nowadays.227
(diś), time (kāla) and ether (ākāśa) in Śivāditya’s SP poses some intriguing questions.
What is the background of this unusual procedure, which finds no justification in the
standard texts of classical Vaiśeṣika? Why did it occur in the work of Śivāditya, an otherwise rather conservative author? Are there connections with Vedāntic ideas or, more
specifically, with Śaivite nondualist teachings?”
222
SP 3, p. 15: tatra dravyāṇi pṛthivyaptejovāyvākāśakāladigātmamanāṃsi navaiva.
223
Padārthacandrikā, p. 104 and Balabhadrasandarbha, p. 148 have nothing to say on
the matter, but Mitabhāṣiṇī, pp. 21–22 explains how each of the three substances must be
inferred from specific inferential marks, which would make no sense if the commentator
understood the three substances as being really one; as for Jinendravardhanasūri’s SPV,
p. 22, it explains that the three substances “each have a unity” (ekaika): see below, n. 224.
224
SPV, p. 22 comments on the following text: ākāśāditrayaṃ vastutas tv ekaikam evopādhibhedān nānābhūtam. “But in reality, the three [substances that are] ether, [time and
space] each have a unity (ekaika); they become diverse owing to the difference in the
extrinsic properties.”
225
Winter 1898: 334: “In Wirklichkeit gibt es nur eine Luft, eine Zeit und einen Raum;
wir nehmen jedoch an, dass sie vielfach sind je nach den Bedingungen, unter denen sie
vorkommen.”
226
Halbfass 1992: 217 (see also e.g. Larson and Bhattacharya 1987: 91, quoted above,
n. 219).
227
That W. Halbfass did not envisage any other interpretation of the passage is all the

A History of Time in the Sāṃkhya Tradition

401

It has also been suggested that the insistence of the fifteenth-century Vaiśeṣika
author Śaṅkaramiśra on distinguishing time and space shows that “some members of his school were proposing the reduction of time, spatial direction and
ākāśa to a single substance;”228 and it is true that ether, space and time have
much in common in the Vaiśeṣika tradition,229 so that it may have been tempting
to reduce the three of them to a single substance. Śaṅkaramiśra’s endeavour is,
however, a very common strategy in Vaiśeṣika, and one that largely predates his
time: Praśastapāda for instance had already explicitly defined time and space in
contradistinction from each other when specifying that we may consider an object
temporally close when it is spatially remote (and conversely).230 Admittedly, the
existence of space and time as distinct substances had already been questioned by
the tenth-century Naiyāyika Bhāsarvajña, who criticized Praśastapāda’s attempts
to infer their existence and argued that their alleged causality is in fact God’s;231
and the Navya-Nyāya philosopher Raghunātha Śiromaṇi (active in the first half
of the 16th century)232 followed in Bhāsarvajña’s footsteps,233 but also proposed
to dispense with the substance ether by arguing that God is the inherence cause
of sound.234 If we are to look for a Nyāya-Vaiśeṣika influence on the definition
more surprising since Halbfass 1992: 226, n. 72, remarks that the claim in Ui 1917: 136f.
to the effect “that Praraśastapāda, too, regarded ether, time, and space as ultimately one
and the same entity is based on his misunderstanding of the phrase ākāśakāladiśām
ekaikatvād.”
228
Potter and Bhattacharyya 1993: 35.
229
As remarked e.g. in Potter 1957: 25.
230
See e.g. above, n. 91.
231
See NBhūṣ, pp. 590–593 (too long to be quoted here) and Halbfass 1992: 218; cf.
Aparārkadeva’s NMĀ, which simply paraphrases the NBhūṣ (third part, pp. 149–153).
232
See Ingalls 1951: 17.
233
See PTN, p. 23: tatra dikkālau neśvarād atiricyete mānābhāvāt tattannimittaviśeṣasamavadhānavaśād īśvarād eva tattatkāryaviśeṣāṇām upapatteḥ. “Among the [categories],
space and time are nothing over and above God, since there is no means of knowledge
[demonstrating their existence]; for it is thanks to God that the various particular effects
become possible, thanks to the bringing together of various particular causes.” Cf. the
translation in Potter 1957: 23. Raghunātha Śiromaṇi thus adopts a strategy very similar
to Bhāsarvajña’s – a point that of course could not be made in Potter 1957 (the NBhūṣ
was published in 1968); surprisingly, however, one still reads in Potter 1977: 91, that the
forerunners of Raghunātha Śiromaṇi as regards space, time and ether are Aparārka[deva]
(on whom see above, n. 231) and Śivāditya; cf. Potter and Bhattacharyya 1993: 35, which
only says that in this respect Raghunātha Śiromaṇi “follows at least one earlier author,
Aparārkadeva the commentator on Bhāsarvajña.”
234
PTN, p. 26: śabdanimittakāraṇatvena kļptasyeṣvarasyaiva śabdasamavāyikāraṇatvam.
“It is God – who is accepted as a [general] cause (nimittakāraṇa) of sound – who [also]

402

Isabelle Ratié

of time in the last creative phase of Sāṃkhya, Raghunātha Śiromaṇi’s way of
reducing space, time and ether to aspects of God is certainly the one that comes
closest; but not to mention the obvious differences between the two doctrines
(notably the fact that late Sāṃkhya presents them as aspects of Nature, not of
God), the identification of time, space and ether is already clearly stated in
Aniruddha’s commentary on the SSū, which predates Raghunātha Śiromaṇi’s
work, so that the PTN cannot have been the source of Sāṃkhya’s new definition
of time.
Finally, Karl Potter, while remarking that “Raghunātha’s identification of space
and time was not new in the history of the system,” mentions, besides Śivāditya’s
SP, “at least one commentator” of the VS who supposed “that Kaṇāda himself
identified these individuals with one another.”235 The commentator in question,
who remains unnamed in Potter’s study, is Candrakānta Tarkālaṃkāra,236 and
he did unambiguously defend the very idea put forward by Aniruddha and
Vijñānabhikṣu:
Indeed, although ether is one, it is called differently due to the variety
of effects; but in reality, time and space are not something distinct from
ether.237
Candrakānta Tarkālaṃkāra, however, cannot be suspected of having inspired
either Raghunātha Śiromaṇi or Vijñānabhikṣu, since apparently this author (also
known as Chandrakant Tarkalankar) was born in 1836 and died in 1910.238 So as
far as I know, no surviving work belonging to the Nyāya-Vaiśeṣika tradition and
anterior to Aniruddha identifies space, time and ether, whereas a recent Vaiśeṣika
work such as Candrakānta Tarkālaṃkāra’s was evidently influenced by the later
constitutes its inherence cause (samavāyikāraṇa).” See Potter 1957: 26–28.
235
Potter 1957: 25.
236
As can be gathered from the references to Faddegon [1918] 1969: 210 and Keith 1921:
237 in Potter 1957: 25, n. 6.
237
VSBh on VS 1.1.5, p. 19: ākāśaḥ khalv eko ’pi kāryabhedād vyapadeśabhedaṃ bhajate.
na tv arthāntaram ākāśāt tattvataḥ kālo dik ceti… Cf. VSBh on VS 2.2.13, p. 105:
ācāryapravṛttir jñāpayaty ākāśakāladigākhyam ekaṃ dravyam iti. yato ’sau mahatā prayatnenākāśe sparśavadātmamanasāṃ vyatirekam āha na kāladiśoḥ, tayos tu na kasyāpi.
“The master [Kaṇāda]’s endeavour makes [us] understand that there is a single substance
called ‘ether,’ ‘time’ and ‘space;’ for he has gone to great lengths to explain how ether is
distinct from tangible [entities,] the self and mind; but [he has said] no[thing of a possible
distinction between ether] and time and space, or of [such a distinction] between [time
and space] with anything else.”
238
The very late date of Candrakānta did not prevent e.g. Sinha 1923: 4 from asserting
that “Time and Space are complementary to Ether. The three substances are in reality
one only (Praśastapāda and Candrakānta).”

A History of Time in the Sāṃkhya Tradition

403

Sāṃkhya definition of time.239 Could earlier Sāṃkhya authors such as Aniruddha
and Vijñānabhikṣu themselves have initiated this way of reading into Śivāditya’s
popular Vaiśeṣika manual an idea that its author probably never upheld? I know of
no evidence that could help answer this question. At any rate, in his commentary
on the SPraBh, Vijñānabhikṣu keeps emphasizing how the metaphysical frame
of Sāṃkhya leaves room for the Vaiśeṣika categories (or encompasses them from
its superior viewpoint), instead of frontally opposing them as the author of the
YD; and his explanation of time reflects this attitude. Admittedly, in his Yoga
works, the perspective shifts: Vaiśeṣika is still described as an inferior point of
view relatively to the Yoga tradition, but so is Sāṃkhya; and Vijñānabhikṣu
makes a point of showing how Sāṃkhya and Yoga differ with respect to the issue
of time, and how the Sāṃkhyas’ definition of time expounded in the SPraBh is
to be rejected on the same grounds as the Vaiśeṣikas’:240
With respect to this, Nyāya and Vaiśeṣika consider that time is, as the Self,
partless, eternal [and] one; [and] for the sake of economy [in reasoning]
(lāghava), [they argue] that it is this same [time] that causes [our] talking
about [such time units] as the moment, muhūrta, night-and-day, month, or
year, inasmuch as it is delimited by the extrinsic properties [corresponding to] these [time units]; but [according to them], there is no distinct
constitutive element of reality that would be called “moment.” As for the
Sāṃkhyas, in accordance with the aphorism “Time and space are from
ether, etc.,” they consider that [time] – whether the Great Time (mahākāla)
or the moment and [other time units] – is not a distinct constitutive element of reality, but ether itself, which, [inasmuch as it is] particularized by
extrinsic properties, causes [our] talking about [various segments of time,]
from the moment to the Great Time. [Now,] both of these [opinions] are
incorrect, because no extrinsic property – which, [being associated] with
[either] the Great Time [or] ether, [would have to be] permanent [itself]
– can cause [our] talking about the moment. To explain: [our] opponents
[must] admit that the extrinsic property [allegedly causing] the fact that the
Great Time or ether take the form of a moment [must be] the action of e.g.
an atom – [an action] delimited by its conjunction with another place –, or
something else of the same kind. With respect to this, if that [which causes
This is already noted in passing in Keith 1921: 237, n. 1, about Candrakānta on VS
2.2.12 (“This is the Sāṃkhya view, SSū 2.12.”).
240
Sinha 1983: 174, claims to spot “contradictions” between the PYSā and SPraBh
because “while in the later [sic] work he suggests that Sāṃkhya admits a distinction
between eternal and empirical time, in the former he clearly maintains that Sāṃkhya
expressly denies transcendental or eternal time.” This is not the case: the PYSā never
says that Sāṃkhya denies “transcendental time” – on the contrary, it criticizes it for admitting it, and it asserts that Yoga is superior to Sāṃkhya in that it denies the existence
of time as an eternal substance.
239

404

Isabelle Ratié

the eternal substance to take the form of a moment] – such as an action
particularized by a conjunction [with another place] as [just] stated – is
[in fact] nothing but the [eternal substance] particularized [by this limitation], or the [limiting property] that particularizes [the eternal substance],
or [even] the relation between them, since [our] opponents [must] admit
that the three of them are eternal, [our] talking about the moment cannot
occur thanks to them; and if that [which makes the Great Time or ether
take the form of the moment] is [rather] distinct from these [three], then,
this [so-called extrinsic property that does not particularize a substance] is
only a name for a particularized [entity], and this [particularized entity] is
precisely [what] we acknowledge as time, which is called “moment” [and]
is distinct from all permanent things. But this [time] is neither the Great
Time nor ether, because, given that this [impermanent entity] is sufficient
to account for [our] talking about the moment, it is useless to postulate
another [entity] distinct from it as the cause of [our] talking about the moment. And this moment, which is a particularized [entity] and [is neither
the Great Time nor ether,] is impermanent; it is a particular transformation
of Nature itself, which is extremely mutable (atibhaṅgura); therefore there
does not ensue that it would be distinct from Nature and the person.241
The passage underscores that according to both Vaiśeṣika and Sāṃkhya, our
awareness of temporal determinations results from the limitation of an eternal
substance (whether we call it time or ether) by some extrinsic property. The PYSā
argues that this cannot be the case because the said substance being eternal, the
property particularizing it as well as their relation must be eternal too –242 and as a
consequence, whether the cause of temporal limitation is the substance, its property or their relation, the very fact that we are able at all to talk about the moment
241
PYSā, pp. 70–71: tatra nyāyavaiśeṣikābhyāṃ manyata ātmavad akhaṇḍo nitya ekaḥ
kālo ’sti, lāghavāt sa eva tadupādhyavacchinnaḥ san kṣaṇamuhūrtāhorātramāsasaṃvatsarādivyavahāraṃ kurute, na punaḥ kṣaṇanāmā pṛthakpadārtho ’stīti. sāṃkhyais tu
dikkālāv ākāśādibhya iti sūtrān mahākālo vā kṣaṇādir vā pṛthakpadārtho nāsti, kiṃ tv
ākāśam evopādhibhir viśiṣṭaṃ kṣaṇādimahākālāntavyavahāraṃ kuruta iti manyate. tad
etan matadvayam apy asamañjasam, sthireṇa kenāpy upādhinā mahākālākāśābhyāṃ
kṣaṇavyavahārasyāsambhavāt. tathā hy uttaradeśasaṃyogāvacchinnā paramāṇvādikriyānyad vaitādṛśaṃ kiṃcin mahākālākāśayoḥ kṣaṇarūpatāyām upādhiḥ parair iṣyate.
tatroktasaṃyogaviśiṣṭakriyādikaṃ ced viśeṣyaviśeṣaṇatatsambandhamātraṃ tarhi trayāṇām api paraiḥ sthiratvābhyupagamān na taiḥ kṣaṇavyavahāraḥ sambhavati. yadi ca tat
tebhyo ’tiriktam iṣyate, tarhi tasya viśiṣṭasaṃjñāmātraṃ tad eva cāsmābhiḥ sarvebhyaḥ
sthirapadārthebhyo ’tiriktaṃ kṣaṇākhyaḥ kāla iṣyate. na tu tan mahākāla ākāśaṃ vā
tenaiva kṣaṇavyavahāropapattau tadavacchinnasyānyasya kṣaṇavyavahārāhetutvakalpanāvaiyarthyāt. sa ca viśiṣṭādir asthiraḥ kṣaṇaḥ prakṛter evātibhaṅgurāyāḥ pariṇāmaviśeṣa ity ato na prakṛtipuruṣātiriktatvāpattiḥ.
242
This, at any rate, is how I understand the passage; the translation in Jha 1894: 100–
101, and the paraphrase in Sen 1968: 421, are obscure to me.

A History of Time in the Sāṃkhya Tradition

405

remains inexplicable. We must therefore accept that the cause of temporal
determinations is essentially distinct from these three, but then it can be no property particularizing something else: it must be an entity of its own, i.e. a substance243 that, contrary to Vaiśeṣika’s time or Sāṃkhya’s ether, is particularized
as being momentary by its very nature – and this is what time is. Vijñānabhikṣu
thus presents the Yoga tradition as avoiding all the problems that inevitably arise
if we try to understand the relation between an eternal, unitary time and its extrinsic delimitations; besides, all momentariness being thus confined within this
single atom of time, everything else can be said to be permanent.244 One could
argue that this solves very little in effect, since in order to avoid positing time
as a fourth padārtha, Vijñānabhikṣu has no choice but to present the moment
thus defined as a particular transformation… of the eternal Nature. Although
Vijñānabhikṣu seems to have little to say in this regard, he does point out that
the latter’s eternal essence is precisely its absolute mutability, thus seemingly
emphasizing that the paradoxal status of kṣaṇa is ultimately that of Nature itself.

9. By way of a conclusion: a tentative outline of the history of
Sāṃkhya’s denial of time
As seen above (§1), among the commentaries on the SK, the Suvarṇasaptati*,
SV, SSV, GBh and MV all criticize an epic “doctrine of time” and refuse to
acknowledge the existence of a distinct entity called time that would be endowed
with a causal power. Their justification for this denial is doctrinal rather than
philosophical: instead of discussing the nature of kāla, they merely emphasize
that the Sāṃkhya tradition does not acknowledge it as a constitutive element of
reality, since the SK only admits three padārthas and time is “included” within
the vyakta category. This might be considered a clue that the authors of these
works were fighting to establish a doctrine that had not always been unanimously
shared in Sāṃkhya circles (Asita Devala in particular appears to have ascribed
a distinct reality and causal power to time) and was perhaps still contested from
within; it could also be seen as a reaction to Vaiṣṇava and Śaiva movements that
were appropriating much of the Sāṃkhya conceptual frame while developing
systems in which kāla featured as a fourth padārtha or a distinct tattva.
The way of dealing with time in preserved Sāṃkhya texts dramatically changes
with the YD (§2–3). The target has shifted: it is now the Vaiśeṣika definition of
time as an omnipresent, eternal and static substance causing our awareness of

243
244

Vijñānabhikṣu uses the word dravya in PYVā, p. 382 (see above, n. 156).
See above, n. 157.

406

Isabelle Ratié

temporal determinations that is under attack. What we call time is really nothing
but actions being performed: our awareness of temporal determinations is simply the result of our comparing various limited actions relatively to each other,
and does not have as its cause any distinct substance called time. This idea was
certainly inspired in some measure by grammatical and astronomical treatises;
and it is reminiscent of a passage in Bhartṛhari’s VP that ascribes to “experts on
time” the opinion that time is the measure of any action by another action (and
that this entails no infinite regress because the duration of the action used as a
time unit is already “well known”). Whether these kālavids were astronomers,
as suggested by later sources, or certain yogins associated with Sāṃkhya (the
PYBh describes as kālavids the yogins who call “time” the mentally constructed
succession, and as pointed out in §7, in the Pātañjalayoga tradition, the same
thesis happens to be vigorously defended by the PYV), the YD’s relativistic
conception of time sounds very close to that of the mathematician Bhāskara for
instance.
The YD also says of actions that they are ultimately nothing but the constituent
of Nature called rajas; nonetheless, contrary to later non-Sāṃkhya sources depicting the Sāṃkhya position, as far as I know, the YD never identifies time
with Nature’s transformation. It describes prakṛti’s activity as existing beyond
temporal limitations inasmuch as it is ever present, but it does not attempt to
equate it with time – probably because, according to the YD’s author, time should
not be thought of as the timeless, unitary source of all temporal determinations: it
is nothing over and above our measuring various limited movements relatively to
each other. This refusal to acknowledge time as a distinct substratum of change
was certainly not a denial of change itself: the author of the YD probably felt that
he could afford negating the existence of a substantive time precisely because
Sāṃkhya acknowledges as one of its fundamental categories an active principle
whose innumerable metamorphoses account for a material universe in constant
evolution; and his staunch criticism of the Vaiśeṣika notion of time may have
been driven at least in part by a will to avoid freezing the infinite dynamism of
prakṛti into the static, universal receptacle that the Vaiśeṣikas call time. Against
the Vaiśeṣika inference of kāla, the author of the YD therefore pointed out (§3)
that, as acknowledged by the VS themselves, temporal determinations only occur in produced entities (which the Vaiśeṣikas take as evidence that temporal
diversity is only due to the variety of actions, understood as extrinsic properties
that we superimpose onto the fundamental unity of the substance that is time);
but the invariable presence of temporal determinations in produced entities, and
their invariable absence in eternal ones, rather show that these determinations
must result from actions themselves.

A History of Time in the Sāṃkhya Tradition

407

Among Vaiśeṣika authors who may have responded to this argument (§4),
Candrānanda appears to paraphrase it, and it seems that he forcefully read into
the VS an anticipation of this objection and an answer to it. According to him (as
well as Vyomaśiva and Śrīdhara), this reduction of time to actions is illegitimate
because it ignores the specificity of our awareness of time as opposed to that of
actions: it is not quite the same to be aware that something is done and to know
that it is done quickly, or before something else, etc. (Sāṃkhya does not seem to
have offered an explicit answer to it; anyway one wonders to what extent the
objection actually undermines the YD’s argument, since the YD does seem to
acknowledge that the cognition of an action and the cognition of its temporal
determinations differ inasmuch as in the latter case, we are in fact comparing
the action with other actions.) On the Nyāya side, Jayanta accuses the thesis of
involving an infinite regress, since every action used to measured another one
must be temporally measured relatively to a third one, etc. (This reproach must in
fact have been much older than the NM, as its answer by those who reduce time
to actions, namely, that we only use an already well-known action to measure
another one, can be traced back at least to Bhartṛhari.)245 On the whole, however,
the YD’s argument against time does not seem to have had much of an impact
on later Nyāya and Vaiśeṣika literature;246 in the Pātañjalayoga corpus, only the
PYV defends the same point of view;247 most of all, it seems to have rapidly
vanished in Sāṃkhya itself.
It was first ignored or distorted in the two other commentaries on the SK that
have come down to us, the JM and TK (§5). For all mention of the identification
of time with actions is absent from the JM, and in the TK, Vācaspatimiśra, who
knew the YD, ascribes to the “Sāṃkhya masters” an argument that is close to the
YD’s, but somewhat altered, perhaps to make it sound equivalent to the Buddhist criticism of the Vaiśeṣika notion of time; and Vācaspatimiśra, obviously
averse to the YD’s position, omits mentioning in the TK that in a previous work
of his, he himself has already offered a lengthy rebuttal of the reduction of time
to actions (§6).
See above, nn. 75, 76 and §7.
On the discrepancy between the YD’s philosophical importance and its apparently
limited influence, see e.g. Wezler and Motegi 1988: xxvi, and Granoff 1999: 580.
247
According to Maas 2013: 74–75, “the role of the PYV for the interpretation of
Pātañjalayogaśāstra may be compared to that of the YD for understanding the philosophy
of the SK,” a comparison that seems particularly apt in that both texts, while being of
a great philosophical interest, seem to have been rather isolated within their tradition
and are still in many ways historical enigmas; and the relationship between these two
fascinating works deserves a more thorough investigation.
245
246

408

Isabelle Ratié

The SSū’s cryptic definition of time (§8) has nothing to do with the YD’s. It
presents time as arising “from ether, etc.,” and it may have originally summed up
a doctrine (already mentioned by Ḍalhaṇa alongside the reduction of time to actions) according to which the word “time” really designates the five mahābhūtas’
transformations; but Aniruddha and Vijñānabhikṣu, whose commentaries make
no mention of the YD’s thesis, read the SSū as asserting the identity of time
and space with ether. In this last phase Sāṃkhya still ostentatiously denies
the existence of time as a distinct principle; but the meaning of the denial has
changed beyond recognition. Time is no longer, as in the YD, a word for the actions that the Vaiśeṣikas wrongly see as extrinsic properties superimposed onto
a substance whose existence is denied: it has become the substance ether on
which we superimpose the extrinsic properties that are actions. It is still no tattva;
but ironically, it has become exactly what the author of the YD so fiercely refused to admit – an eternal, omnipresent and static substance. This spectacular
transformation was certainly facilitated both by the virtual disappearance of the
YD and Vācaspatimiśra’s biased account of its position, but it is very unlikely
that it resulted from the identification of ākāśa, kāla and diś in the twelfthcentury Vaiśeṣika manual composed by Śivāditya: although the SP is often presented nowadays as having conflated the three substances, in fact Śivāditya
probably did not mean to reduce space and time to ether; it is rather Aniruddha
and Vijñānabhikṣu’s conflation of the three Vaiśeṣika substances that led recent
Vaiśeṣika interpreters such as Candrakānta Tarkālaṅkāra or D. Gurumūrti to read
Śivāditya in this way.
In any case tensions between the Yoga and Sāṃkhya traditions, and within the
Yoga tradition itself, seem to have crystallized around the issue of time’s nature
(§7–8): contrary to the SK commentaries, the PYBh does not explicitly deny the
reality of time itself, but only that of succession, and it asserts that the moment
is real – a discrepancy that might result from a stronger Buddhist influence on
the PYBh, and that is usually glossed over in the secondary literature on time
in “Sāṃkhya-Yoga.” Neither Vācaspatimiśra nor Bhoja attempts to compare the
PYBh’s attitude with the YD’s, or even with the blanket denial of time found in
the first group of commentaries on the SK; in contrast, the PYV explicitly links
the YD’s reduction of time to actions – which it expounds at length – with the
PYBh’s assertion that succession is a mental construct: it is the only surviving
text in the Pātañjalayoga corpus that defends the YD’s understanding of time, and
that shows as a result a possible convergence between the Sāṃkhya and Yoga
traditions on this issue. Vijñānabhikṣu, for his part, criticizes an interpretation of
the PYBh according to which the latter in fact denies all reality to time (which
might have been an attempt to conciliate the PYBh’s approach with that of the

A History of Time in the Sāṃkhya Tradition

409

SK commentaries); he presents as a specificity of the Yoga tradition the equation
of time with the moment understood as a real entity; and he underscores that what
he thus sees as the thesis of Yoga – namely, that time is not an eternal substance
limited by extrinsic properties, but a momentary substance limited by its own
nature, i.e. the moment itself – should be deemed superior248 to that of Sāṃkhya.
There is a lot that could not be thoroughly examined here – in particular, the
complex relationship between the Buddhists’ and Sāṃkhyas’ denial of time;249
but hopefully the present essay, despite its mistakes, oversights and outrageous
length, has contributed to show that if Stanislaw Schayer was right in pointing out
that Sāṃkhya authors were primarily driven by a dogmatic concern to deny time
the status of an additional principle or category, they did not content themselves
with “copying the view of the rejected kālavāda.”250 Sāṃkhya authors, at least
from the SK onwards, had to accept on principle that time is nothing in and of
itself; but this dogmatic denial left them much philosophical leeway to define
what it is that we confuse with an independent entity called time: considering
how far apart the definitions of time put forward from the first preserved commentaries on the SK to Vijñānabhikṣu’s works are, one cannot but marvel at the
philosophical creativity that these authors showed (long after what is usually
described as the end of the creative period of the tradition) in explaining what it
is that this nonexistent time really is.

Bibliographical references
Primary sources
ĀBh [= Āryabhaṭīyabhāṣya] – See Āryabhaṭīya.
ABSaṃ [= Ahirbudhnyasaṃhitā] – Ahirbudhnya Saṃhitā of the Pāñcarātra Āgama, ed.
M. D. Rāmānujācārya under the supervision of O. Schrader, 2 vols. Madras 1916.
AKBh 9 – Abhidharmakośabhāṣya of Vasubandhu. Chapter IX: Ātmavādapratiṣedha, ed.
J. C. Lee. Tokyo 2005.

That is, if we take at face value the “game of silences” mentioned above with respect
to Vācaspatimiśra’s works (n. 134): Vijñānabhikṣu makes no allusion to the thesis of
Yoga in the SPraBh, whereas he criticizes that of Sāṃkhya in his PYSā.
249
The influence of Buddhist ideas on the PYBh has often been noticed (see above,
n. 154), but the exact relationship of the arguments adduced e.g. by Śāntarakṣita or
Prajñākaragupta (see above, nn. 125, 128 and 129) with that found in the YD (the
composition of which certainly predates these Buddhist authors) deserves a separate study.
250
See above, n. 3.
248

410

Isabelle Ratié

Āryabhaṭīya of Āryabhaṭa with the commentary of Bhāskara I and Someśvara, ed. K. S.
Shukla. New Delhi 1976.
Balabhadrasandarbha – See SP.
BAU [= Bṛhadāraṇyakopaniṣad] – See Olivelle 1998.
Bhāskarī – Īśvarapratyabhijñāvimarśinī of Abhinavagupta, Doctrine of Divine Recognition, vols. I–II: Sanskrit Text with the Commentary Bhāskarī, ed. K. A. S. Iyer and
K. C. Pandey. Delhi [1938] 1986.
BSūBh – The Brahmasūtra Śāṅkara Bhāṣya with the commentaries Bhāmatī, Kalpataru
and Parimala, ed. A. Śāstrī, 2 vols. Bombay 21938.
Carakasaṃhitā – The Charakasaṃhitā by Agniveśa, Revised by Charaka and Dṛidhabala,
With the Āyurveda-Dīpikā Commentary of Chakrapāṇidatta, ed. V. J. Trikamji.
Bombay 31941.
GBh [= Gauḍapādabhāṣya] – Sāṃkhya-kārikā. Īśvara Kṛṣṇa’s Memorable Verses on
Sāṃkhya Philosophy with the Commentary of Gauḍapādācārya, ed. H. D. Sharma.
Poona 1933.
GPu – Garuḍapurāṇa of Kṛṣṇadvaipāyana Vyāsa, ed. R. Pandey. Varanasi 1986.
ĪPK – Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikā of Utpaladeva with the Author’s Vṛtti, ed. and trans.
R. Torella. Corrected edition. Delhi 2002.
ĪPV – Īśvarapratyabhijñāvimarśinī, ed. M. R. Shāstrī and M. K. Shāstrī, 2 vols. Srinagar
1918–1921.
ĪPVivṛti [= Īśvarapratyabhijñāvivṛti, Chapter 2.1] – See Ratié 2021.
ĪPVṛtti [= Īśvarapratyabhijñāvṛtti] – See ĪPK.
ĪPVV – Īśvarapratyabhijñāvivṛtivimarśinī by Abhinavagupta, ed. M. K. Shāstrī, 3 vols.
Srinagar 1938–1943.
JM [= Jayamaṅgalā] – Śrīśaṅkarācāryaviracitā jayamaṅgalā nāma sāṃkhyasaptatiṭīkā,
ed. H. Śarmā, with an introduction by G. Kaviraj. Calcutta 1926.
JRM [= Jyotiṣaratnamālā] – La Jyotiṣaratnamālā ou Guirlande des Joyaux d’Astrologie
de Śrīpatibhaṭṭa, ed. P. Poucha. Archiv Orientàlní 16 (1949) 277–309.
KĀ [= Kiraṇāvalī] Praśastapādabhāṣyam With the Commentary Kiraṇāvalī of Udayanācārya, ed. J. S. Jetly. Baroda 1971.
KPu – The Kūrmapurāṇa, ed. A. S. Gupta. Varanasi 1971.
LPu – Liṅgapurāṇam, maharṣivedavyāsapraṇītam, ed. J. V. Bhaṭṭācāryya. Calcutta 1885.
LT – Lakṣmī-tantra. A Pāñcarātra Āgama, ed. V. Krishnamacharya. Adyar 1959.
MatV [= Mataṅgavṛtti, Vidyāpāda] – Mataṅgapārameśvarāgama (Vidyāpāda) avec le
commentaire de Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭḥa, ed. N. R. Bhatt. Pondicherry 1977.
MBh – The Mahābhārata for the First Time Critically Edited, ed. V. S. Sukthankar, S. K.
Belvalkar, P. L. Vaidya et al., 19 vols. Pune 1933–1966.
MBhāṣya – The Vyākaraṇa-Mahābhāṣya of Patañjali, ed. F. Kielhorn, 3 vols. Bombay
1880–1884.

A History of Time in the Sāṃkhya Tradition

411

Mitabhāṣiṇī – See SP.
MṛVD [= Mṛgendravṛttidīpikā] – Śrī Mṛgendram, kāmikopāgamam, vidyāyogapādadvayamilitam, śrībhaṭṭanārāyaṇakaṇṭḥaviracitayā vṛttyā tadvyākhyayāghoraśivācāryaviracitayā dīpikayā cālaṅkṛtam, ed. N. Kṛṣṇaśāstrin and K. S. Subrahmaṇyaśāstrin.
Devakottai 1928.
MV [= Māṭharavṛtti] – Sāṃkhya-kārikā of Śrīmad Īśvarakṛṣṇa with the Māṭharavṛtti of
Māṭharācārya [ed. V. P. Śarmā] and the Jayamaṅgalā of Śrī Śaṅkara [ed. S. Vaṅgīya].
Varanasi 1970.
NBhūṣ [= Nyāyabhūṣaṇa] – Śrīmadācārya-Bhāsarvajña-praṇītasya Nyāyasārasya svopajñaṃ vyākhyānaṃ Nyāyabhūṣaṇam, ed. Yogīndrānanda. Varanasi 1968.
NiSaṃ [= Nibandhasaṃgraha] – The Suśrutasaṃhitā of Suśruta, with the Nibandhsangraha
Commentary of Śrī Dalhaṇācārya, ed. V. J. Trikamji Āchārya. Bombay 1931.
NK – Nyāyakandalī, being a commentary on Praśastapādabhāṣya, with three subcommentaries, ed. J. S. Jetly and V. G. Parikh. Baroda 1991.
NM – Nyāyamañjarī of Jayanta Bhaṭṭa, with Ṭippaṇī – Nyāyasaurabha by the editor, ed.
K. S. Varadacharya, 2 vols. Mysore 1969–1983.
NMĀ [= Nyāyamuktāvalī] – Nyāyasāraḥ of Bhāsarvajña with the Commentaries
Nyāyamuktāvalī of Aparārkadeva and Nyāyakalānidhi of Anandānubhavācārya, ed.
S. Subrahmanya Sastri and V. Subrahmanya Sastri. Madras 1961.
NSū [= Nyāyasūtra] – Gautamīyanyāyadarśana with Bhāṣya of Vātsyāyana, ed. A.Thakur.
New Delhi 1997.
NSūBh [= Nyāyasūtrabhāṣya] – See NSū.
NVTP – Nyāyavārttikatātparyapariśuddhi of Udayanācārya, ed. A. Thakur. New Delhi
1996.
NVTṬ – Nyāyavārttikatātparyaṭīkā of Vācaspatimiśra, ed. A. Thakur. New Delhi 1996.
Padārthacandrikā – See SP.
Paitāmahasiddhānta – Jyautiṣasiddhāntasaṃgraha, a collection of ancient Hindu astronomical works. P[a]itāmaha Siddhānta & Vṛddha Vasiṣṭa Siddhānta, ed. V. P. Dvivedī. Benares 1917.
PDhS [= Padārthadharmasaṃgraha] – See NK.
PP 2 [= Prakīrṇaprakāśa 2] – See VP 3.
PTN – See Potter 1957.
PVA [= Pramāṇavārttikālaṅkāra] – Pramāṇavārtikabhāshyam or Vārtikālaṅkāraḥ of
Prajñākaragupta (Being a commentary on Dharmakīrti’s Pramāṇavārtikam), ed.
R. Sāṅkṛityāyana. Patna 1953.
PYBh [= Pātañjalayogabhāṣya] – See PYSū.
PYSā [= Pātañjalayogasārasaṅgraha] – An English Translation With Sanskrit Text of the
Yogasāra-saṅgraha of Vijñānabhikṣu, trans. G. Jha, ed. Vindhyeśvarīprasādaśarman.
Bombay 1894.

412

Isabelle Ratié

PYSū [= Pātañjalayogasūtra] – Vācaspatimiśraviracitaṭīkāsamavetaśrīvyāsabhāṣyasametāni Pātañjalayogasūtrāṇi, ed. K. Ś. Āgaśe et al. Puṇyākhyapattana 1919.
PYV [= Pātañjalayogaśāstravivaraṇa] – Pātañjala-Yogasūtra-Bhāṣya Vivaranam of
Śaṅkara-Bhagavatpāda, ed. P. R. Sastri and S. R. K. Sastri. Madras 1952.
PYVā [= Pātañjalayogavārttika, in] The Sāṃga Yogadarśana or Yoga Darśana of
Patañjali With the Scholium of Vyāsa and the Commentaries Tattva Vaiśār[a]dī,
Pātañjala Rahasya, Yogavārtika and Bhāsvatī, ed. D. Śāstrī. Varanasi 1935.
SK [= Sāṃkhyakārikā] – See TK.
SP – Śivāditya’s Saptapadārthī. A Manual of the Vaiśeṣika System with Mādhava’s
Mitabhāṣiṇī, Śeṣānanta’s Padārthacandrikā & Balabhadra’s Sandarbha (hitherto
unpublished), ed. A. M. Bhattacharya and N. C. B. Bhattacharya. Calcutta 1934.
SPraBh – The Sāṃkhya-Pravacana-Bhāṣya or Commentary on the Exposition of the
Sāṅkhya Philosophy by Vijñānabhikṣu, ed. R. Garbe. Cambridge, Mass. 1895.
ŚPu [= Śivapurāṇa] – Śrī-Śivamahāpurāṇam, ed. Khemaraja (son of Kṛṣṇadāsa). Bombay
1954.
SPV [= Saptapadārthīvyākhyā] – Śivāditya’s Saptapadārthī with a Commentary by
Jinavardhana Sūri, ed. J. S. Jetly. Ahmedabad 1963.
SSā [= Sāṃkhyasāra] – Vijñānabhikṣupraṇītaḥ Sāṃkhyasāraḥ (saṭīkaḥ), ed. R. Bhaṭṭācārya. Vārāṇasī/Dillī 1978.
SSū [= Sāṃkhyasūtra] – See SSūV.
SSūV – The Sāṃkhya Sūtra Vṛitti or Aniruddha’s Commentary and the Original parts of
Vedāntin Mahādeva’s Commentary to the Sâṃkhya Sûtras, ed. R. Garbe. Calcutta 1888.
SSV – Sāṃkhya-Saptati-Vṛtti (V1), ed. E. Solomon. Ahmedabad 1973.
SuSaṃ [= Suśrutasaṃhitā] – See NiSaṃ.
Suvarṇasaptati* – See Takakusu 1904.
SV – Sāṃkhya-Vṛtti (V2), ed. E. Solomon. Ahmedabad 1973.
SVS [= Sāṃkhya[sūtra]vṛttisāra] – See SSūV.
Tarkasāgara – bhaṭṭavādīndraracitavaiśeṣikavārtikakṛṣṇabhūpālaracitatrisūtrīprakāśājñātakarttṛkavṛttibhir vilasitam maharṣikaṇādapraṇītaṃ Vaiśeṣika-darśanam, ed.
A. Thakkur, Darbhanga 1985.
TK – Vācaspatimiśras Tattvakaumudī. Ein Beitrag zur Textkritik bei kontaminierter Überlieferung, ed. S. A. Srinivasan. Hamburg 1967.
TSK/TSPK [= Tattvasaṅgraha(pañjikā), Krishnamacharya’s ed.] – Tattvasaṅgraha of
Śāntarakṣita With the Commentary of Kamalaśīla, ed. E. Krishnamacharya, 2 vols.
Baroda 1926.
TSŚ/TSPŚ [= Tattvasaṅgraha(pañjikā), Śastri’s ed.] – Tattvasaṅgraha of Ācārya Shāntarakṣita with the Commentary “Pañjikā” of Shri Kamalshīla, ed. D. Śastri, 2 vols.
Varanasi 1968.

A History of Time in the Sāṃkhya Tradition

413

TSS [= Tattvasamāsasūtra, in] Sāṃkhyasaṃgrahaḥ, a collection of the works of Sāṃkhya
Philosophy, ed. V. Prasāda Dvivedin. Varanasi 1920.
TV [= Tattvavaiśāradī] – See PYSū.
Upaskāra [= Vaiśeṣikasūtropaskāra] – Vaisheshika Darshana by Kanada Muni with
Upaskara, Vivritti, and Bhasya, ed. M. G. Bakre. Bombay 1913.
Vārttika – See MBhāṣya.
VP 2 – The Vākyapadīya of Bhartṛhari, Kāṇda II, With the Commentary of Puṇyarāja and
the ancient Vṛtti, ed. K. A. S. Iyer. Delhi 1983.
VP 3 – Vākyapadīya of Bhartṛhari with the Prakīrṇaprakāśa of Helārāja, Kāṇḍa III,
Part ii, ed. K. A. S. Iyer. Poona 1973.
VPu – The Critical Edition of the Viṣṇupurāṇam, ed. M. M. Pathak, 2 vols. Baroda
1997–1999.
VPV [= Vākyapadīyavṛtti] – See VP 3.
VS – Vaiśeṣikasūtra of Kaṇāda, with the commentary of Candrānanda, ed. Jambuvijayaji.
Baroda 1961.
VSBh [= Vaiśeṣikasūtrabhāṣya] – See Upaskāra.
VSV [= Vaiśeṣikasūtravṛtti] – See VS.
Vyomavatī – Vaiśeṣikadarśane… praśastapādabhāṣyam… sūktiṭīkayā… setuvyākhyayā…
vyomaśivācāryanirmitayā vyomavatyā ca samanvitam, ed. G. Kaviraj and D. Shastri.
Varanasi 1925.
YD [= Yuktidīpikā] – See Wezler and Motegi 1998.
YDP [= Yuktidīpikā, editio princeps] – Yuktidīpikā, critically edited for the first time from
original manuscripts, ed. P. Chakravarti. Calcutta 1938.

Translations and studies
Acharya 2006 – D. Acharya, Vācaspatimiśra’s Tattvasamīkṣā. The Earliest Commentary
on Maṇḍanamiśra’s Brahmasiddhi, Critically Edited with an Introduction and Critical
Notes. Stuttgart 2006.
Angermeier [2007] 2010 – V. Angermeier, Über die Auslöschung von Land und Leuten. Die Ursachen von Massensterben und Schutzmaßnahmen gegen diese gemäß
Carakasaṃhitā, Vi.3. Diplomarbeit, Universität Wien 2007. Revised version 2010.
Bakker and Bisschop 1999 – H. Bakker and P. Bisschop, Mokṣadharma 187 and 239–241
reconsidered. Asiatische Studien/Études Asiatiques 53 (1999) 459–472.
Balslev 1983 – A. N. Balslev, A Study of Time in Indian Philosophy. Wiesbaden 1983.
Bedekar 1961 – V. M. Bedekar, The doctrines of svabhāva and kāla in the Mahābhārata
and other old Sanskrit works. Journal of the University of Poona 13 (1961) 17–28.
Begley 1973 – W. E. Begley, Viṣṇu’s Flaming Wheel: The Iconography of the SudarśanaCakra. New York 1973.

414

Isabelle Ratié

Bhaduri 1947 – S. Bhaduri, Studies in Nyāya-Vaiśeṣika Metaphysics. Poona 1947.
Bhattacharya 1934 – N. C. Bhattacharya, Introduction. In: SP.
Bhattacharya 2007 – R. Bhattacharya, What is meant by svabhāvaṃ bhūtacintakāḥ?
In: Expanding and Merging Horizons. Contributions to South Asian and CrossCultural Studies in Commemoration of Wilhelm Halbfass, ed. K. Preisendanz. Vienna
2007, 275–284.
Bhattacharyya 1945 – D. C. Bhattacharyya, Date of Vācaspati Miśra and Udayanācārya.
Journal of the Ganganatha Jha Research Institute 2(4) (1945) 349–356.
Brockington 1999 – J. Brockington, Epic Sāṃkhya: Texts, teachers, terminology. Asiatische Studien/Études Asiatiques 53 (1999) 473–490.
Bronkhorst 1994 – J. Bronkhorst, The qualities of Sāṃkhya. Wiener Zeitschrift für die
Kunde Südasiens 38 (1994) 309–322.
Bronkhorst 2003 – J. Bronkhorst, Review of Yuktidīpikā. The Most Significant Commentary on the Sāṃkhyakārikā, critically edited by Albrecht Wezler and Shujun
Motegi… Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft 153(1) (2003)
242–247.
Bronkhorst 2011 – J. Bronkhorst, Language and Reality. On an Episode in Indian
Thought. Leiden 2011.
Brunner, Oberhammer and Padoux 2004 – Tāntrikābhidhānakośa II. Dictionnaire des
termes techniques de la littérature hindoue tantrique/A Dictionary of Technical Terms
from Hindu Tantric Literature/Wörterbuch zur Terminologie hinduistischer Tantren,
ed. H. Brunner, G. Oberhammer, and A. Padoux. Vienna 2004.
Cardona 1991 – G. Cardona, A path still taken: Some early Indian arguments concerning
time. Journal of the American Oriental Society 111(3) (1991) 445–464.
Chakravarti 1951 – P. Chakravarti, Origin and Development of the Sāṃkhya System of
Thought. Calcutta 1951.
de Jong 1949 – J. W. de Jong, Cinq Chapitres de la Prasannapadā. Leiden 1949.
Eltschinger 2007 – V. Eltschinger, Penser l’autorité des Écritures. La polémique de
Dharmakīrti contre la notion brahmanique orthodoxe d’un Veda sans auteur. Autour
de Pramāṇavārttika 1.213–268 et Svavṛtti. Vienna 2007.
Eltschinger, Krasser and Taber 2012 – V. Eltschinger, H. Krasser, and J. Taber, Can the
Veda Speak? Dharmakīrti Against Mīmāṃsā Exegetics and Vedic Authority. An Annotated Translation of PVSV 164,24–176,16. Vienna 2012.
Faddegon [1918] 1969 – B. Faddegon, The Vaiçeṣika-System, Described with the Help of
the Oldest Texts. Amsterdam 1969.
Franco 2011 – E. Franco, Perception of yogis – Some epistemological and metaphysical
considerations. In: Religion and Logic in Buddhist Philosophical Analysis. Proceedings of the Fourth International Dharmakīrti Conference, Vienna, August 23–27,
2005, ed. H. Krasser, H. Lasic, E. Franco, and B. Kellner. Vienna 2011, 81–98.
Frauwallner 1953 – E. Frauwallner, Geschichte der indischen Philosophie. Vol. I. Salzburg 1953.

A History of Time in the Sāṃkhya Tradition

415

Frauwallner 1956 – E. Frauwallner, Geschichte der indischen Philosophie. Vol. II. Salzburg 1956.
Ganeri 2011 – J. Ganeri, The Lost Age of Reason. Philosophy in Early Modern India
1450–1700. Oxford 2011.
Garbe 1888 – See SSūV.
Garbe 1892 – R. Garbe, Aniruddha’s Commentary and the Original Parts of Vedântin
Mahâdeva’s Commentary on the Sâṃkhya Sûtras, Translated, With an Introduction on
the Age and Origin of the Sâṃkhya System. Calcutta 1892.
Garbe 1894 – R. Garbe, Die Sāṃkhya-Philosophie. Eine Darstellung des indischen
Rationalismus nach den Quellen. Leipzig 1894.
Garbe 1895 – See SPraBh.
Goodall 2016 – D. Goodall, How the tattvas of Tantric Śaivism came to be 36: The
evidence of the Niśvāśatattvasaṃhitā. In: Tantric Studies. Fruits of a Franco-German
Collaboration on Early Tantra, ed. D. Goodall and H. Isaacson. Pondicherry 2016,
77–112.
Goodall, Kataoka, Acharya and Yokochi 2008 – D. Goodall, K. Kataoka, D. Acharya, and
Y. Yokochi, A first edition and translation of Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha’s Tattvatrayanirṇayavivṛti. A treatise on Śiva, souls and māyā, with detailed treatment of mala.
South Asian Classical Studies 3 (2008) 311–384.
Granoff 1999 – P. Granoff, Refutation as commentary: medieval Jain arguments against
Sāṃkhya. Asiatische Studien/Études Asiatiques 53 (1999) 579–591.
Gurumurti 1932 – D. Gurumurti, Saptapadārthī of Śivāditya, Edited with Introduction,
Translation, and Notes. Madras 1932.
Halbfass 1991 – W. Halbfass, Śaṅkara, the Yoga of Patañjali, and the so-called Yogasūtrabhāṣyavivaraṇa. In: Tradition and Reflection. Explorations in Indian Thought.
Albany 1991, 205–242.
Halbfass 1992 – W. Halbfass, On Being and What There Is. Classical Vaiśeṣika and the
History of Indian Ontology. Albany 1992.
Halbfass [1997] 2007 – W. Halbfass, Research and reflection: Responses to my respondents. IV. Topics in classical Indian philosophy. In: Beyond Orientalism. The Work
of Wilhelm Halbfass and Its Impact on Indian an Cross-cultural Studies, ed. E. Franco
and K. Preisendanz. Delhi 2007, 471–488.
Halbfass 2001 – W. Halbfass, Space or matter? The concept of ākāśa in Indian thought.
In: Mind, Matter and Mystery. Questions in Science and Philosophy, ed. R. Nair. New
Delhi 2001, 85–105.
Harimoto 2014 – K. Harimoto, God, Reason, and Yoga. A Critical Edition and Translation
of the Commentary Ascribed to Śaṅkara on Pātañjalayogaśāstra 1.23–28. Hamburg
2014.
Hulin 1980 – M. Hulin, Mṛgendrāgama. Sections de la doctrine et du yoga, avec la Vṛtti
de Bhaṭṭanārāyaṇakaṇṭha et la Dīpikā d’Aghoraśivācārya. Traduction, Introduction
et Notes. Pondicherry 1980.

416

Isabelle Ratié

Ingalls 1951– D. H. H. Ingalls, Materials for the Study of Navya-Nyāya Logic. Cambridge,
Mass. 1951.
Isaacson 1995 – H. Isaacson, Materials for the Study of the Vaiśeṣika System. Unpublished PhD dissertation, University of Leiden 1995.
Iyer 1974 – K. A. S. Iyer, The Vākyapadīya of Bhartṛhari, Chapter III, pt. ii. English
Translation with Exegetical Notes. Delhi 1974.
Jha 1894 – See PYSā.
Jhaveri 1955 – I. Jhaveri, Concept of kāla and ākāśa in the Sāṃkhya Yoga system.
Journal of the Oriental Institute of Baroda 5 (1955) 1–4.
Keith [1918] 1924 – A. B. Keith, The Sāṃkhya System. A History of the Sāṃkhya Philosophy. Calcutta 21924.
Keith 1921 – A. B. Keith, Indian Logic and Atomism. An Exposition of the Nyāya and
Vaiçeṣika Systems. Oxford 1921.
Kumar 1983 – S. Kumar, Sāṃkhya-Yoga concept of time. Annals of the Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute 64 (4) (1983) 129–135.
Lamotte 1949 – E. Lamotte, Le Traité de la grande vertu de sagesse de Nāgārjuna
(Mahāprajñāpāramitaśāstra). Tome I: Chapitres I–XV. Louvain 1949.
Larson and Bhattacharya 1987 – Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies. Volume IV:
Sāṃkhya. A Dualist Tradition in Indian Philosophy, ed. G. J. Larson and R. S. Bhattacharya. Delhi 1987.
Leggett 1990 – T. Leggett, The Complete Commentary by Śaṅkara on the Yoga Sūtra-s.
A Full Translation of the Newly Discovered Text. London/New York 1990.
Maas 2006 – P. A. Maas, Samādhipāda. Das erste Kapitel des Pātañjalayogaśāstra zum
ersten Mal kritisch ediert. Aachen 2006.
Maas 2013 – P. A. Maas, A concise historiography of classical Yoga philosophy. In:
Periodization and Historiography of Indian Philosophy, ed. E. Franco. Vienna 2013,
53–90.
Maas 2014 – P. A. Maas, Sarvāstivāda Abhidharma and the Yoga of Patañjali. Presentation at the 17th Congress of the International Association of Buddhist Studies
(Vienna, 23/08/2014), available online at https://tinyurl.com/jgdkxyz, last accessed
19/03/2021.
Matilal 1968 – B. K. Matilal, The Navya-nyāya Doctrine of Negation. The Semantics and
Ontology of Negative Statements in Navya-nyāya Philosophy. Cambridge, Mass. 1968.
May 1981 – J. May, Āryadeva et Candrakīrti sur la permanence (II). Bulletin de l’École
Française d’Extrême-Orient 69 (1981) 75–96.
Meulenbeld 1999 – G. J. Meulenbeld, A History of Indian Medical Literature, Vol. IA.
Groningen 1999.
Mishra 1930 – U. Mishra, Gauḍapādabhāṣya and Māṭharavṛtti. Allahabad University
Studies 7 (1930) 371–386.

A History of Time in the Sāṃkhya Tradition

417

Motegi 1994 – S. Motegi, Some Vaiśeṣika thoughts referred to in the Yuktidīpikā.
Asiatische Studien/Études Asiatiques 48(2) (1994) 807–817.
Motegi 2007 – S. Motegi, Asita Devala, a Sāṃkhya teacher. In: Expanding and Merging
Horizons. Contributions to South Asian and Cross-Cultural Studies in Commemoration
of Wilhelm Halbfass, ed. K. Preisendanz. Vienna 2007, 357–372.
Nicholson 2010 – A. Nicholson, Unifying Hinduism. Philosophy and Identity in Indian
Intellectual History. New York 2010.
Oberhammer 1960 – G. Oberhammer, The authorship of the Ṣaṣṭitantram. Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Süd- und Ostasiens 4 (1960) 71–91.
Oberhammer 1977 – G. Oberhammer, Strukturen yogischer Meditation. Untersuchungen
zur Spiritualität des Yoga. Vienna 1977.
Olivelle 1998 – P. Olivelle, The Early Upanisads. Annotated Text and Translation. Oxford
1998.
Panda 1997 – G. P. Panda, The concept of time in Indian grammatical tradition (1).
Sambhāṣā (Nagoya Studies in Indian Culture and Buddhism) 18 (1997) 97–124.
Panse 1956 – M. G. Panse, Jyotiṣaratnamālā of Śrīpatibhaṭṭa. Bulletin of the Deccan
College Research Institute 17 (1956) 237–502.
Phillips 2015 – S. Phillips, Seeing from the other’s point of view: Counter the schismatic
interpretation of Vācaspati Miśra. Newsletter of the American Philosophical Association 14(2) (2015) 4–7.
Pingree 1967–1968 – D. Pingree, The Paitāmahasiddhānta of the Viṣṇudharmottarapurāṇa. Brahmavidyā 31–32 (1967–1968) 472–510.
Potter 1957 – K. Potter, The Padārthatattvanirūpaṇaṃ of Raghunātha Śiromaṇi (A
Demonstration of the True Nature of the Things to Which Words Refer). Cambridge,
Mass. 1957.
Potter 1977– Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies, vol. II: Indian Metaphysics and Epistemology. The Tradition of Nyāya-Vaiśeṣika Up to Gaṅgeśa, ed. K. Potter. Delhi
1977.
Potter and Bhattacharyya 1993 – Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies, vol. VI: Indian
Philosophical Analysis. Nyāya-Vaiśeṣika from Gaṅgeśa to Raghunātha Śiromaṇi, ed.
K. Potter and S. Bhattacharyya. Delhi 1993.
Prasad 1984a – H. S. Prasad, Time and change in Sāṃkhya-Yoga. Journal of Indian
Philosophy 12 (1984) 35–49.
Prasad 1984b – H. S. Prasad, Time as a substantive reality in Nyāya-Vaiśeṣika. East and
West 34 (1984) 233–266.
Ramanujam 1979 – P. S. Ramanujam, A Study of Vaiśeṣika Philosophy, with special
reference to Vyomaśivācārya. Mysore 1979.
Rastelli 2018 – M. Rastelli, Considerations about traditions influential in the Ahirbudhnyasaṃhitā. Asia 72(2) (2018) 421–443.

418

Isabelle Ratié

Ratié 2014 – I. Ratié, A Śaiva interpretation of the satkāryavāda: the Sāṃkhya notion
of abhivyakti and its transformation in the Pratyabhijñā treatise. Journal of Indian
Philosophy 42 (2014) 127–172.
Ratié 2021 – I. Ratié, Utpaladeva on the Power of Action: a First Edition, Annotated Translation and Study of Īśvarapratyabhijñāvivṛti, Chapter 2.1. Cambridge,
Mass. 2021.
von Rospatt 1995 – A. von Rospatt, The Buddhist Doctrine of Momentariness. A Survey of
the Origins and Early Phase of this Doctrine Up to Vasubandhu. Stuttgart 1995.
Rukmani 1992 – T. S. Rukmani, The problem of the authorship of the Yogasūtrabhāṣyavivaraṇam. Journal of Indian Philosophy 20 (1992) 419–423.
Rukmani 2001 – T. S. Rukmani, Yogasūtrabhāṣyavivaraṇa of Śaṅkara. Vivaraṇa text
with English translation, and Critical Notes along with Text and English Translation
of Patañjali’s Yogasūtras and Vyāsabhāṣya. 2 vols. New Delhi 2001.
Sanderson 2001 – A. Sanderson, History through textual criticism in the study of
Śaivism, the Pañcarātra and the Buddhist Yoginītantras. In: Les sources et le temps/
Sources and Time. A Colloquium, Pondicherry, 11–13 January 1997, ed. F. Grimal.
Pondichéry 2001, 1–47.
Śastrī 1963 – S. Śastrī, Conception of time in post-Vedic Sanskrit literature. In: Essays
on Indology. Delhi 1963, 149–204.
Schayer 1938 – S. Schayer, Contributions to the Problem of Time in Indian Philosophy.
Kraków 1938.
Schrader 1902 – O. Schrader, Über den Stand der indischen Philosophie zur Zeit Mahāvīras und Buddhas. Leipzig 1902.
Schrader 1914 – O. Schrader, Das Ṣaṣṭitantra. Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft 68 (1914) 101–110.
Sen 1968 – S. K. Sen, Time in Sāṅkhya-Yoga. International Philosophical Quarterly
8(3) (1968) 406–426.
Shah 1968 – N. J. Shah, Nature of time. In: Shri Mahavir Jaina Vidyalaya Golden Jubilee
Volume. Part I. Bombay 1968, 63–87.
Sharma 1972 – P. S. Sharma, The Kālasamuddeśa of Bhartṛhari’s Vākyapadīya (together
with Helārāja’s Commentary Translated from the Sanskrit for the First Time). Delhi
1972.
Shukla 1976 – K. S. Shukla, Āryabhaṭīya of Āryabhaṭa, Critically Edited with Introduction, English Translation, Notes, Comments and Indexes, in collaboration with K. V.
Sarma. New Delhi 1976.
Sinha 1923 – N. Sinha, The Vaiśeṣikasūtras of Kaṇāda. Allahabad 21923. Revised and
enlarged ed.
Sinha 1983 – B. M. M. Sinha, Time and Temporality in Sāṃkhya-Yoga and Abhidharma
Buddhism. New Delhi 1983.
Slaje 1986 – W. Slaje, Untersuchungen zur Chronologie einiger Nyāya-Philosophen.
Studien zur Indologie und Iranistik 11–12 (1986) 245–278.

A History of Time in the Sāṃkhya Tradition

419

Solomon 1974 – E. Solomon, The Commentaries of the Sāṃkhya Kārikā – A Study.
Ahmedabad 1974.
Stcherbatsky 1923 – T. Stcherbatsky, The Central Conception of Buddhism and the
Meaning of the Word “Dharma.” London 1923.
Stcherbatsky 1926 – T. Stcherbatsky, La Théorie de la connaissance et la logique chez les
bouddhistes tardifs. Trans. I. de Manziarly and P. Masson-Oursel. Paris 1926.
Suryanarayanan 1931 – S. S. Suryanarayanan, Māṭhara and Paramārtha. Journal of the
Royal Asiatic Society 63(3) (1931) 623–639.
Takakusu 1904 – M. J. Takakusu, La Sāṃkhyakārikā étudiée à la lumière de sa version
chinoise. Bulletin de l’École Française d’Extrême-Orient 4 (1904) 1–65 and 978–
1064.
Tilak 1915 – B. G. Tilak, A missing verse in the Sāṅkhya-kārikās. Sanskrit research 1(2)
(1915) 107–117.
Torella 1998 – R. Torella, The kañcukas in the Śaiva and Vaiṣṇava Tantric tradition:
Some considerations between theology and grammar. In: Studies in Hinduism II.
Miscellanea to the Phenomenon of Tantras, ed. G. Oberhammer. Vienna 1998, 55–86.
Ui 1917 – H. Ui, The Vaiśeṣika Philosophy According to the Daśapadārtha-śāstra:
Chinese Text with Introduction, Translation, and Notes. London 1917.
Varadachari 1961 – V. Varadachari, Vyomavatī, Nyāyakandalī and Kiraṇāvalī: Relative
priority among these works. Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute
42(1) (1961) 168–174.
Wezler 1974 – A. Wezler, Some observations on the Yuktidīpikā. Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft, Suppl. II (1974) 434–455.
Wezler 1990 – A. Wezler, On two medical verses in the Yuktidīpikā. Journal of the
European Āyurvedic Society 1 (1990) 125–148.
Wezler and Motegi 1988 – A. Wezler and S. Motegi, Yuktidīpikā. The Most Significant
Commentary on the Sāṃkhyakārikā, critically edited. Vol. I. Stuttgart 1998.
Winter 1898 – A. Winter, Die Saptapadārthī des Śivāditya. Zeitschrift der Deutschen
Morgenländischen Gesellschaft 52(2) (1898) 328–346.

