Can Representation be Transformative? Resemblance,
Suggestion, and Metaphor in Tantric Meditation
Sthaneshwar Timalsina
Philosophy East and West, Volume 71, Number 1, January 2021, pp. 193-216
(Article)
Published by University of Hawai'i Press
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1353/pew.2021.0010

For additional information about this article
https://muse.jhu.edu/article/777895

[ Access provided at 3 Feb 2021 23:44 GMT from University of Hawaii at Manoa Library ]

Can Representation be Transformative? Resemblance, Suggestion,
and Metaphor in Tantric Meditation
Sthaneshwar Timalsina
Department of Religious Studies, San Diego State University
timalsin@sdsu.edu

Background
Not all tantras are monistic in their worldview. The paradigm and the
speciﬁc philosophers from tantric literature that I am engaging here come
from a non-dual Saiva-Sākta paradigm. The key issues from tantric literature
relevant to this conversation involve visualization or sustained meditation
upon speciﬁc phonemes called ‘mantras’, geometric designs called ‘maṇd. alas’,
or images of the deity. Tantric rituals and gestures help address the enactive
domain of representation. Complex manuals deﬁne sign-reference systems to
contextualize representation grounded on cognitive dualism. Mainstream
discourse on representation dichotomizes schema and categories against
experience, and although this approach helps us contextualize some sets of
tantric representation, it tends to miss the target meaning. I apply a
phenomenological and cognitive scientiﬁc critique of these positions onto
the backdrop of tantric monist hermeneutics. Siva or the absolute, in this
paradigm, is a singular essence endowed with latent potential for higherorder consciousness and agency, with it being the all-encompassing pure
consciousness that unfolds to blossom as manifold subjects and objects.
This absolute consciousness is non-directional, non-representational, and
the foundation for all that exists.
Brieﬂy, representation here is not a second-order presentation of something “out there,” not a shadow truth lurking yet never totally given to us,
nor a replica of something else. It is a ‘re-presentation’ or ‘presentation
again’. In the context of meditation, it is a ‘presentation again and again’ of
the particular image, concept, emotion, feeling, or state of the lack thereof.
This ‘presentation again’ is also presentation afresh, and this is where the
concept of prati in the recognition philosophy of pratyabhijñā resonates.
Whether forming instincts or reﬂexes or acquiring learned behavior,
repeated presentation of memories is crucial. In episodic memories, what is
being recalled is not just a second-order presentation of an absent object;
the experiences given are fresh and unique even when they are simply
shadows from past experiences. Similar to the pain of remembered painful
experiences, arousal at replaying pleasure, or salivation when thinking of

Philosophy East & West Volume 71, Number 1 January 2021 193–216
© 2021 by University of Hawai‘i Press

193

sour fruit, or even when conjuring something remote, these experiences are
nevertheless lived and are as authentic as what they stand for.1
These representations, I argue, have the transformative power to alter the
horizon of our experience and leave behind potent somatic imprints. This
innate experience of non-dual tantras directly exposes the being-as-such and
the luminous nature of purely latent consciousness prior to a subject-object
conditioned structure. Tantras aim to merge the experienced world and
experiencing subject in a non-dual state. Descriptions fail to express this
state even when they describe it as a state beyond representation. Enactive
modes of expression, gesture, or ritual participation closely capture a breach
of the dichotomy inherent in the discourse of representation. We can compare
this experience to what Piaget calls the “adualism” of the child in the early
months where “there does not yet exist any consciousness of self; that is, any
boundary between the internal or experienced world and the world of external
realities” (Piaget 1969, p. 22). Tantric visualizations presuppose a reversal
from the sign-reference paradigm to the most basic experience by means of
repeating basic experiences and retrieving from commonsense experience,
both inside and outside. For a broader philosophical dialogue, I will now
discuss some schema and affect theories, then shift to simulation and
animation to address how tantric “suggestion” or “indication” (saṅketa)
functions beyond ‘representing’, to ‘recognizing’ reality.

Section I: Representation
Representation in Light of Non-dual Tantras
To engage how tantras aim to ‘present again’ the non-conditioned natal
experience prior to culture and language, while using tantric culture and
language to meticulously construct anticipated cognitive and somatic effects,
we need a non-dual platform for representation where experience precedes
language, where the mind can present something non-propositional and
play it again or represent it. This representation does not always need to be
propositional, and the mechanisms for representing emotions and feelings
are not distinct from those of schemas and thoughts.
In general, presentation precedes representation. In the tantric world of
meditation, it is rather representation that precedes the presentation of
exalted modes of experience. In this absolute ground, in this recognition, the
dissolution of the constructed coincides with the constructing ego. The
fundamental premise is that even when the constructed character of
concepts and schema that mediate experience are recognized, the experiencing as such is not erased and the visualizing subject retrieves their
foundational ground. And this rejection of the dichotomies is not solely
based on the absolute unitive experience, as even the most public practices
of visualization breach the regular dichotomy imposed by representation.
Take, for example, the deity image of Tripurā, which represents the deity,

194

Philosophy East & West

and the deity herself represents different concepts depending on the visualizing subject: eros, the godhead, pure will, or an embodiment of volition,
cognition, and action. If the deity image is in itself the representation of
abstract concepts, the ‘image in the head’ is a representation of representation. Thoughts, concepts, impressions, schema, and images are all tools to
represent something, but this is not always the case, as we also use external
objects to represent something conceptual. Neither is it always the case that
these images lack any propositional representation. Even then, tantras use
both the symbols and signs for representation that may or may not resemble
what it stands for. Furthermore, just as a word representing a thing also
represents itself, an object or an image that represents something else can
also represent itself.2 Tantric representation underlies these and several other
premises that will be addressed when the context arises.
The object and its representation cannot be identical. However, they
cannot be diametrically different. If the concepts of the absolute or of the
natal experience did not touch upon the fundamental modes of being and
awareness, meditative discourse could never give an exposure to the truth.
Relying on similarity and contiguity, tantric semiotics utilizes metaphor and
metonymy for re-presenting experiences at the level the subject can objectify
as originally presented in the non-dual state. Tantras apply various modes of
representation to bring innate modes of experience to subjective awareness.
A common mechanism is ‘blending’ different schemas and images in
constituting new structure, suggesting an exalted state of consciousness. This
process can be explained by applying conceptual blending as theorized by
Fauconnier and Turner. It is in the mechanism of blending from different
inputs and giving rise to new structure that Fauconnier and Turner trace the
evolution of consciousness. Tantric mystical language applies both differentiation and assimilation in the mechanism of representation, and therefore
both models are applied in tantric representation of X representing Y where
difference is primary, as well as A resembling B where assimilation is
primary. The correspondence between geometric shapes and the elements,
for instance earth and solidity represented by a square, water represented by
a circle, ﬁre represented by a triangle, air represented by a hexagon, or the
sky represented by a half circle, shows barely any resemblance. By using
basic geometric shapes and different phonemes for mapping reality, tantras
derive complex meaning from their symbolism, and someone unfamiliar
with the internal sign system can easily be lost when it comes to deciphering
tantric images and mantras.
When conveying esoteric experience and employing language to
cultivate the semblance of experiences, tantras are bound to use the same
cognitive mechanisms and the same tropes and images that are used when
conveying more mundane experiences, as all our experiences are derived in
the encounter with the environment, and all our experiences are somatically
grounded. The only difference is that when tantras utilize imagery or

Sthaneshwar Timalsina

195

gestures to articulate something, the target is not ‘out there.’ There is nothing
objective that resembles these images. The real objective is the transformation of experience. Tantras utilize sophisticated visualizations for both
transforming everyday experience and directly encountering the absolute. In
this regard, tantric visualization or mentally ‘seeing’ the image of Tripurā, for
example, is not just to freeze other cognitive processes. It is about
transforming the experience corresponding to both subject and object. The
aspirant, as a consequence, should have a different attitude toward the
world, toward other subjects, and toward the aspirant’s own embodiment.
The cognitive process that started with simple representation thus translates
into behavioral alteration. This means that tantric representation is both
about reconstituting bodily schemas and cultivating new ones by creating
new memory “constructions” (saṃskāras). The discussion on ‘indication’ or
saṅketa in the next section clariﬁes both the phenomenological and
cognitive aspects of these constructions.
Cognitive psychology may not need to taxonomize mental states
according to their semantic properties, as Stich (1983) has argued. Even
tantric terminology for visualization, for instance ‘retention’ (dhāraṇā) or
‘cultivation’ (bhāvanā), afﬁrm that visualization is not for representing
something but rather to cultivate something new.3 More explicit is the case
of emotions, as the simulation of arousal or compassion is not merely
picturing a surge of prior emotions but re-living them. If corporeal gestures
remind us of speciﬁc emotions, they do not just represent them, because
they are meant to arouse the actual presence of these emotions. This
account concurs with Boghossian (1995): some representations composed of
concepts have no phenomenal features while others such as sensations have
phenomenal features that nonetheless lack a conceptual framework.
Tantric images are more akin to mnemonic devices than simple
representations. These devices, however, do represent something even
though what they represent can be private and what they stand for can
change in different contexts. Even resemblance is not necessary between the
represented and the representing. When the phoneme ‘ra’ represents ﬁre,
and ﬁre is represented by a triangle, and this represents a vagina,
resemblance is distant. What an ‘image in the head’ represents is not what
exists out in the world even with clear resemblance, but a further
representation of concepts and feelings. The practice does not progress with
a recognition of difference but when simulations elicit real experience.
Meaning in this sense is what is given to experience by means of practice
where close correlation is hard to establish. Actually, tracing a thought
correlate for each and every experience is as complex as establishing a
neural correlate for each and every thought. Furthermore, fantastic images
are not representations of something external, although they borrow nuance
from the real world. At the same time, these images become cultural
artifacts that transcend the established system of sign and reference, and

196

Philosophy East & West

rather than representing something, they present themselves and gain their
own subjectivity.
Furthermore, geometric forms, like abstract concepts, lack ‘what it is
like’, a phenomenal quality. For example, there are no terms for feeling like
a triangle inside a circle or a circle outside an octagon. By anthropomorphizing maṇd. alas, tantric visualizations enrich practice with phenomenal
qualities. We then have something intentional that also feels like visualizing
the same images. The schemas used merely for replaying certain concepts
are now applied to generate a speciﬁc response to the stimuli. If arousal is
central to the imagery of Kāmesvarī, terror plays a central role in Mahākāla.
The deities’ images function to elicit emotions while being appraised as the
manifold expression of the unitary foundational pure consciousness. Images
presented to the mind are not references but signs that have their own
meaning. Tantric visualization practices make conversation on ‘mental
imagery’ being ‘image-like’ or ‘language-like’ moot because speech- and
image-like properties are integral from the ﬁrst emergence of an object,
analyzed and differentiated in the course of visualization.
The grammarian Bhartr. hari introduced the concept of pasyantī to
describe the most subtle form of speech equated with consciousness,
allowing the argument that basic schema may not need to be exclusively
image-like or thought-like. Pasyantī, the most subtle form of speech, has the
approximation of both image and speech as integral properties. This speech
cannot be fully objectiﬁed, as it is not fully separate from the subject. There
is yet another concept on representation from Abhinavagupta, the eleventhcentury polymath and foremost tantric philosopher: ‘counter-image’ (pratibimba). His theory incorporates ‘after-images’ or the subsequent imprints of
what we directly apprehend, not just of visual perception but also of tactile
or gustatory sensations (Tantrāloka III.24–46). Representation is a deeper
cognitive mechanism that incorporates thoughts, emotions, and sensations.
Penetrating deeper into consciousness to address basic sensations in light of
representation, it is clear that representations are original, second-order
presentations, or the repeated presentation of something presented before.
Along these lines, if our judgmental consciousness (savikalpaka) represents
what was initially presented in the pre-judgmental state, this is then a
viviﬁed coloring of what was ﬁrst given in lines. This process brings images
back to life and allows memories to be relived. This makes it thus an act of
synthesis—reproductive rather than productive.
All of this boils down to how we interpret ‘representation’ when
addressing tantric symbols and gestures. To address the type of language at
hand and extend from assumptions in discourse on tantric language, I
borrow from Merleau-Ponty (1962, p. 193):
The link between the word and its living meaning is not an external link of
association. The meaning inhabits the word, and language ‘is not an external

Sthaneshwar Timalsina

197

accompaniment to intellectual processes.’ We are therefore led to recognize a
gestural or existential signiﬁcance in speech. . . .

We therefore seek beyond parameters of meaning versus word, signiﬁer
versus signiﬁed to engage tantric symbolism, particularly because in tantras
these symbols retain the potency to alter reality or create a new reality
rather than reality transcending the realm of signiﬁcance. Applying a
dichotomy of internalism versus externalism does not take us further. Even
the concept of signiﬁcance underscores this dichotomy, as the mental
referent and sign borrowed from the environment are two different entities.
Tantras therefore use gestures and signs as stepping-stones to refer to reﬁned
modes of experience. Broad spectra of visualization rest on internally
established correlations, for example the phoneme ‘ra’ representing a
triangle, or the phoneme ‘a’ representing the inherent luminosity of
consciousness. Any attempt to explain tantric representation with the same
models used to explain everyday language will inevitably fail. When tantric
symbols signify something, their objective is not accomplished by eliciting a
‘stand for’ relation. They are not meant just to refer to something but to
actually ‘present’ something original, revealing direct modes of experience.
In order to do this, tantras transform existing frameworks and introduce new
categories, alter existing schema and apply new concepts to confront the
cognitive mechanism of conceptualization.
When visualized, the object acquires additional value, new meaning.
The act of visualization transforms common objects into aesthetic or sacred
objects. Even with tantric objects borrowed from commonsense reality, the
meditating subject intentionally superimposes additional value to it. Above
all, the act of visualization is meant to transform the subjective states,
reprogramming somatic responses. The visualized images become more
vivid as the visualization practices become established and the subject’s
conviction deepens. Consequently, what is visualized and commonsense
externality are blurred, and ﬁctional imagery produces real effects. Subjects
can feel arousal or experience burning rage by playing with their own
ﬁction. The fundamental difference between visualization practice and
daydreaming is that in the case of the ﬁrst, subjects have total awareness
and control over their states and are able to control, manipulate, and return
to everyday consciousness at will. This enables freedom to experience the
world, to recognize reality beyond their own impositions, acquiring freedom
from earlier inhibitions and schemas, and reprogramming their own
response to worldly stimuli. At the very least, this is what tantric freedom
looks like.
Any episodic memory of a tragic event retains painful content and it
hurts as we recollect. When the episodic and phenomenal aspects faint, we
can have a mere semantic recollection from the past. Frege ([1892] 1997)
demands that natural language has a ‘stand-for’ relationship with both

198

Philosophy East & West

extensional properties or an external reference or truth conditions and
intentional properties. Two expressions may have the same reference but
different properties or propositions, for the sense that is expressed by means
of speciﬁc expression is surplus to its merely representational property.
While the ‘stand for’ relation in gestures and images still exists, what they
stand for are experiences that are not in opposition to intentional properties.
Terror or anger depicted in the imagery and somatic response to encountering these fearsome situations constitutes the ﬁrst dyad. Visualization allows
the subject to evaluate such situations, to transcend the instantaneous
somatic response, and ultimately allows the subject to ground itself in the
transformed mental state. In essence, the objective of tantric representation
is not about information but transformation. And it is for this transformation
that the subject claims a separate order, “as if” splitting itself from ordinary
modes of body and emotion. In its resting, it abides in the non-dual state,
not being separated as the body and the mind, even while experiencing
reality from an all-embracing gaze.
Not all representations mirror direct experience. When a gap exists
between experience and its representation, we encounter a propositional
attitude. Then the meditation manuals describe ‘x’ standing for ‘y’, and
cognitive devices function in this ‘stand for’ relationship. What is directly
given to us in this context becomes the most distant copy of what is
represented. The visualized image stands for complex images that in turn
stand for different concepts, and they all stand for some elementary modes
of experience. The image of Durgā, a conceptual blend representing
different deities and their identiﬁable powers, stands for various tropes
applied in conceptualizing space and time. And this chain can be extended
as long as the subject visualizing the imagery establishes their intentionality.
Representations then become private, as when what an image elicits at a
given time is determined by the type of experience the subject is able to
evoke. All images, all conceptualizations, collapse at the end. When the
intended meaning is conveyed, only the experience remains in its pristine
form.
The primary objective of tantric visualization is to shift awareness from
the image to concepts that subsume other concepts, and to analyze those
secondary concepts. We can compare this process with excavating sedimented layers. The goal is not just to reach to the bottom of the layers but
to gain freedom for the subject from conceptual conditioning. If visualization
is an exercise to explore the frontiers of the cognitive power of imagination
and its affective role in transforming the scope of experience, tantric
language is then a mechanism that allows the subject to deconstruct existing
frameworks, liberating the subject from the restraints of conditioned
experience. From the monistic tantric perspective, representation functions
both ways. Each of the overwhelming volumes of tantra and its practice in
the ﬁeld relates to rituals. Rituals enact deep symbolism, vivid in dance

Sthaneshwar Timalsina

199

forms such as Navadurgā, Bhairava, or Kālī. Gestures are likewise central to
tantric practice. Many of the tantric gestures, such as depicting fear and
protection, giving, or threatening, are derived from embodied experiences.
Both rituals and gestures enact meaning or corporeally act out meaning,
wherein the whole body, and not just the mind, represents while also
representing.
Gestures in themselves are meanings, for instance when they express
shock or horror. But tantric rituals also provide narratives where signreference relation is explicit and the gestures used here have a layered
meaning. Tantric rituals form a dialogue whether between the deity and the
practitioner, between teacher and student, or between two practitioners.
Semantic representation in these accounts only functions in the most
external layer of cultivating experience. What they aspire to is the unitive
experience that is corporeally felt and enacted by means of gestures. When
the rituals animate, the dichotomy of external layers and inner core
collapses. Tantric texts exploit this unitive experience to describe intersubjective relation in various forms. The meaning derived in the initial stage of
practice grounded on sign-reference dichotomy collapses in the experiential
modes of ‘merging’ (samāvesa).
Tantras focus on different experiential stages and shift meaning as the
practice evolves. For example, the goddess Tripurā can represent eros as
Kāmesvarī or cosmic desire as the ﬁrst pulsation of pure being. The cognitive
representational domain of tantric symbolism is marginal when it comes to
experience. For this reason, tantric traditions stress the personal teacherdisciple relationship, rejecting learning from manuals, similar to learning
swimming or dancing. Nevertheless, tantric visualization starts from the
propositional stages of representation, where narratives become central and
the sign-reference system quintessential. Deciphering meaning itself
becomes the central mode of visualization in this initial stage. For example,
the goddess Tripurā, carrying a bow made of sugarcane stick and
arrows made of ﬂowers, represents different aspects of embodiment. The
Yoginīhr. daya (YH, I.53) deciphers the rope, goad, and bow and arrows that
the goddess carries as volition, cognition, and action. Fluidity of meaning
becomes vivid when we consult other texts that decipher the weapons as
signifying passion, aversion, the mind, and the objects of the senses.4 The
objective here is not to recount ﬁxed references but to provide the template
for one’s selected visualization. It is when experience that breaches the
dichotomy of subject and object and is non-dual in nature splits apart and
determines the horizons of subject and object that something appears as an
object, the ﬁrst representation. Basically, visualization practices reveal both
tendencies. First, by retracing the original presentation we substitute y to
reach to x, which occurs when analyzing what is represented in propositions. Next, we bracket concepts in order to trace the originally given
experience. We need a semiotic model that addresses the expressed

200

Philosophy East & West

propositional representation while simultaneously incorporating the most
basic forms of presentation or mirroring.

Affective Domains of Tantric Representation
Tantric visualizations meticulously focus on representing emotions. It is
because representing does not mean picturing or mirroring that the question
of creating an exact likeness of an emotion does not even arise. What is the
shape of the face or body of anger, after all? To represent an emotion would
be, as we indicated above, to recreate, experience again—perhaps in a
distilled de-individuated form—the same experience. Terror depicted in
Bhairava, disgust in Cāmuṇd. ā, eros in Kāmesvarī, or vigor and heroism in
Durgā are some of the emotions that deity images vividly portray. If none of
these emotions surface in the heart and the subject is merely visualizing a
propositional attitude that ‘K represents desire’, this is neither visualization
nor representation but is rather like watching a drama and following the
narrative but having no emotional engagement. A complex image represents
a network of emotions and its propositional contents. In this case, one
emotion or proposition becomes primary and other emotions or propositions
are subsumed. Tantric meditations do not necessarily ask subjects to
subsume their emotional state. The real challenge is grounding the self in
the reﬂexive nature of consciousness while in such emotional states and
aware of one’s own emotional content. The way the image is interpreted, or
the way the representation is established, affects the subject’s psychosomatic
state, and transformed mystical experiences rely on these interpretive
mechanisms. Emotional being is as primary or even more fundamental than
propositional content, both being ﬁnally subsumed within the subject’s
reﬂexivity.
Emotional simulations do not appear as representation in a commonsense understanding as long as they retain emotional content. To meditate
on an emotional state is more than thinking about emotions. It evokes
speciﬁc states to project intended value while experiencing them. Meditation
thus ‘re-plays’ emotions. The parameters in which emotions are replayed are
determined by the subject’s control over them, complemented by heightened reﬂexivity. If the six heads of Kubjikā relate to six different emotional
states, the subject is experiencing a symphony of emotions as well as
visualizing the image. Whether the visualized images are real is never an
issue. As far as emotions are concerned, they are felt just the same. If the
objective of visualization is to recognize the reﬂexive nature of consciousness identiﬁed with the self, the goal of playing with images is to empower
the subject to recognize its foundational nature while also savoring its
manifold expressions.
In tantric meditation, every emotional re-presentation in recollection is
also a fresh presentation. We therefore need a system of representation that
makes a twofold distinction, where some representations are re-lived and

Sthaneshwar Timalsina

201

others traversed. This occurs because representing emotions is not the same
as representing x as y. Comprehending emotions like anger or arousal
conceptually does not require re-living them. However, we do not want a
vertical split between conceptual or sensory meditation content, as they are
contiguous, with the potential to shift one into another. Initially some
memories lack emotional vivacity or intensity and we may simply experience their semantic presentation. Some concepts repeatedly played out may
cause somatic affect once they enter the subject’s horizon and touch the
emotional core, the felt domain of the self. The concept of simulation
connects some aspects discussed above, as simulated emotions have the
same affective role, even if the source is not real. Emotional simulation is
equally central to visualization practice. We can encounter its vivacity in
bhakti or love-oriented visualizations. In bhakti practices, the subject replays
narratives and animates them to the extent that they become part of one’s
episodic memory. Religious experience, in this light, is constructed much
like other experiences. The meditative objective is to explore emotional
mechanisms rather than just animate religious emotion. Recognition of the
constructed nature of experience allows the subject to gain freedom from all
other constructions. Tantric discourse on visualization intends to gain the
absolute freedom to abide in the reﬂexive nature of consciousness itself,
independent of the conditions and content, including emotion, within the
totality of self-awareness.
Rituals are the domains within which all the representations and
simulations come to the surface. Starting with commonly agreed-upon
symbols of representation, such as using substances with white, red, and
dark colors to represent the three guṇas, or displaying common gestures
such as the display of the index ﬁnger (tarjanī mudrā) for power or
dominance, rituals develop into the zones of abstraction. However, every
ritual is unique in its application, based on the variation of the deity being
worshipped or the anticipated result. Even the same maṇd. ala or the same
image of the deity will have a different affective role, guided by the
intentionality of the subject performing the ritual. Representation in rituals
thus negotiates ﬂuid meanings and contexts. To represent complex meanings, tantras create a hierarchy of images, blending the imagery from
different domains, or subsuming one image by another. Ritual worship and
visualization both creates new imagery and deciphers them. The type of
representation we are dealing with here is therefore unique, as complex
private and public intentions are simultaneously at play. Clearly, visualization is not merely commonsense representation, but the simulation and
presenting of the actual experience again.
I am introducing a category of saṅketa, roughly translated as ‘indication’,
to address representation in tantras. Since the term is used for gestures as
well as for metaphoric suggestion, it does not rely on the same dichotomies
as do the terms representation or simulation. In the case of gestures, where

202

Philosophy East & West

what is representing coexists with what is represented, for example fear
being represented
p by a terriﬁed face, saṅketa is a lived gestural indication
(derived from kita meaning ‘dwelling’). When meaning is merely suggested
by metaphor, or suggestion contains additional meaning to that which is
with cognition as primary
apparent, as in dhvani, saṅketa is an indication
p
(where the meaning is derived from kita meaning ‘knowing’).5 Just as
words can invoke complex orders of meaning, the ﬁrst order likewise hints
or suggests a higher-order meaning. We can address in this platform
meaning as a continuum, as a gradual process that magniﬁes signiﬁcance
rather than a dividing sign from the signiﬁed or represented.

Section II: Suggestion
Saṅketa: Representation, Resemblance, or Suggestion?
Our cognitive life is ﬁlled with propositional attitudes. Any alternative to
dualistic meaning theories has to confront the everyday cognitive life
dominated by language and determined by the system of sense and
reference. Mimesis gives us an alternative platform. As meaning emerges
from embodied states, a vertical divide between sense and reference fails to
capture the felt and the embodied aspects. A language of gesture, in short, is
at the foundation of our use of language. I introduce the category of saṅketa
at this juncture to bring expressed and expressing into a uniﬁed ﬁeld while
acknowledging the differentiated emergent structures without dividing
represented and representing. If speech is an extension of gesture, an
extension of bodily being, the philosophy of language to address speech can
be grounded in the philosophy of gesture. Saṅketa does exactly that. Saṅketa
is applied for gestural reference and also refers to metaphoric suggestion.
More importantly, saṅketa covers the scope of dhvani, the secondary
meaning that does not abnegate the primary or literal meaning.
The exposition of saṅketa in the Yoginīhr. daya (YH) helps us bridge the gap
between mimesis and propositionality. The most common application of
saṅketa is for gestural expression,6 subsuming meaning through the signreference relation within. Extending beyond corporeal gestures, any object,
sound, word, or event can be saṅketa as long as there is a mutual agreement.7
Even though saṅketa begins with corporeal gestures and physical symptoms, it
builds from corporeal depths to incorporate propositional attitudes within. This
extension of meaning is vivid in the ways saṅketa evolves from gestures and
becomes a central mechanism of tantric hermeneutics for deciphering the
meaning of mantras, geometric designs, and rituals.8 But tantras envision the
scope of meaning beyond gestures and propositions, as something deeper
exists that is merely intimated, or ‘said without saying’. A common example,
“just shoot me before you leave,” is neither a command to shoot nor
permission to leave. Every mode of meaning is captured within saṅketa, as it
captures within its fold even indirect suggestion (dhvani).9

Sthaneshwar Timalsina

203

The YH subsumes semantic meaning under ‘indication’ (saṅketa), as it is
evident that the conversation upon the meaning (artha) of mantras comes in
YH II.15–77, the chapter “Indication on Mantras” (mantrasaṅketa). The
‘meaning’ (artha) identiﬁed here is not presented in the paradigm of the
vertical divide between sense and reference, as artha means both ‘meaning’
and ‘what is meant’, the external object. Returning to saṅketa, it grounds the
intentionality (icchā) of a subject to relate a word to its meaning.10 Tantric
texts are written within the paradigm of saṅketa, where textual meaning is
not simply conveyed but is mediated by a teacher, and the same text can be
deciphered differently for different levels of aspirants. This is why
Amr. tānanda, the commentator upon the YH, explains the process of writing
the commentary as ‘a process of giving form’ or ‘in order to reveal’
(vyaktīkartum) (YH, Dīpikā I.5). This is similar to the literary use of
‘suggestion’ (vyañjanā), where a higher-order meaning subsumes other
meanings. This reveals the higher-order meaning where what is literal is not
negated but subsumed.11 Vyañjanā describes indirect suggestion (dhvani)
where the signs remain essential even after revealing their corresponding
meaning, or when a sign can have both a literal meaning and something
beneath not exhausted by correspondence. The objective of this hierarchical
subsumption of meaning is not merely to describe the ineffable, as William
James (1917) would have it. It brings to life the experience for those
meditating accordingly.12 The subject of saṅketa suggests something that
cannot be directly described or that cannot be represented via commonsense representation.
The cognitivist/perennialist debate on mystical language teaches that
every mode of experience relies on something constructed. Even ‘ineffable’
describes a concept, and all concepts are subject to construction. The
paradigm of saṅketa is different. It is not just about representing. It is about
presenting again. When describing saṅketa, Amr. tānanda explains the paradox of objectifying the non-objectiﬁable:
An entity remains transcendent from the scope of sensory faculties for as long as
the mind is not actively engaged there. Since the object of this [teaching] is
always outside of the scope of the mind, speech, and sensory faculties, this is
highly esoteric.13

Tantric exegetes engage with meaning ﬁrst by penetrating the quagmire of
construction while addressing original things, beyond replicas and mirror
images. Their approach confronts the dichotomy of sign and reference and
views meaning as seamlessly unfolding from corporeal expressions. The
philosophy of ‘recognition’ (pratyabhijñā) is not a mere epistemic category
to explain the reﬂexive mode of consciousness self-afﬁrming itself. It is also
devised to ground mystical experience. Recognition refers to the integral
mode of consciousness where both memory and direct apprehension
intersect. The same applies to visualization, albeit what is recalled here is

204

Philosophy East & West

borrowed from the ﬁctions of past visualization. This process of reﬁning
imagery through suggestion is not the penultimate goal. On the contrary, it
is just a mechanism that allows the practitioner to explore the mechanisms
of consciousness. The real freedom lies in recognizing the constructed
nature of all conceptualizations. This is where the subject stands next to the
luminosity of consciousness, encountering the presence of consciousness
itself. Meditation presents this mode of consciousness repeatedly.
The real problem, then, is how can any language ‘present’ something
afresh, something new, that is not already presented by other epistemic
means? By adopting the ‘recognition’ framework, the emergent consciousness is not entirely new, since the most basic form of consciousness is
given in every mode of consciousness prior to it being objectively
conditioned. Tantras go one step further and argue that in every instance of
consciousness there are both base consciousness and its emergence into
objective form. One does not negate the emergent structure in order to
trace original consciousness. For ‘suggestion’, language need not be
entirely expunged of its referentiality to describe something non-conceptual. The words or symbols can be comprehended both in terms of
negative concept and as the target, that which can be merely suggested. If
saṅketa were to indicate the primordial form of consciousness, this would
refer to its dynamic expression, not just revealing base consciousness.
Amr. tānanda utilizes this philosophical framework in his commentary upon
the YH: “I rest on the mode of consciousness that manifests in the
distinctive forms corresponding to each and every entity with the character
of space, time, and materiality.”14
Saṅketa and Schema
The parameters in which saṅketa functions as a system of meaning are as
follows: (1) exalted or reﬁned experience is something that is always present
but merely obscured due to misconception, not something new; (2) the
framework by means of which we recognize reality needs to be replaced;
and (3) meticulous construction by means of visualization practices can
reprogram our body-mind complex and alter our cognitive framework as
well as our somatic responses. In other words, freedom from both biological
and cultural constructions in order to directly encounter base consciousness
is possible. The altered framework anticipates new meaning to experiences
while revealing the basis of each effulgent instance of consciousness. The
argument is to redeﬁne the schema by which we cognize the world and add
new schemas to interpret our experience. This ‘seeing as’ (bhāvanā) or
substituting the value for our experiences is synonymous with the process of
‘assimilation’ (saṃhāra), integrating new information into existing schemas.
For example, when tantras assign new meaning for the existing objects,
or when the ritual objects are ‘viewed as’ something else, a new
value incorporates into the existing schema. Tantras also ‘accommodate’

Sthaneshwar Timalsina

205

(antarbhāva) new schemas and alter the existing ones when they introduce
‘geometric forms’ (cakras) and ‘corporeal gestures’ (mudrās).
If schemas are basic units of knowledge that relate to all aspects of the
world, tantras utilize schemas to assimilate new meanings, to alter and
reshape existing ones. If schemas are to comprehend and interpret
information, tantric visualization manipulates existing schemas and introduces new categories to our cognitive mechanisms of representation. Tantras
are not only focused on ‘representing’ the basic mode of consciousness, as
they intend to give direct exposure to this pre-conditioned state. This
compares to Husserl (1983, p. 44):
Every originary presentive intuition is a legitimizing source of cognition, that
everything originarily . . . offered to us in ‘intuition’ is to be accepted simply as
what is presented as being, but also only within the limits in which it is
presented there.

In the case of tantric visualization, it is not directed just to modify the
structure of representation. Visualization practices are often identiﬁed as
‘remembering’.15 The consciousness that emerges as a consequence of
visualization, being a synthesis of perception and memory, is irreducible to
a singular form. As it is this synthetic consciousness that is being represented
in visualization practices, the objective of visualization is to frame existing
information in a new light, to transform judgment and layer new meaning,
and not to erase it. Seeing a rock is not visualization; seeing a rock as the
phallic representation of Siva, for instance, is visualization. But this added
value merely sees something differently. There is more to tantric representation. Manipulation of the schema sees things anew and brackets some
information to focus on speciﬁc aspects while visualizing an entity. This shift
of perception or seeing differently, tantras argue, opens up the possibility for
subjects to confront their own subjectivity and their alignment with the
world. Just as we can reeducate our taste buds and modify our perception of
what is delicious and what is disgusting, or alter the aesthetic perception of
one thing as appealing and another as repellent, the argument goes, we can
likewise modify our judgment of pleasure and pain, or our evaluation of
something as sacred or profane. All this is carried out by manipulating the
schema. As a consequence, just as we can have an ‘acquired taste’ for
something, we can also have an ‘acquired gaze’ for seeing reality afresh.
In agreement with constructivism, tantric philosophers maintain that
everyday experiences are shaped by language and imagination. They also
maintain that what is given in the mode of experience is not just what is
experienced or objectiﬁed. The reﬂexive gaze (vimarsa) is constantly
appraising experiences, making even the painful experiences worth savoring.
Furthermore, tantric visualizations reframe the schema to train subjects to
confront their own mental conditioning to allow them to liberate themselves
from the prison of their mind. Even though there is no explicit reference for

206

Philosophy East & West

whether concepts are image-like or language-like, tantric texts appear to
acknowledge that concepts have both these properties.
If mantras exploit the language-like structure of conceptualization,
maṇd. alas and other images assist in retraining the cognitive image
processing. Tantras assign multiple ‘meanings’ (artha) for a single mantra to
extend the cognitive limits of representation. In this sense, mantras and
maṇd. alas function like mnemonic devices, cognitive templates that remind
subjects of different objects. Tantric texts use single phonemes to represent
different categories or various deities, and when they use complex phonetic
structures or groups of such structures, these either refer to a layered
reference or are acronyms representing various deities and other mantras.
Essentially, these phonemes or images are templates that engage multiple
cognitive functions. Visualization is an act of creating new structure, not just
a ‘standing for’ relation for speech and form. It is in this act of creating new
forms that the aspirant encounters the intricate nature of consciousness as
creativity, where substantial transformation occurs.
In tantras, the category ‘indication’ (saṅketa) captures both natural and
non-natural signs. Whether it is a “must stop” red trafﬁc light or the
gathering of clouds indicating rain, the term saṅketa captures them all. There
is no categorical difference when it comes to saṅketa whether it is the
physical symptom of sneezing for ﬂu or tears for sorrow. Our common
language is a subset of the entire paradigm of representation where
corporeal modes, any form of signs, gestures, and speech, whether in terms
of meaningful words or a screech for pain, are all saṅketa. Tantric discourse
on gestures (mudrā) is particularly relevant for addressing indication. The
gestures of threatening (tarjanī), of giving (dāna) or of fearlessness (abhaya),
when applied in visualization, allow the subject to feel protected and
blessed, not just to ‘represent’ speciﬁc concepts. Gestures evoke feelings
directly, mirroring the cognitive states of the subject displaying these
gestures. Just as with facial gestures, hand gestures are comprehended, for
example someone calling, stopping, or showing the middle ﬁnger. Emotions
and actions reciprocate the gestures without needing propositional attitudes
to decipher them. If concepts mediate our reaction, they are more basic than
semantic.
To conclude, there is no categorical difference between gestures and
verbal expression, only that the latter gains complexity and propositional
structure. Feelings and emotional states can function as gestures, suggesting
physical and mental conditions. Tantric discourse on saṅketa includes every
mode of representation, whether it is presenting again, reproducing early
states of being, mirroring, copying, or simulating these modes.

Threefold Indication in Yoginīhr. daya (YH)
The modes of representation in mimetic, iconic, or propositional forms are
common to all tantric practices. Each of these modes can be traced in any

Sthaneshwar Timalsina

207

of the representations by means of the body, speech, and mind. The scope
of bodily gestures extends beyond the body and encompasses the ritual
objects and the altar. The practitioner acts out, re-lives, and by means of
representation repeatedly plays out exalted modes of mystical experience.
What begins from a sign-reference system, such as rice mixed with vermilion
powder, a commixture of white seeds and red drops, suggesting the two
principles of male and female, does not remain a propositional attitude but
becomes lived and felt, blurring the boundaries of subject and object. When
used in rituals, cups and ladles are no longer merely cups and ladles, butter
and sesame seeds are not the offering, and ﬁre is no longer just ﬁre. Even
the priest is not a priest but stands for the benefactor facilitating the ritual.
By assigning new meaning to ritual acts, be it gestures displayed, worship of
the circle of deities in the cakras, or the performance of ﬁre rituals, tantric
rituals aim to present again modes of experience cultivated by sustained
visualization, and not just to place new meaning upon existing signs.
For economy, I apply a single text, the Yoginīhr. daya (YH), to discuss
tantric representation. Tantric discourse on the cakra or the geometric forms
in YH (chapter 1) relates to the discourse on body, in particular the
signiﬁcance of gestures. Even though gestures essentially are acted out,
embodied, and belong to mimetic representation, the YH formulates these in
light of monistic Sākta philosophy to re-live basic forms of unitive
experience. The second chapter in the YH on the mantra is on speech.
Beginning from propositional representation, the practice traces back to the
elemental forms of mystical experience and afﬁrms repeated presentation of
experiences. By comprehending mental correlates, it is possible to understand the structure of the text. For example, the last chapter of the YH
concerns ritual (pūjā). Amr. tānanda explains that the three chapters signify
‘illumination’ (prakāsa), reﬂexivity (vimarsa), and the fusion of both
(sāmarasya).16 The mind, in this structure, is the fusion of body and speech,
and these three constitute the scope of representation. It is in the geometric
forms (cakra), speech (mantra), and rituals (pūjā) that body and speech are
meaningful and integral aspects of sign-reference relations. The maṇd. ala
extended in the external space thus relates to the surge of somatic
experiences, with each nexus in a maṇd. ala standing for a distinctive
emotional and cognitive correlate, making the maṇd. ala a mesocosm, a
platform for reﬂecting the entire felt domain within the body:
When the absolute potential that manifests in the form of the world with its
own will [of consciousness] reﬂexively cognizes (pasyet) its own blossoming,
that is when the maṇd. ala or the totality (cakra)17 comes into being.18

The gestures (mudrā), accordingly, evoke the elemental form of bliss and
consciousness and dissolve dichotomies that determine commonsense
experience. The objective, again, is to relive the unitive experiences
cultivated through sustained visualization:

208

Philosophy East & West

When the power of reﬂexivity wills itself to play in the form of the world, it
then becomes the power of action and it enjoys (mud) the world that is its own
transformation, by the characteristics of the transcendental bliss and awareness,
and it melts (drāvaṇa) in the form of being commingled, and so this attains the
name of mudrā or gesture.19

Whether by visualizing and internalizing the ritual space by means of
maṇd. alas or enacting and reliving ritualized experience by means of
gesture, tantras meticulously reinforce the idea that we can repeat or
‘present again and again’ intimate forms of experience through ritualization.
These experiences transform the subject’s self-image as well as participation
in the world. It is in the tantric practice that even copulation becomes a
form of gesture; the partner becomes mudrā, as the sexual union here enacts
divine copulation, the unfolding and enfolding of the cosmos.
The corporeal representation expressed in the ﬁrst chapter of the YH
provides the pretext for speech. The second section, the ‘indication of
mantras’ (mantrasaṅketa), captures this expressiveness by means of layering
meanings that stem from the syllables and evolve into propositional
structure. Mantra is explicitly linked to mentation, thinking. There are three
domains of this mentation: speech, subjectivity, and inter-subjectivity. The
second chapter of the YH addresses the sixfold meanings (artha) of the
mantric speech whereby two initial ‘meanings’ adopt the formal signreference system. The ﬁrst, bhāvārtha, is the commonly understood wordmeaning. The second, sampradāyārtha, relates to the speaker’s speciﬁed
meaning, as it is the given meaning within a closed circle. This is why the
text says, “the traditional meaning rests on the mouth of the preceptor” (YH
II.26). In other words, both common use and speciﬁc sense are categorized
as literal meaning because they both follow the same sign-reference system.
Tantric meaning systems are unique by granting phonemes complete meaning, similarly to sentences. What a mantra means, in this light, is additional
to what the speciﬁc phonemes mean. Meaning cannot be exhausted by
breaking words into phonemes and dividing even the syllables into partial
phonemes (ardha-mātrā).
Distinct from representing the manifest world, two deeper layers of
meaning (artha) relate to transforming the subjective schema. The metaphysical background is that consciousness is inherently differentiating while the
course of visualization is to overcome this differentiation in both intersubjective and subject-object relationships. The course begins with ﬁrst seeking
oneness between the two dialogical subjects, for example teacher and
student, or speaker and listener. And this extends to the absent subject, the
third person, presented in the form of a deity. This is not a mere ‘representation’ but an in-between stage, as the subject is present and is
consciously seeking oneness with what is represented, the second and third
persons.20

Sthaneshwar Timalsina

209

Just as the preceding two exercises relate to imposing new meaning and
altering the schema by means of which the subject actualizes himself and
appropriates other subjects, the ﬁnal two ‘meanings’ or modes of visualization relate to reducing the scope of subjective experience and eventually
liberating consciousness from the limitations of subjectivity. The ﬁrst step,
explained in terms of sarvarahasyārtha, relates to magnifying subjective
experience within an inﬁnitesimal locale within the body, for example a
triangular space inside the base cakra.21 The aspirant then focuses on the
ﬁnal meaning, mahātattvārtha, wherein the subject merges into the absolute
without referentiality. In terms of the YH, this is the state of
Merging of the self in the essential nature that is both transcendent and
immanent, that is devoid of aspects, very subtle and outside of indication,
lacking any existing entity (bhāva), beyond the empty space, the absolute entity
comprised merely of illumination and bliss.22

Meaning (artha), in this account, is about transforming experience. A real
comprehension of meaning of mystical language is not possible without
subjugating every mode of experience. Among six ‘meanings’ identiﬁed
here, the four higher levels of meaning do not function in the same system
of sign and reference but relate instead to altering the schema or
manipulating the sign. The argument is that, as long as we seek meaning
within the conﬁnement of sign and reference, we cannot ‘present’ ourselves
to the truth, and our experiences will always be representations or
resemblances. Tantras, by deploying a complex system of suggestion
(saṅketa), seek to restructure subjective experience, to comprehend meaning
beyond mere reassignment of value upon objects.
The third ‘indication’ in the chapter on ritual worship (pūjā) corresponds
to the realm of active engagement in the world and also relates to the mind.
This is why the chapter begins with threefold ritual worship: the supreme
form of ritual is abiding in non-dual nature, the second form of ritual relates
to visualizing the cakras internally, and only the ﬁnal form relates to external
worship. Both mind and body are accordingly framed within the ritual
paradigm. If external rituals are the expression of the inner mental state,
externality per se is the blossoming of the mind. The YH uses ritual to afﬁrm
this. By realigning bodily schema and assigning new meaning to the ritual
objects that in themselves function as templates for the world of objects and
things, the chapter on worship seeks to transform the way active participation in the world is experienced.
Fundamentally, individuation is a consequence of three layers of
obscuration (mala) that delimit our volition (āṇava), cognition (māyīya), and
action (kārma). Our being in the world, our embodied experiences, and our
intersubjective engagement are all conditioned by these delimiting factors.
The objective of tantric visualization is to reprogram habitual modes that
schematize our consciousness and experience the world. Bodily state,

210

Philosophy East & West

external gestures, or corporeal modes, in this light, do not contrast against
mental modes. There is categorically no difference here between gestural
expression and mental representation. At the end, the other, the transcendent, the deity being worshipped, is no different than the worshipping
subject. Tantras therefore ﬁrst confront the limitations imposed on our
physicality by introducing a category of self-worship (svātmapūjā): “One
who has worshipped himself by [accepting] the substances that please the
sensory faculties.”23 Accordingly, accepting physical pleasure as part of selfrecognition provides the foundation for proceeding with worship of the
divine.
Even the phonemes or mantras installed in the body in the ritual act of
‘grounding’ (nyāsa) follow the same philosophy of representation. By
establishing a complex ritual correlation between the body and syllables, the
aspirant is supposed to ‘see’ the syllables while being aware of their limbs.
For instance, if someone were to re-condition the body parts from head to
toe in alphabetical order from A to Z, the subject should have his or her
bodily awareness transformed into this phonetic structure. Through deep
programming of the correlation between body parts and the phonemes,
aspirants present the body parts to their mind by recalling different
phonemes, similar to representing reality by means of language. The practice
advances with ﬁnding a correlation between the body and the cosmos. It is
then that the aspirants can assume their body and the entire existence of all
categories to be their seat (āsana).24 Against this backdrop, ritual worship
relates to transforming commonsense experience into primordial consciousness:
Pūjā is not what makes our mind attained by means of ﬂowers etc. It actually is
the submerging [of the mind] with total ardor in the supreme void that is
expunged of all conceptualizations.25

Making libations into ﬁre becomes a template for the following visualization:
In the supreme effulgence that is eager to project and retrieve the world, one
should offer in the face of the kuṇd. alinī the functions of the rays [of sensory
faculties] by means of the mind. Making this state of being expunged of the
mind as the ladle, [one should visualize] oneness between the states of subject
and object, and what manifests in this churning [of the oneness between subject
and object], that should be the libation object. Having repeatedly offered [this
libation object] when the aspirant has the body comprised of innate bliss, he
should worship the Srīcakra as having the form of the expression of one’s own
consciousness.26

This also outlines the ﬁnal objective of this sophisticated visualization, the
oneness between subject and object: “One should live happily by
contemplating the oneness between I-ness and this-ness.”27

Sthaneshwar Timalsina

211

Take-Home Lessons about Ritual-Meditative Representation that Transforms
Selective reading to understand tantric representation is insufﬁcient, as
tantras relate to a wide range of rituals, dance, gestures, and, in particular, a
variety of visualization practices. By mimesis, tantras do not just convey
meaning but act it out. When we engage tantric semiotics, we come to
realize that ritual objects and tools are extensions of the mind, and the altar
is the extended body of the practitioner. By the use of images and
maṇd. alas, tantras use iconic representation where ‘stand for’ relation
becomes explicit. At the same time, articulated mantras and ritual narratives
as well as over-coating philosophies provide examples for propositional
representation. The big question is, what is the objective behind varied
forms of representation in tantras? From the non-dual tantric paradigm, these
representations relate to different stages of human consciousness: semantic
representation relates to the external world where the objective is to reverse
the gaze from outside to within or use what is represented, whether mantras
or ritualized reﬂections, as devices to retrieve the mind from its outward
ﬂow. Representations reengage the schema and create or alter existing ones
when playing with images. They reprogram our sign-reference structure and
relive basic stages of human consciousness before differentiation into subject
and object.
In tantras, the objective of this meticulous representation is to capture
everyday consciousness, to uncover and engage with its most basic form
before being semantically and culturally constructed, and it is not to progress
toward externality. In essence it is about unlearning the ways we have trained
our mind to respond, to interpret, and to experience certain events or things.
To achieve these goals, tantras utilize existing signs and symbols and create
new ones or provide new meanings for the existing ones. Finally, tantric
representation is about the inner modes of experience. Rather than describing
objects, they inscribe feelings and modes of being, reconstituting the
parameters of subject and object. Most importantly, tantras are not developing
new semiotics to describe reality but inscribing their worldview into our mind,
to make us relive our primordial, original experience. The mechanism of
‘indication’ (saṅketa) is thus to recover unitive experiences and to gain
freedom from the constructed nature of representation. This is in order to
present, yet again, the blissful state of being and awareness.
Notes
1 – This is one of the core visualization (dhāraṇā) practices in the
Vijñānabhairava. For instance, see verse 70 (recollection of sexual
bliss).
2 – For Gotama, a word represents both the universal and the image as well
as the external object (vyaktyākr. tijātayas tu padārthah. j [Nyāyasūtra

212

Philosophy East & West

II.2.68]). Since ākr. ti here is a mental representation, we can identify this
as a schema. Philosophical concepts like this are presumed in contemplative discourse. For instance, when the Vyāsa commentary upon the
Yogasūtra (III.17) addresses indication (saṅketa), it deﬁnes it as of the
character of memory, where the word and meaning are mutually
superimposed (saṅketas tu padapadārthayor itaretarādhyāsarūpah.
smr. tyātmakah. j). In this context, the Vyāsa-commentary also itemizes the
reference for a word, e.g. cow, as the word cow, the external object, and
the present-tense consciousness of cow (gaur iti sabdo gaur ity artho gaur
iti jñānam. . . ).
3 – For a detailed analysis of bhāvanā and cultivation in light of visualization, see Timalsina 2015a and 2015b.
4 – For this reading, see Bhāvanopaniṣad 22–25.
p
p
5 – There are two separate verbal roots, kita nivāse
and
kita jñāne,
p
from which the term is derived. Saṅketa = saṃ + kita + ghañ.
6 – manogatabhāvavyañjanāya kr. to hastādiceṣt. āviseṣah. j (Jhalakikar, p. 904).
Jhalakikar assigns this deﬁnition to dramatology. In fact, the Nāt. yasāstra of
Bharata is historically one of the earliest texts that addresses hand and
corporeal gestures in depth.
7 – The component of mutual agreement comes in Amr. tānanda’s commentary on the YH: yathā kr. tasamayau kāminīkāmukau yatra kvāpi
vasatah. evam asmin (Dīpikā, YH I.6–7).
8 – For instance, the phoneme ‘ka’ can mean Brahmā, or the phoneme ‘ra’
can refer to the element ﬁre. But the same phonemes can refer on
other occasions to different deities, different weapons, and even some
geometric shapes.
9 – If we explore the synonyms of the term saṅketa, the application of
‘indicated’ (sūcita) seems much closer to the concept of suggestion
(dhvani). For example, Amr. tānanda initiates the text with the premise
that his project is “to reveal the meanings that are suggested” (sūcitān
arthān vyaktīkartum . . . [Amr. tānanda, YH I, Benedictory verse 5]).
10 – idaṃ padam amum arthaṃ bodhayatv ity asmāc chabdād ayam artho
boddhavyah. iti vecchā j (Jhalakikar, p. 903).
11 – Sanskrit semantics rests on the threefold powers of speech: literal
meaning (abhidhā), indication (lakṣanā), and vyañjanā or suggestion.
While tantric texts acknowledge this tri-partite meaning system, they
add new structures. But all of them are subsumed within saṅketa.

12 – William James, The Varieties of Religious Experience: A Study in
Human Nature (New York: Longmans, Green, and Co., 1917).

Sthaneshwar Timalsina

213

13 – yad vastu yāvat tatra na manah. pravartate tat tāvatkālam atīndriyagocaraṃ bhavati j asya tu sarvadā manovāgindriyātītatvān mahāguhyatvam j (Dīpikā of Amr. tānanda on YH I.2–3).

14 – desakālapadārthātmā yad yad vastu yathā tathā j tattadrūpeṇa yā bhāti
tāṃ sraye sāṃvidīṃ kalām jj (cited in Dīpikā of Amr. tānanda, YH
I.2–3).

15 – The application of ‘should recollect’ (smaret or anusmaret) is quite
common in tantric literature when prescribing visualization.
16 – I derive this understanding from the statement: yathā prakāsavimarsasāmarasyarūpiṇī parā asyās trividhah. saṅketah. j (Dīpikā on
YH I.6–7).
17 – I am interpreting cakra as totality on the basis of Amr. tānanda’s
exposition: cakrasya visvamayasya, of cakra that is of the character of
the totality. Even the common use of the term cakra is for ‘samūha’ or
collection.
18 – yadā sā paramā saktih. svecchayā visvarūpiṇī jj 9 jj sphurattām
ātmanah. pasyet tadā cakrasya saṃbhavah. j (Yoginīhr. daya I.9cd and
10ab).
19 – yadā vimarsasaktih. visvarūpeṇa vihartum icchati tadā kriyāsaktir
bhūtvā svavikārabhūtasya visvasya paracidānandalakṣanena modanena
tadaikarasyalakṣaṇena drāvaṇena ca mudrākhyām āpannetyarthah. j
(Dīpikā on YH I.57–58).
20 – I have in mind two higher meanings (artha) prescribed in YH when
discussing the programming of the subjective ﬁeld. Nigarbhārtha
relates to seeking oneness among the deity, the preceptor, and the
aspirant (YH II.48). This takes subjectivity as plastic, something that
can be manipulated, and something that can escape the embodied
horizon and enclose the other. This expansion continues further in
kaulikārtha, as in this the aspirant seeks oneness among the cakra,
deity, mantra, the teacher, and the self (YH II. 51–52).
21 – mūlādhāre tad. idrūpe vāgbhavākāratāṃ gate j (YH II.69). eṣā svātmeti
buddhis tu rahasyārtho mahesvari jj (YH II.72).

22 – niṣkale parame sūkṣme nirlakṣye bhāvavarjite jj (YH II.73) jj vyomātīte
pare tattve prakāsānandavigrahe j visvottīrṇe visvamaye tattve svātmaniyojanam jj (YH II.74).
23 – indriyaprīṇanadravyair vihitasvātmapūjanah. jj (YH III.7cd).

24 – ṣat. triṃsattattvaparyantam āsanaṃ pariklpya ca j (YH III.93ab).

25 – pūjā nāma na puṣpādyair yā matih. kriyate dr. d. hā j nirvikalpe
mahāvyomni sā pūjā hy ādarāl layah. jj (Vijñānabhairava 147).

214

Philosophy East & West

26 – mahāprakāse visvasya saṃhāravamanodyate j marīcivr. ttīr juhuyān
manasā kuṇd. alīmukhe jj (YH III.109). ahantedantayor aikyam unmanyāṃ sruci kalpitam j mathanodrekasambhūtaṃ vasturūpaṃ mahāhavih. jj
(YH III.110). hutvā hutvā svayaṃ caiva sahajānandavigrahah. j svaprathāprasarākāraṃ srīcakraṃ pūjayet sudhīh. jj (YH III.111cd).
27 – ahentedantayor ayikyaṃ bhāvayan viharet sukham j (YH III.201ab).
References

Bhāvanopaniṣad. In Upaniṣatsaṅgraha. Edited by Pandit Jagdish Shastri.
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Boghossian, Paul A. 1995. “Content.” In A Companion to Metaphysics,
edited by Jaegwon Kim and Ernest Sosa, eds., pp. 94–96. Oxford:
Blackwell.
Frege, Gottlob. (1892) 1997. “On Sinn and Bedeutung.” In The Frege
Reader, edited by Michael Beaney, pp. 151–171. Oxford: Blackwell
Publishers.
Husserl, Edmund. 1983. Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a
Phenomenological Philosophy. Translated by F. Kersten. The Hague:
Martinus Nijhoff.
James, William. 1917. The Varieties of Religious Experience: A Study in
Human Nature. New York: Longmans, Green, and Co.
Jhalakikar, Bhimacarya. 1978. Nyāyakosa or Dictionary of Technical Terms
of Indian Philosophy. Revised and re-edited by Vasudev Shastri Abhyankar. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute.
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice. 1962. Phenomenology of Perception. Translated by
Colin Smith. London: Routledge.
Piaget, Jean, and Bärbel Inhelder. 1969. The Psychology of the Child. New
York: Basic Books.
Stich, Stephen. 1983. From Folk Psychology to Cognitive Science: The Case
against Belief. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Tantrāloka. 1918. With the Viveka Commentary of Rājānaka Jayaratha.
Edited by Mukund Ram Shastri. Allahabad: Indian Press.
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2015a. Tantric Visual Culture: A Cognitive
Approach. New York: Routledge.
———. 2015b. Language of Images: Visualization and Meaning in Tantras.
New York: Peter Lang.

Sthaneshwar Timalsina

215

Vijñānabhairava or Divine Consciousness: A Treasury of 112 Types of Yoga.
2002. Translated by Jaideva Singh. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Yoginīhr. daya. 1979. With the commentaries Artharatnāvalī of Amr. tānanda
and Setubandha of Bhāskarāya. Varanasi: Sampurnananda University
Press.
Additional Sources
Gunkel, David J. 2015. Of Remixology: Ethics and Aesthetics after Remix.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hariharānanda, Āraṇya. (1963) 2012. Yoga Philosophy of Patañjali with
Bhāsvatī. Calcutta: University of Calcutta Press.
Harper, Katherine Anne, and Robert L. Brown. 2002. The Roots of Tantra.
New York: State University of New York Press.
Lakoff, George, and Mark Johnson. (1980) 2003. Metaphors We Live By.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Padoux, Andre. 2002. “What Do We Mean by Tantrism?” In Harper and
Brown, 2002, pp. 17–24.

216

Philosophy East & West

