The Journal of Hindu Studies 2011;4:248–257
Advance Access Publication 7 October 2011

doi:10.1093/jhs/hir035

The Resounding Field of Visualised
Self-Awareness: The Generation of Synesthetic
Consciousness in the Śra Yantra Rituals of
Nity@Xonaśik@r>ava Tantra
Jeffrey S. Lidke*

Abstract: In this article, I utilise current scholarship on synesthetic experience
as a lens for evaluating the multi-layered cognitive and artistic processes by
which Śra Vidy@ practitioners construct, visualise, and embody the primary
symbol of their clan, the Śra Vidy@ diagram. This diagram is simultaneously a
multi-hued visual image and a resounding symphonic field of luminous, reverberating graphemes. By constructing externally and visualising internally a
sound field that is not just heard but perceived, the s@dhaka generates an
embodied poly-sensualised consciousness that is the ritualised means for
achieving the aim of his Ś@kta practice: the recognition of one’s self as
non-distinct from that supreme goddess, Mah@tripurasundara, she whose
self-emanation as the resounding, luminous Śra Yantra, is itself the emergent
cosmos.

Antyam bajam athendukundaviśadam sam.cintya citt@mbuje tadbh+t@m
dhr.tapustak@kXavalay@m devam. muhus tanmukh@t udyantam nikhil@kXaram
nijamukhen@n@ratasrotas@ niry@ntam ca nirastasam.sr.tibhayo bh+y@t sa
v@gvallabhah.
Prapañcas@ra: 9.42
If he meditates on the last of the three seed-syllables he will be free of the
danger of reincarnation after his death and will win the favor of the goddess of
Eloquence-and-Learning. He must visualize a lotus [in his heart] and this [syllable] gleaming white as the moon or jasmine in its centre. He must then
visualize the goddess of the syllable holding a book and a rosary, then imagine
the alphabet pouring forth from her mouth again and again, [rising up from his

ß The Author 2011. Oxford University Press and The Oxford Centre for Hindu Studies. All rights reserved.
For permissions, please email journals.permissions@oup.com

Downloaded from http://jhs.oxfordjournals.org/ at Berry College on October 27, 2011

Associate Professor of Religion and Chair, Department of Religion and Philosophy, Berry
College, Rome, Georgia
*Corresponding author: jlidke@berry.edu

Jeffrey S. Lidke

249

heart] and emerging from his mouth in an unbroken stream. (Translation by
Sanderson, 1990: 36)

In the nineteenth century, Francis Galton discovered a phenomenon he identified as ‘synesthesia’, an experience in which the stimulus of one’s sense awakens
the perceptive capacities in another sense function. For example, a synesthete may
experience that she not only ‘hears’ music but also simultaneously ‘sees’ it as a
particular pattern or hue. Since Galton’s discovery, interest in the implications of
synesthetic phenomena has captured the imagination of scientists, scholars, and
artists working in the interrelated domains of cognitive science, aesthetics, and
the performing arts. In this article, I utilise current scholarship on synesthetic
experience as a lens for evaluating the complex cognitive and artistic processes by
which Śra Vidy@ practitioners construct, visualise, and embody the primary symbol
of their clan, the Śra Yantra (see Fig. 1). This sacred diagram is perceived simultaneously as a multi-hued visual image and a resounding symphonic field of luminous, reverberating graphemes. By constructing externally and visualising
internally a sound field that is not just heard but perceived, the s@dhaka generates
an embodied poly-sensualised consciousness that is the ritualised means to achieving the aim of his Ś@kta practice: recognition of one’s self as non-distinct from that
supreme goddess who manifests herself as the cosmos itself.

Downloaded from http://jhs.oxfordjournals.org/ at Berry College on October 27, 2011

Figure 1. Image of Sri Yantra painted by Narayan Citrakar, Bhaktapur, Nepal, 1997. From the
personal collection of the author.

250

Synesthetic Consciousness in the Śra Yantra Rituals

History and theory of synesthesia in the West
‘Synesthesia is a rich way of feeling, highly enjoyable for those who possess it.
To lose it would be a catastrophe, an odious state akin to going blind or not
being alive at all. Synesthetes have a well-developed innate memory that is
amplified by use of the parallel sense as a mnemonic device’
—Richard Cytowic (2002: 46).

One of the earliest authoritative systematic treatments of synesthetic in the
West is a work written in 1883 by Sir Francis Galton (half cousin of Charles
Darwin and father of eugenics), titled Inquiries into Human Faculty and Its
Development. In this work, Galton notes with wonder that rare individuals see
numbers in colour. In that work, he wrongly assumes that conscious cannot be
applied to the control of such synesthetic activity. In this work (p. 108), he cites a
teacher, Ms. Stones, and her claim of seeing the forms of letters as colour:
The vowels of the English language always appear to me, when I think of them,
as possessing certain colours, of which I enclose a diagram. Consonants, when
thought of by themselves, are of a purplish black; but when I think of a whole
word, the colour of the consonants tends towards the colour of the vowels. For
example, in the word ‘Tuesday,’ when I think of each letter separately, the
consonants are purplish-black, u is a light dovecolour, 0 is a pale emerald
green, and a is yellow; but when I think of the whole word together, the first
part is a light gray-green, and the latter part yellow. Each word is a distinct
whole. I have always associated the same colours with the same letters, and no
effort will change the colour of one letter, transferring it to another. Thus the
word ‘red’assumes a light-green tint, while the word ‘yellow’ is light-green at
the beginning and red at the end. Occasionally, when uncertain how a word
should be spelt, I have considered what colour it ought to be, and have decided

Downloaded from http://jhs.oxfordjournals.org/ at Berry College on October 27, 2011

In this article, I seek to apply a bi-directional hermeneutic whereby data from
cognitive sciences and from Tantric traditions mutually illumine each other. In
other words, my assumption is that not only is it the case that data on synesthesia
in Western scientific circles may shed light on the purpose and effects of Tantric
ritual, but also that the very structure of Tantric ritual may suggest a methodology
for the production of synesthetic states of consciousness. If the latter hypothesis is
true, then it would call into question the widely held assumption that synesthesia
is solely a byproduct of genetics. And, if Ramachandran and other cognitive scientists are right that synesthetic consciousness is a result of and produces ‘hyperconnectivity’ in the brain, then it could be argued that efforts to develop
‘synesthetic technologies’ might be worth continued focus. Imagine this essay,
playfully, as a dialogue between cognitive sciences and T@nktrikas who are both
engaged in experimenting with the ways that sense experience connects to and
shapes consciousness.

Jeffrey S. Lidke

251

in that way. I believe this has often been a great help to me in spelling, both in
English and foreign languages. The colour of the letters is never smeared or
blurred in any way. I cannot recall to mind anything that should have first
caused me to associate colours with letters, nor can my mother remember any
alphabet or reading-book coloured in the way I have described, which I might
have used as a child. I do not associate any idea of colour with musical notes at
all, nor with any of the other senses.

Downloaded from http://jhs.oxfordjournals.org/ at Berry College on October 27, 2011

Galton notes that Ms. Stone goes on state that, ‘Perhaps you may be interested in
the following account from my sister of her visual peculiarities: “When I think of
Wednesday I see a kind of oval flat wash of yellow emerald green; for Tuesday, a
gray sky colour; for Thursday, a brown-red irregular polygon; and a dull yellow
smudge for Friday” ’. Galton concludes that such synesthetic tendencies are a
peculiarity of ‘hereditary function’, a sentiment re-articulated by a majority of
cognitive scientists to the present.
One notable exception to the general trend within the sciences of assuming that
synesthesia is a genetic byproduct is Jamie Ward. In his recent work, the Frog Who
Croaked Blue (Ward 2008), Ward argues that ‘non-genetic factors need to be considered in a theory of synesthesia’ (p. 9). Ward posits that in addition to
drug-induced states, synesthesia may be generated through art, ritual, and other
contexts in which multiple senses are activated and consciously conflated. Along
these lines, Chara and Gillett (2004) argue that synesthesia can be generated by
‘learned stimuli’: ‘If synesthesia can be experienced by most people and be generated by learned stimuli, then it stands to reason that people’s religious beliefs
could take on a synesthetic quality’ (p. 235).
Oliver Sacks (2008) discusses research on a professional musician who naturally
sees and tastes music. For example, the Major third is sweet while the Major
seventh is sour (Sacks, p. 173). He also notes the case of a number of musicians
whose ability to see music has enhanced their experience of music and abilities to
compose and perform. This includes the eminent composer Michael Torke, who
claims to experience music as inherently colourful, and the songwriter Patrick
Ehlen who wishes others could experience sound as the integrated totality that he
does and who also claims numerous benefits from his synesthetic abilities, including powers of memorisation and creativity.
The possibility that synesthetic experience heightens and reflects evolutionary
advancements in human cognitive functions is intriguing. In the 1980s, the famed
neurologist and author Richard Cytowic reinvigorated interest in synesthesia
through the first neurophysical studies on synesthetes. In his pioneering work,
Synesthesia: A Union of the Senses (2002), Cytowic concluded, accurately, that
synesthesia is linked to the co-activations of two or more sensory areas in the
neocortex (pp. 178–9). Meanwhile, in Europe, Simon Baron-Cohen and John
Harrison (1997) were conducting a research to test the premise of Galton that
synesthesia may be hereditary. Their work showed that one-third of synesthetes

252

Synesthetic Consciousness in the Śra Yantra Rituals

(i) the general trend in the cognitive sciences is to interpret synesthesia as a
byproduct of genetics;
(ii) that there is an increasing awareness that synesthesia is less rare than one
imagined (one in twenty-three amidst artists in one study [Cytowic 2009]);
(iii) that types of synesthetic experience are more diverse than once imagined:
Cytowic identifies 54 types (Cytowic 2009);
(iv) that synesthetes have enhanced forms of sensory experience that generally
results in more developed cognitive states, such as an increase in memory
function or heightened creative abilities; and
(v) that synesthesia may be both the result and cause of a brain system characterised by ‘hyperconnectivity’ in which the brain functions generate simultaneously an orchestra of ‘neural distributive networks’ affecting a ‘total
neurological system’ that brings multiple regions of the brain into simultaneously neurological collaboration.
It is particularly this final point, regarding the possibility that synesthetic experience is both the result and cause of a ‘total neurological system’ that I wish for us
to bear in mind as we now turn to a discussion of ritual practices in the
Nity@Xonaśik@r>ava.

Downloaded from http://jhs.oxfordjournals.org/ at Berry College on October 27, 2011

came from families in which there was a history of synesthesia. This meant, obviously, that two-thirds of synesthetes came from families in which there was no
such history. Nevertheless, Baron-Cohen and Harrison continued to repeat the
standard refrain: synesthesia is a result of genetics. Cytowic notes in this regard
that, ‘the system [of scientific evaluation on synesthetic data] seems to be stuck in
an antideluvian paradigm of orthodoxy that grinds and squeezes out imagination
and creativity in the quest for conformity’ [Editor note: page pending from
contributor!]
The research of V. S. Ramachandran and E. M. Hubbard (2001) is perhaps one
place to turn for a way out of limiting ‘paradigm of othodoxy’. Their work has
contributed significant advances in the testing of synesthesia, leaving little doubt
that there is a physiological and psychological basis for synesthesia. Moreover,
their research provides data that suggests synesthesia results as a condition of
‘hyperconnectivity’ and cross-activation in the sensory cortex that exists for most,
if not all, humans and some primates at an early stage in brain development but
remains intact for only about 1 in 2000. While the continuation of synesthetic
capacities is considered by ‘orthodox scientists’ to be a ‘genetic abnormality’
(Sacks 181) that results in the inability to distinguish the senses, Ramachandran
and Hubbard find in synesthetic phenomenon profound implications for the development of human language, the origins of metaphor, and possible links to and
explanations for extraordinary religious experience.
In summation of my initial and tentative research on synesthesia in the cognitive sciences, I offer the following observations:

Jeffrey S. Lidke

253

‘Synesthetic consciousness’ as cosmogonic tantric ritual
Mantra-ma>nala-var>@tma-r+pi>am. karu>@-par@m
Dh@ma-sam.vit-svar+p@m. t@m. vande tripurasundaram.
I worship that Tripurasundara whose own form is the foundation for consciousness, who is supreme compassion, and whose body is composed [simultaneously] of mantra, ma>nala and var>a (Artharatn@vali 1.1) (see Fig. 2)

The ninth-century ś@kt@gama, Nity@Xonaśik@r>ava (NS.A) functions primarily as a
ritual manual (paddhati) for the construction and worship of clan goddess,
Mah@tripurasundara, she who emanates photically as Śra Yantra and phonically
as the Perfected Mother of Sound, Siddham@tr.k@. My exegesis of this text is informed by the Trika Kaula commentaries of two twelfth-century Kaśmira exegetes:
Śiv@nanda’s R. juvimarśini and Vidy@nada’s Artharatn@vala, well-versed in the Trika
Kaulism of Abhinavagupta and his own teachers (Lidke 2012). Both Śiv@nanda and
Vidy@nanda conflate the acquisition of power (a primary concern of the elite
patrons who sponsored Śakta texts) with the quintessential insights of the Trika
Kaula system: the yogic recognition of a supreme I-ness which recognises its
own nature by emanating and contracting as the infinite cycles of creation
and dissolution. In other words, while the NS.A itself promises a host of cultic
powers (kula-siddhis) through the worship of Mah@tripurasundara, Śiv@nanda and
Vidy@nanda posit a still greater attainment: the recognition of Mah@tripurasundara

Downloaded from http://jhs.oxfordjournals.org/ at Berry College on October 27, 2011

Before doing so, let us try together a simple non-religious synesthetic exercise.
See in your mind’s eye the capitalised form of vowel A. Draw, in other words,
capital letter A into your cognitive field. Now proceed to colour that form red.
Think of the vowel A as you see it in its capitalised coloured form. Open your eyes.
Continue to see and think of a vowel A. If you can do this to any degree, you are
engaged in synesthetic functioning. If this coloured vowel-form A resonates as a
note, say, for simplicity’s sake, the note A, and if you can simultaneously see vowel
form A and hear that thought-form as the note A, then you are fusing into your
cognitive field the functions of thought, vision, and hearing. If the perceived
A-note resounding red-coloured vowel-form A ‘tastes’ like mango, then taste has
been added to a growing field of united senses. And if the A-note resounding
mango-tasting A-form now feels warm, then touch has been added to that emerging field. And if the A-note resounding (hearing-capacity)-warm feeling
(touch-capacity)-mango tasting (taste-capacity)-A-form (sight capacity) ‘smells’
like frankincense, then the capacity to smell, too, has been brought into the
field of fused senses. If you are not able to merge all five senses through this
simple exercise, perhaps you can imagine that if you made it your daily effort to
bring about such a synthesis, in conjunction with elaborate ritual processes, it
could perhaps be done.

254

Synesthetic Consciousness in the Śra Yantra Rituals

not simply as a divine bestower of powers (a notion grounded in dualistic consciousness), but as one’s own self-nature (the fruit of nondual consciousness).
Towards this end, they identify the artistic rituals of Śra Yantra as the means by
which this recognition-of-self-as-divine is achieved.
As I have detailed, cognitive studies on synesthesia suggest that the conjoining
of sensual experience has a transformative ‘networking impact’ on one’s consciousness. Perhaps it is the case that this ‘networking impact’ is an intended
result of cultic ritual practice. As Skora (2009) has shown, sense conjoining in
the construction and worship of the Tantric ma>nala is not limited to the senses
of sight and hearing. Through mudra (gesture) and ny@sa (placing), touch is stimulated; through ritual offering and consumption, taste is activated; and, through the
burning of sweet fragrances, the olfactory system is awakened (Cf., Timalsina,
60–62). In this way, the ritual produces a multi-layered synesthetic condition in
which the Deva’s form is at once heard, seen, felt, smelt, and tasted. Embodied in
this way through all the senses, the goddess is encoded into consciousness through
the activation and conflating of the sense functions. In other words, the worship of
Deva requires synesthesia.

Downloaded from http://jhs.oxfordjournals.org/ at Berry College on October 27, 2011

Figure 2. Image of Tripurasundara as anthropomorphic deity, as geometric pattern (ma>nala), and
sacred sound (mantra). Royal wedding invitation for the daughter of the late King Birendra of
Nepal, 1997. Author’s personal copy.

Jeffrey S. Lidke

255

Downloaded from http://jhs.oxfordjournals.org/ at Berry College on October 27, 2011

As a symbol of Deva, the Śra Yantra necessarily exhibits a dyadic nature. On the
one hand, it is a visual image, revealing the luminous symmetrically precise visual
emanations of divinity. On the other hand, it is a sonic field, reverberating as the
seed mantras that comprise the acoustic body of Siddham@tr.k@. The linking of
these photic and phonic fields is the key to the ritual and it is a linking that occurs
at both outer and inner levels. At the outer level, the s@dhaka acts as an artist,
ritually constructing the Śra Yantra with materials that comprise his tantric shrine.
At the inner level, this outer act is mirrored by a cognitive process in which the
s@dhaka mentally constructs the Śra Yantra on the shrine of his own consciousness.
In this way, the s@dhaka replicates the primal cosmogonic act in which the Goddess
emanates her essential being as an apparently ‘outer’ cosmos that in fact abides
always within the infinite expanse of her own consciousness. Just as the Goddess
emanates and dissolves creation within her own infinite being, the s@dhaka too
creates externally and visualises internally a Śra Yantra as a luminous acoustic field
by which he cognises his own synesthised self as the Goddess herself.
This dialectical relationship between a pure consciousness, on the one hand, and
a manifest cosmos, on the other, at first resembles the S@mkhyan dualism of puruXa
and prakr.ti. For Śiv@nanda and Vidy@nanda, however, this apparent dualism yields
to a non-dualist mantralogy (science of empowered phonemes) in which ‘awareness’ and ‘emanation’ are identified as inseparable aspects of the Siddham@tr.k@,
she whose essential nature emits the Sanskrit phonemes ranging from ‘a’ to ‘ha’
Through this interpretive stance, Śiv@nanda and Vidy@nanda maintain the aims of
both S@m.khya-Yoga and Tantra: liberative-cognition is achieved in combination
with the acquisition of power and the experience of pleasure. Liberation, in other
words, is both empowering and pleasurable. And liberation includes the awareness
that ‘self’ is at once transcendent too yet within the cycles of cosmic flux.
It is, in fact, in this movement from uncreated to created, from stillness to
movement, from unstruck sound to struck sound, from transcendent to embodied,
from non-being to being, that Śiv@nanda and Vidy@nanda perceive the essential
nature of a divinity whose dyadic patterns contain, reflect, and reveal a liberating
triad. Through the construction and destruction—at inner and outer levels—of the
Śra Yantra, the s@dhaka harnesses action, desire, and knowing (kriy@-icch@jñ@na-śakti) as the triad of powers whose interwoven, inseparable natures are
symbolised by the inner triangle at the yantra’s core. From the one Goddess
comes a field of dyadic patterns that are themselves the result of a trinity of
powers. These in turn give rise to the 36-fold creation, containing within itself
not only the field of infinite possibility, but also more concretely the ten sense
faculties (karmendriya and jñ@nendriya) as extensions of one’s cognitive functions
(buddhi, manas, and aham.k@ra) together with the subtle elements of sense perception (tanm@tra) and the five elements as interrelated facets of a singular emanation
of embodied consciousness. By identifying each of these embodied components
with a var>a (letter) within the visual-acoustic field of the ma>nala and in turn
‘placing’ these var>as into one’s own body through ny@sa, the s@dhaka produces a

256

Synesthetic Consciousness in the Śra Yantra Rituals

Conclusion
In this article, I have argued that recent theories on synesthesia in the cognitive
sciences provide an intriguing context in which we can reflect bi-directionally on
the embodied nature of Tantric ritual, particularly as exemplified in the Śra Vidy@
traditions of Śiv@nanda and Vidy@nanda, two medieval commentators on the NSA.
Engaging in such a bi-directional hermeneutics, we see that cognitive science
provides empirical data that suggests that a ‘union of the senses’ is a catalyst
for and result of ‘hyperconnectivity’ in which the brain functions as a ‘total neurological network’ as the result of heightened sense activity. While most neurologists
see this state solely as a result of genetics, Cytowic, Chara, and Ramachandran
suggest that such states can be generated through creative, imaginative, and
ritualised activities. In this regard, I have posited that the structure and form of
Tantric ritual be analysed as a method for producing a ‘union of the senses’ as a
result of highly creative visionary activity in which sound and image is combined
with taste, touch, and scent. This production of a unified polysensual

Downloaded from http://jhs.oxfordjournals.org/ at Berry College on October 27, 2011

complex synesthetic condition, thereby achieving the unitive states awareness
evoked in the texts.
In other words, it is through the recitation, visualisation, and interpretation of
the Sanskrit phonemes—the luminous sonic m@tr.k@s that comprise the Śra Yantra—
that the s@dhaka empowers the poly-sensual cognition of his goddess-self.
By combining his mastery of language (in its supreme, causal, subtle, and gross
forms) with his abilities as a yogin, ritualist, and artist, the s@dhaka recreates
cosmogenesis as a liberating artistic event in which subjectivity—the triadic
field of the signifier (v@caka) as letter (var>a), power-sound (mantra), and word
(pada)—‘projects out’ (v@maka) as the objectified corollary to itself—the triadic
interlocking fields of the signified (v@cya) as world (bhuvana), being (tattva), and
power (kal@), which comprise the Śra Yantra’s body.
In R. juvimarśini and Artharatn@vala, we see the conjoining of a ‘synesthetic hermeneutics’ together with a refined artistry that challenges the s@dhaka to at once
function as a linguistic philosopher, yogin, priest, and artist. Through these multiple roles, he encodes his own synesthised consciousness with the secret symbol
of his clan’s chosen deity, Mah@tripurasundara. For Śiv@nanda and Vidy@nanda, the
final fruit of this creative act is the recognition that the Śra Yantra’s ultimate
message is the triadic union of A (Śiva) with Ha (Śakti) and M. (Bindu) in the
mah@mantra of perfected self-awareness: aham.. This synesthetic recognition of
self as the integration of all patterns of emanation brands the s@dhaka as a rhythmic, emanating, patterned being, oscillating from stillness into flux, from transcendence into embodiment, from singularity into a symmetrical multiplicity. In
this way, he identifies himself as the cosmic flux itself, generating within his
consciousness via ritual practice the Deva’s cosmic form as the auspicious seal of
his now synesthised identity.

Jeffrey S. Lidke

257

experience—assuming they are possible—suggests that synesthetic states can be
generated and are not simply the result of genetics. If Ramachandran and Cytowic
are correct that synesthesia indicates and facilitates an evolution of neurological
development, then perhaps Tantric cosmogonic ritual can be evaluated in a way
that strips the esotericism down to a sense-based cognitive activity whose effect—
whether designed intentionally as such or not—is the generation of a state of
consciousness that requires the conjoining of the senses. In this regard, the
Yantra itself can perhaps be seen as a symbolic map of the ‘total neurological
system’ identified by Ramachandran as the result of synesthesia.

Baron-Cohen, S., Harrison, J. E. (eds). 1997. Synesthesia: Classic and Contemporary Readings.
Cambridge, Mass: Blackwell.
Chara, P. J. J., Gillett, J. N., 2004. ‘Sensory Images of God: Divine Synesthesia?’ Journal of
Psychology and Christianity 23: 234–40.
Cytowic, R. E., 2002. Synesthesia: A Union of the Senses, 2nd edn. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Cytowic, R. E., 2009. Wednesday is Indigo Blue: Discovering the Brain of Synesthesia. Cambridge:
MIT Press.
Galton, F., 1883. Inquiries into Human Faculty and its Development. London: MacMillan.
Lidke, J., 2012. The Goddess within and Beyond the Three Cities: Ś@kta Tantra and the Paradox of
Power in Nep@la-Ma>nala. Lewiston, NY: Edwin Mellen Press. Includes translations of
the Nity@Xonaśak@r>ava-Tantra (NS.A) with two Sanskrit commentaries, Artharatn@vali
of Śiv@nanda and R. juvimarśinI of Vidy@nanda.
Ramachandran, V. S., Hubbard, E. M., 2001. ‘Synesthesia: A Window into perception,
Thought and language.’ Journal of Consciousness Studies 8: 3–34.
Sacks, O., 2008. Musicophilia. New York: Random House.
Sanderson, A., 1990. The Visualisation of the Deities of the Troika. In: Andre, Padoux (ed).
Linage Divine Culet et Meditation dams L’Hindouism. Paris: Editions du CNRS.
Skora, K. M., 2009. ‘The Hermeneutics of Touch: Uncovering Abhinavagupta’s Tactile
Terrain.’ Method and Theory in the Study of Religion 20 no. 4: 87–106.
Timalsina, S., 2006. ‘Terrifying Beauty: Interplay of the Sanskritic and Vernacular Rituals
of SiddhilakXma.’ International Journal of Hindu Studies 10: 59–73.
Ward, J., 2008. The Frog Who Croaked Blue: Synesthesia and the Mixing of the Senses. Routledge.

Downloaded from http://jhs.oxfordjournals.org/ at Berry College on October 27, 2011

References

