7KHDWULFVRI(PRWLRQ6HOIGHFHSWLRQDQG6HOIFXOWLYDWLRQ
LQ$EKLQDYDJXSWD૷V$HVWKHWLFV
6WKDQHVKZDU7LPDOVLQD

Philosophy East and West, Volume 66, Number 1, January 2016, pp.
104-121 (Article)
3XEOLVKHGE\8QLYHUVLW\RI+DZDL L3UHVV

For additional information about this article
http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/pew/summary/v066/66.1.timalsina.html

Access provided by UniversitÃ¤t OsnabrÃ¼ck (8 Feb 2016 06:13 GMT)

THEATRICS OF EMOTION: SELF-DECEPTION AND SELFCULTIVATION IN ABHINAVAGUPTA’S AESTHETICS
Sthaneshwar Timalsina
Department of Religious Studies, San Diego State University
timalsin@mail.sdsu.edu

Neither are there chariots, nor horses or the paths. Hence, [the self ] creates the chariots, horses, and the paths.
Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad IV.3.10

Theater
Like the reality created in a dream, the Upaniṣadic passage describes a self that constitutes reality as it pleases and, eventually, entraps itself within its creation. What we
call reality is too small a playground. We soar high in the skies of our imagination
and dreams, and we reshape the intersubjective on the ground of the subjective.
To exist, in this light, is tantamount to believing who I am not and what it is not. In
this game of self-deception, fantasy becomes phenomenologically real, and the projected self overpowers its creator. Hence, the subject sacrifices its creative freedom,
enters his dream, and becomes the dream subject. There is no intentionality left; the
subject is not deceiving any more but is deceived. At least so it seems if we read one
stream of classical Indian philosophy. The paradox of self-deception is well addressed
in classical Indian writing, and a common escape from the paradox is to assume twotiered subjectivity: one being the witnessing self and the other the self-deceiving and
self-deceived subject. As Mele (1987, 2001) points out, how can one deceive oneself
without rendering one’s intentions ineffective? In this essay, I am exploring some arguments on self-deception and self-cultivation in Abhinava’s philosophy of theatrics.
In so doing, I will attempt to bridge the philosophical traditions of India and the West.
I am focusing on the philosophy of theatrics in addressing the issue of self-deception
and self-cultivation because performance art requires at least a two-tiered breach of
subjectivity and intersubjective introspection between the audience and the performer
and the performer and the character that he is playing.
The issue of self-deception is thus central to the classical exegetes in describing
this process. A common question is, during role-playing, to what extent are the actors
aware of their own personality and how much are they merged with the character?
Even when the actors are conscious of their distinctness from the character, they still
undergo similar emotions and display similar psycho-physiological states. The question remains, to what extent is this auto-suggestion applicable to performance art? Is
this self-deception even applicable to the audience as it experiences the surge of
aesthetic bliss? Are the emotions of the audience and the actors the same as those of

104

Philosophy East & West Volume 66, Number 1 January 2016 104–121
© 2016 by University of Hawai‘i Press

the characters? Or, to what extent are the emotions intersubjectively linked? In theatrics, viewers relate their experience to that of the protagonist: they are sad when the
hero is sad, and when the hero is outraged so are they. But the question still remains,
are the viewers relieved of emotions and thereby enlightened, or more confused and
self-deceived? The emotions expressed by the viewers in watching a drama mirror
those expressed when witnessing the real events. The real theatrics is outside the
theater where the viewers compare theatrical emotions to everyday experiences. The
distance between performance and reality is blurred in these experiences. These
instances call into question the assertion that self-deception is logically impossible
(see, e.g., Paluch 1967, Haight 1980).
From classical India, Lollaṭa (ninth century) maintained that theatrics is illusion.
Real emotions, in his opinion, are manifest only in the characters, and the actors reproduce emotions by means of recollection. Both the audience and the performance
artists are self-deceived to some degree, and what generates aesthetic pleasure is the
very illusory nature of the reality that is depicted in a play. Lollaṭa’s analysis of rasa
primarily rests on the performance artists, as he maintains that rasa experience comes
into being (utpatti) in the performance artists. A similar position is maintained by
Nāyaka, with a further discussion of the nature and substrate of illusion and a shift
from the artists to the audience to locate the rapture of rasa.1 The key term for him is
bhāvanā, which on the one hand describes the synthesis of different factors that constitute rasa and on the other stands for an active imagination that gives the sense of
reality.2 Nāyaka’s approach is ‘intentionalist’ in the sense that the audience intends
to self-deceive through an approach similar to that of ‘psychological partitioning,’
as has been maintained by Rorty (1980), Pears (1984), or Davidson (1985). These
positions specific to the hierarchy of subjects in terms of functional person and
‘witnessing consciousness’ (sākṣin) describe a structure particularly applicable in the
philosophical paradigm of Śaṅkara.3 The self as a performer and the world as theatrics, in the aesthetic paradigm of Nāyaka and the philosophy of Śaṅkara, relate to
their illusory nature.
Abhinava’s philosophy of theatrics develops against this backdrop. Rather than
seeking the transcendental meaning of being-in-the-world, or finding the theatrics of
life inherently a vanity fair or theater of the absurd, Abhinava exploits both the bliss
and awareness of being as integral to role-playing. Accordingly, there is no misery
intrinsic to the acting that portrays suffering, given that the subject is aware of
role-playing. Now the core issue arises again as to how one can be self-deceived if
one is aware of the mechanism and the process. Granted that acting as if in pain is
not identical to being in pain, how can the subject be in pain if he is simply acting?
Abhinava’s paradigm of jagadānanda or the state of integral bliss incorporates both
corporeal and psychological states, and the spectator’s ability to relish, epitomized
in theatrics, and it can be better described in terms of being in the world rather than
separated from it. For Abhinava, neither watching a performance nor participating in
role-playing demands self-deception. On the contrary, he argues for the presence of
the transcendent gaze while being immersed in the play, whether as the audience
or as an actor. In this paradigm, being in the world also implies having the ability to

Sthaneshwar Timalsina

105

relish the engagement of the senses. This integral state of rapture underlies the transcendence of self-consciousness while at the same time the self is engaged in the
world, actively attending somatic processes and mental events. For Abhinava, relishing the rasa experience is an epiphany of wonder (camatkāra) that also applies to the
bliss of being in the dynamic world (jagad) or living a good life. This foundational
being that is equated with bliss is the awareness or meta-cognition of the blissful instances of somatic engagement found by a yogin in all instances of cognition, and
occasionally by a layperson when watching a drama.
For the philosophies of Nāyaka and Abhinava, the concept of ‘theater’ is crucial,
as it is where roles are played and events are seen. Instead of ‘an enclosure for
watching’ (prekṣāgṛha), which is close to θέατρον, with its link to θεάοµαι, meaning
to see or to watch, the term more frequently occurring in Sanskrit is raṅgabhūmi,
‘the ground of engagement.’ Broadly, this is the ‘stage of colors’ and also a battlefield.
Whether the phenomenal events are worth watching or engaging in makes a big
philosophical difference. Does Kṛṣṇa engage in his roles as a charioteer, an ambassador, a playboy, an ascetic hermit, a warrior, a teacher, and an embodiment of time
and death incarnate, or is he simply watching as the events unfold? Even in his own
words, Kṛṣṇa says that “by presiding over my creative energy, I come into being by
[the powers] of self-deception” (Śrīmadbhagavadgītā 4.6). The process of ‘becoming’
(saṃ + bhū), according to Śaṅkara, relates to ‘becoming as if embodied, and born
with the inherent power of self-deception.’4 This makes self-deception not just a
phenomenological problem but also a metaphysical one, and differing understandings rest in terminology itself, even in describing the theater. On the one hand we
have both normal and pathological self-deception, where subjects intentionally delude themselves, while on the other we have a cognitive paradox, similar to the liar’s
paradox, questioning whether a subject can experience himself as ‘self-deceiving,’
and if he does, how can he not have the awareness of the real self and hence maybe
is not deceived? Whether or not the self is capable of self-deception, a transcendental
ground of consciousness is a logical consequence for the self to manifest and monitor the phenomenal self, where the role-playing self is more akin to the performance
artist. It is in this latency that the dyadic relation of subject and object, or, in our own
terms, an actor and its play, can come into being.
Performance and Self-deception
The issue of self-deception is too wide and most of the arguments are not relevant to
this project. Philosophers East and West are equally eager to address, and apparently
resolve, the paradox of self-deception. Just as in the Western literature — where one
can trace the issue in the writings of Plato, Butler, Hegel, or Sartre, or in the psychoanalysis of Freud — in India the centrality of this issue can be seen, with the identification of one of the most fundamental categories in philosophy being avidyā. Not
only is there communication between the artist and the audience in performance,
there is also a great deal of self-deception. Before contextualizing Abhinava’s analysis of performance, I will borrow select arguments from contemporary analytical

106

Philosophy East & West

discourse on self-deception.5 Since self-deception is tied to both epistemological and
psychological issues, this conversation may lead to more disagreements than finding
real agreements.
Central issues entangled with self-deception include the scope of intentionality,
belief, and desire. Broadly, for the subject S to be self-deceived, S believes both that
p and ~p. The arguments proposed to solve the paradox cannot ignore the fact of S
having a belief and also the awareness of such a belief. The solutions given by the
partial distinction or double agency of the subject also ignore the fact that if there are
two separate agents, one deceiving and the other being deceived, these are not two
logical agents; thus, the paradox itself is not addressed. Kent Bach’s analysis of
self-deception in recent years exemplifies the centrality of desire in the process. His
approach tries to explain why self-deception occurs, roughly analyzing the process
as follows:
S believes that p,
S desires that ~p, and due to this,
S avoids the recurrent thought that p.6
Accordingly, S can believe that p and at the same time think that ~p, broadly
understanding beliefs as states and thinking as an occurrence.7
Bach’s outline also points out that rationalization, evasion, and jamming are the
prominent techniques for a subject to self-deceive. In other words, subjects wishfully
rationalize what they think is not the case, they evade the recurrence of the thought
p so that they can self-deceive about ~p, and they clutter their mind with supporting
thoughts about ~p. Basically, they repress the fact of p in order to believe ~p.
Abhinava’s own analysis of subjective transformation, which he addresses avoiding
the terminology of self-deception in the cognitive sense, has some psychological
nuances, and in this regard is comparable to Bach’s approach.
The issue of self-deception has been addressed in many ways. Some can flatly
deny the phenomenon, pointing to the paradox ‘S believes that p and ~p’. One can
adopt a Platonic, Freudian, or modified version of Davidson and divide the mind into
distinct centers, with the subject split into two as deceiving and deceived. One
can also compartmentalize one’s beliefs. Alternatively, one can avow, or convince
oneself otherwise. Bach’s analysis can be compatible to this, and the role given to
predisposition in this model makes it comparable with the Indian models. Finally,
one can maintain the opposite of the first position (Bach’s) and only believe the
deceived view.8
Abhinava maintains that one cannot simulate psychological states such as grief
or anger:
[Simulation] cannot correspond to mental states such as grief or anger. A performance
artist does not simulate the grief of Rāma, for there exists no grief there [in the mind of the
actor]. On the contrary, if [the actor] experiences grief, it is not a simulation. There is
nothing other [than grief itself ] that is similar to grief.9

Sthaneshwar Timalsina

107

By expanding this position, we can argue that one cannot simulate pain, as pain is a
psychological state that as it occurs is transparent to the subject, and there exists no
pain that is not cognized. The reflexivity of consciousness in Abhinava’s philosophy
strengthens the argument that there is no unrecognized cognitive state. If applied to
our discourse on self-deception, what this means is that if someone deceives oneself
about being in pain, albeit not actually being in pain, there are only two possibilities:
either he is a liar or he is in real pain. Abhinava, on the other hand, maintains that
one can simulate the ‘consequent’ conditions (anubhāva) that involve somatic reflexes of being in specific psychological states. In other words, by seeing someone in
tears, one can simulate tears, but cannot simulate pain and not be in real pain. This
understanding of Abhinava contradicts the James-Lange (William James, Carl Lange)
theory of emotions, and gives its phenomenological-cognitive account.10 On the
other hand, some of the consequent conditions that Abhinava outlines are the psychological states, giving space for some emotions to be reproduced in the cocktail of
emotions when the dominant emotion is something else.
Sādhāraṇīkaraṇa, or the emphatic universalization of emotions, is at the center
of Abhinava’s aesthetics. He does use āveśa /samāveśa or similar terminology for describing transformed subjective states. It therefore becomes relevant how Abhinava
maintains the psychological states that mirror another subject’s state, and who displays physical symptoms of grief or anger while not actually being in such states (at
least not having those as the dominant emotions). Abhinava’s position becomes all
the more crucial because even if the performance artists are simulating the characters
they play, the audience has no reason to self-deceive, albeit the somatic responses
are evidently there. In Abhinava’s metaphysics, the subject is eternally free and is
described in terms of consciousness and bliss. In his monistic paradigm, this is the
very self that assumes bondage and liberation. Now the question returns as to how
Abhinava can justify that there is no self-deception if the fact is that bondage and
liberation are mere fabrications of the self.
Splitting the personality into two, one deceiving and the other being deceived,
may at first appear applicable, but the transcendent in the Pratyabhijñā paradigm is
not a deceiver, and this self is not separate but only transcendent to the phenomenal
self. Partial concealment of self-experience is another alternative, although this faces
the same dilemma of the self being an entity that is a-temporal and non-spatial. Following the avowal view of self-deception (the view attributed to Robert Audi and
Georges Rey), subjects are predisposed to affirm a proposition to oneself or others
with sincerity. All these alternatives would be better placed with some or other forms
of beliefs and predispositions.
Abhinava addresses this issue by adopting a reflexive or higher-order consciousness. The term he uses is anuvyavasāya, which simply means ‘after ascertainment’ or
‘after function.’ Rather than self-deception as the means of experiencing the other
selves in performance, Abhinava’s philosophy of drama considers viewing or experiencing drama as a reflexive act of consciousness, and anuvyavasāya as a key term
in this discourse. In the Nyāya school, which views consciousness as extrinsically
manifest, a second-order cognition is maintained to monitor the first-order cognition,

108

Philosophy East & West

and the term anuvyavasāya refers to the second order consciousness and is often
translated as apperception. In Śaṅkara’s Advaita, there are two simultaneous acts of
consciousness in which the first-order consciousness relates to the mind and the
sensory faculties experiencing the objects while the second order, equated with the
witness consciousness, monitors this engagement, and this higher-order consciousness is reflexive in nature since it does not require another consciousness for its
confirmation. Following the school of Pratyabhijñā, consciousness is reflexive, but
unlike the paradigm of Śaṅkara, cognitive modes or mental and sensory engagement
retain some nuances of the pure consciousness, and in that sense are reflexive. His
theory of anuvyavasāya needs to be read in this light, as what it implies is that reflexivity of consciousness incorporates embodiment, and somatic conditions or
bodily gestures are not outside the domain of consciousness. Mindful embodied
acts, integral to dramatic gestures, are involved within this reflexivity. On these
grounds, Abhinava proclaims that the experience involved in performance art is anuvyavasāya, which can be understood as a ‘conscious bodily expression.’11 Abhinava
explains:
[The spectator,] immersed in the joy or grief erupted by viewing dramatic simulations
such as gesticulation, [situates his heart] in the predisposition [that is] caused by the apprehension of Rāma et cetera as has been described [in a play] that [in turn is] caused by
what has been suggested by the predisposition [corresponding to] the experience of the
desired objects, such as a lascivious woman, music, or songs that cause the recurrence of
the predisposition corresponding to the apprehension of objects such as Rāma or Rāvaṇa.
[This experience] is [1] devoid of the cognitive modes that can be identified in terms of
correct knowledge, erroneous knowledge, doubt, or imagination, [2] is not circumscribed
in any spatial or temporal modes, and [3] has emerged as a consequence of entering into
another character by listening to the text.12

Select concepts used here to describe the aesthetic transformation of heart are
the immersion into specific psychological states, having conductive predispositions
active and disruptive predispositions passive, and having a cognitive state that is distinct from the commonly identified cognitive states. The reflexive awareness that
stands for the awareness of both psychological and somatic states, described in terms
of anuvyavasāya, makes self-deception possible only in somatic states, since at the
cognitive level consciousness is always reflexively given, and there is no such case
that Skp and S~kp. This reflexivity is neither one of the commonly known cognitive
modes nor any of the defective states of cognition, as Abhinava has outlined. This is
not a second-order consciousness, as Naiyāyikas would have it, nor is it identical to
the Pātañjalian application of the term to refer to the aspect of the mind that associates, integrates, differentiates, and assimilates pure sensations (ālocana) into percepts
and concepts (Dasgupta 1924, p. 176).13 One needs to keep in mind, though, that
not all theories of self-affirmation of consciousness are identical, and the case of
anuvyavasāya as proposed by Abhinava, which incorporates physical reflexive states,
is not compatible with various other schools that nonetheless accept reflexivity of
consciousness.14

Sthaneshwar Timalsina

109

Abhinava’s distinction between simulation and reflexive act helps situate the
issue of self-deception in imitation. Plainly and simply, if the subject is somewhat
deceived, or does not have an awareness of his role-playing, this is not performance
art or theater. Abhinava’s project here is explicitly to define a phenomenological
episode of dramatic experience wherein subjects not only experience the content but
also become reflexively aware of what is phenomenologically given as an artistic
corporeal expression. Abhinava therefore states:
During this [epiphany], since no experience in the form of having the external stimuli
[such as that of the protagonist] is felt [by the artist], this simulation of speech [or mimetic
representation] is a particular type of reflexive awareness (anuvyavasāya) and is synonymous to performance art. One should not [confuse] it with [non-reflexive] simulation.15

Even with corporeal gestures, Abhinava maintains that only the gestures of a similar
class can be performed, and an identical gesture cannot be copied. He proposes an
impossible situation: How can you simulate being God, as it is not possible to mimic
omniscience or omnipresence? Again, what lies behind this objection is to demonstrate that the subject S cannot have a psychological state that is a simulation of T and
not an original psychological state of S. What transpires in performance art, then, is
only S displaying the gestures that are generically similar to those of T. The underlying
notion here is an action embedded within performance, rather than the copying of
an action or simulation of the primary act.16
Just like cognitive states, somatic states are also reflexive. Abhinava, however,
does not maintain that all physical states are similar to cognitive states and intrinsically reflexive. In his opinion, what defines performance art and dissociates it from
mimicry is reflexivity.17 And this reflectivity is intermingled with the perceptual
modes of listening to the music or viewing the gestures, and since this is essentially
identical to the self mirroring its own orgasmic being, this higher-order consciousness is addressed as the ‘epiphany of wonder’ (camatkāra).18
Metaphors speak. When the phenomenal self is compared to a performance artist, it on the one hand stands by the premise of reflexivity, while on the other also
maintains the originality of the acts, since, as has been stated, they are not just automatic reflexes but conscious acts. To be an actor in Lollaṭa’s or Nāyaka’s paradigm
would mean the subject as illusion, but Abhinava’s paradigm frees the subject by
bestowing autonomy. In his paradigm, the self ‘acts’ as if lost, or becomes someone
else while not really losing sight of one’s true nature. For Abhinava, this concealment
of the self occurs with assuming fourfold imitations.19 And this is possible only with
the actor’s predispositions (saṃskāra), which are shaped by the narratives that weave
the storyline.20
The passage is vague when Abhinava identifies performance with reflexive
awareness. The following conversation, only a fragment of a broader conversation,
gives a glimpse of what he means by the reflexivity of performance. Noteworthy in
this passage is the distinction he makes between reflexive consciousness and the
entity manifest in it, the latter being equated with performance:

110

Philosophy East & West

Performance21 is an entity that manifests in reflexive consciousness as [1] comprised of
bliss and luminosity of the consciousness of the self, which is colored with distinctive
mental states of the forms of pain or pleasure, and, for this reason, as [2] variegated and
alternatively experienced (pari + aya) as relishing, tasting, epiphany, savoring, swooning,
enjoyment, and so on. This [reflexive consciousness] manifests when watching [a performance played] by a performer who is instrumental in [both] communicating with the
heart and effecting identity [between the hearts]. [This reflexive consciousness is caused]
primarily by the predispositions that constitute subjects as empathic, and the instrumental
predispositions that arise out of the commonsense [experiences] of the past such as perception or inference. [The performer in this process has] concealed the real nature of the
self with an immersion into the assemblage of coloring [the essential nature of the self ].22

Noteworthy are the concepts of intersubjectivity and empathy. A dialogue between
the spectator and the performer at the level of the heart is initiated in this performance, which breaches the boundary of hearts and allows multiple hearts to be one.
This is where the other subjects relive the experience of one subject. While the instigators of such transformative experience are commonsense experiences, the result is
unique, and all the terms used to describe it fail to exhaust the experience as such.
The preceding statement explicitly details that psychological states are reflexively
known when relishing aesthetic bliss, as there is not just one way of describing this
epiphany, or even experiencing this rapture, and it is upon the subject’s predisposition, which entails their past commonsense experience, that the transformation of
the heart occurs and subjects mingle in this empathic experience, which transcends
phenomenal subjectivity. Moreover, although the predispositions arise from commonsense experience, aesthetic bliss is transcendental in the sense that it is reflexively
known, and in this state the self is inversed, or reflexively manifesting itself.
As to the question of the phenomenality of dramatic construction, Abhinava proclaims that this is comprised only of cognition. In other words, performance is cognitively accessed and does not have any externality. What constitutes performance is
its capacity to superimpose something that is not ontologically there. Its existence is
simultaneous to it being experienced. In all accounts, the creator of these characters,
the consciousness that gives performance art its phenomenality, is not the role that is
played but rather the way it is felt, and if subjects fail to see something as performance, there is no performance. Not just for the artists but also for the audience, it is
their reflexivity that allows them to maintain their distinctive roles. In situations when
this reflexivity is breached and the spectators shift their identity, being as if possessed
by the mental states of the characters, these subjects assume that the events they are
watching are occurring in their real life. This, however, is not a topic for aesthetics but
for pathology.23
What makes performance art a performance is its reflexivity, or the acts being
mindful. The agents are cognitively aware while performing something, knowing
the sequence of gestures or tones. On this occasion, Abhinava’s phrase ‘awareness
of [the mental state] that is soiled with concepts’ (rūṣitavikalpasaṃvedana) further
confirms that the reflexive consciousness that he addresses does have the mental

Sthaneshwar Timalsina

111

event (vikalpa) as its object. His statement ‘this is known by its awareness itself’ (tadvedanavedya) confirms the same thesis that, unlike the apperception theory, where
second-order consciousness grasps the first, this consciousness is intrinsically reflexive, and the reflexivity in performance is one’s own embodiment.24 What the artist
reflexively knows are his own bodily or psychological states. The embodied nature of
the reflexive state and mental events as intrinsic to being reflexive of them not only
makes performance possible, it also provides a logical conclusion for Abhinava’s
monistic philosophy to describe the phenomenal being.
The Autonomous Performer
The issue of moral responsibility is intertwined with free agency. Are the deceived
subjects morally responsible for believing that p when the case is ~p? This question
becomes a bit more complicated when the deceiving and deceived subjects are
identical. To make it even more complicated, if it is the transcendent self that is
self-deceiving, and the phenomenal self deceived, should not the transcendent self
bear moral responsibility? However, this will contradict the standard thesis that the
transcendent self is eternally free and never defiled. If being in the world is equivalent
to performance, as Abhinava posits, there is no real deception. Following the alternative disposition theory, even when subjects choose to be self-deceived, it is only that
they believe that p and not think that p. In other words, a transcendent awareness is
embedded with self-deception even when predisposition or its equivalent saṃskāra
theory is applied.
In order to proclaim that aesthetic experience is not one of the consequent
emotions/cognitions that follow some somatic or psychological reaction to stimuli,
Abhinava negates all the possibilities:
[The cognition of the performers in theatrics] is not analogical, as [in the case of recognizing] a twin. It is not like being confused, like cognizing silver in the case of a shell that
entails the memory of silver. Neither is this a superimposition, similar to the case of the
‘face is the moon’ [analogy], where veridicality is rejected and [what is cognized is] in the
form of the superimposed (mithyā) cognition. Neither is this [metonymic] ascertainment
[of certain properties] as in the case of ‘the person from Vāhika is [as dull as] an ox.’ Neither is this metaphoric, as in the case of [cognizing] ‘the face is [similar to] the moon.’
Neither is this a copy, as in the case of a painting or [copying] a book. Neither is this an
imitation, like a playful exposition of a text between a teacher and a student. Neither is
this an instantaneous construction, like a magical act. Neither is this like a magical handtrick that skillfully simulates something. [The reason that the cognition in performance is
not compatible with any of these is] because in all these alternatives, there is no relishing
of rasa when the viewer is uncommonly disengaged.25

Two crucial points are made in this conversation. The awareness that emerges when
watching a performance is generated passively. This cognition, however, is not a
form of erroneous cognition, or any other commonly known mode of simulation.
While the list is long, the essence is that aesthetic relishing cannot be reduced to any

112

Philosophy East & West

common cognitive mode. Since the various alternatives of erroneous modes and
deception through magic tricks are explicitly outlined, the uncommon experience
during the epiphany cannot be identical to self-deception either. The judgment of
real or unreal for the events cognized is not applicable in this consciousness, and for
this reason there cannot be a moral obligation for the viewers to act accordingly.
In other words, a viewer is not morally responsible to stop the violence that occurs in
a drama. Quite the contrary, Abhinava finds this experience morally uplifting, because
it is in this aesthetic epiphany that the subject experiences his intrinsic nature and
this experience empowers him, making him capable of moral decisions.
Recognition of the self is integral to the drama of self-deception.26 There is no
self, in the phenomenal sense, without role-playing. Being and awareness, the essential characteristics of the absolute, do not retain subjectivity. Being qua awareness
provides the foundation for the reality that is expressed in terms of speech and what
is described by speech. Both language and the world are mere simulations (anukāra)
of this transcendent reality.27 Unlike the subjects in Baudrillard’s paradigm, the
agents of Abhinava retain their subjectivity, or, in other words, they have not lost their
‘originality’ even when being reproduced in a series of simulations. Rather than with
the self-deceived selves in the above-described paradoxical situation, Abhinava
aligns himself with the free agent playing his game with absolute awareness. It is
where the concept of self-deception becomes theoretically problematic.
In contrast, the role Bhaṭṭa Nāyaka assigns for the self differs significantly, and the
concept of self-deception is crucial to his phenomenology of theatrics:
The imitation of [characters such as] Rāma or Rāvaṇa, which in essence is mere imagination and [thus] unreal, and for this reason has a characteristic of not being permanent,
manifests as if real for some [indescribable] reason, although no cause [for its manifestation] exists. Performed by an artist who has not relinquished the basis of [his] personality
[and for this reason is] comparable to the [transcendent] Brahman, [this artistic simulation] accommodates hundreds of thousands of imaginations in a single moment, and
while being distinct from dream [or illusion] et cetera, [it] is the cause for a positive
seizure of the heart. Despite [mimetic simulation] being unreal [tathā], it leads to [actualizing] the highest pursuit of humankind. Just like a drama, this world is a mere fabrication
of non-substantial names and forms but nonetheless a means to achieve [liberation, or]
the highest pursuit of humankind.28

The language above is explicit. Illusion and deception are central to this conversation. Nevertheless, Nāyaka argues that a drama is nonetheless a means for achieving
the highest pursuit of humankind, that is, liberation. Whether or not dramatic experience is real, both Abhinava and Nāyaka thus maintain that the aesthetic experience
in the course of watching a drama has a positive consequence. For Abhinava, there
is an additional phenomenal purpose of the theatrics, as aesthetic bliss and the moral
judgment that the subject develops are its highest pursuit. The distinction between
self-realized and ignorant persons lies in their ability or lack thereof to acknowledge
the phenomenality of the phenomenal self. If a subject is role-playing, for him to

Sthaneshwar Timalsina

113

recognize that he is role-playing is liberating enough. Unlike Baudrillard’s simulacra,
these phenomenal selves are not devoid of the originals, as they walk and breathe
with it, although they do not reflexively look back and recognize their true self when
in the flux of saṃsāra. If there is such a thing as self-deception, what drama does is
to prepare subjects to reflect back and look in the mirror and see their true nature.
Drama or role-playing, which includes being in the world, in itself is thus a deconstructive process with the consequence of self-recognition embedded with it.
The Audience
In a performance, two layers of relationship are forged: between the audience and
the actor and between the actor and the character. Abhinava analyzes the extent
to which the subjectivity of an artist is transformed when simulating the acts of the
character or to what extent his personal identity is shifted into the character. The
way Abhinava elaborates on role-playing helps us contextualize his arguments on
self-deception. This issue is more vividly addressed when he discusses the experience of the audience, as it is the audience who ultimately makes the connection with
the character when it is mediated by the artist. The viewer, while transcending his
subjective horizon and touching upon the subjectivity of the actor, is also capable of
preserving his individuality as a viewer. While a connection is made between the
character and the audience, it is required that the subjects watching a play are well
aware of the distinction between the artists and the roles they play. Nevertheless, the
viewer is also required to breach his own subjectivity and relate his experience to
that of the character so that he can mirror the emotions that the character undergoes
and be able to empathize.
At the same time, he also needs to be aware of himself as a viewer, or else the
mirroring of emotions may overpower his emotional response, and, rather than relishing the performance, and in such situations, he may experience the negative emotions of the character. People do not watch a tragedy to cry or a horror film to be
spooked. There is a higher-order consciousness that relishes the emotions, even the
negative ones, when watching a drama, or experiences the epiphany of wonder in
witnessing a tragedy or a gut-wrenching scene that evokes disgust. While on the
stage, real-life emotions manifested by the actor elevate aesthetic sensibility even
when evoking the corresponding emotions in the audience. Abhinava’s aesthetics
shifts focus to the viewers, who, while suspending their disbelief, do not become lost
in their immersion in the story as it unfolds, and are thus able to relish the drama. For
Lollaṭa and Nāyaka, this provides an opportunity to expand upon the disinterested
witness, who, while watching the drama as the plot unfolds, is not subjectively immersed. Abhinava’s enlightened subjects are not viewers who are emotionally detached as the drama unfolds: They are very much relishing world events as they
unfold. His approach is thus twofold: (1) dramatic experience suspends everyday
experience and thus allows the subjects to undergo aesthetic rapture, and (2) this
rapture brings the subjects to the core of their being, brings them to the final repose,

114

Philosophy East & West

and makes them able to see the way things are, empowering them to make a moral
judgment. A clear sense of reality is maintained in this higher-order consciousness.
In its absence, simulation would replace the sense of the true narrative and overpower the judgment of the audience. This would not only misdirect aesthetic judgment, but would also make the viewers morally responsible. Reading Abhinava at
this juncture helps us contextualize role-playing and subjectivity on the one hand,
while on the other it also grounds some key issues related to ritual and morality.
First, the following lines help us understand how Abhinava explains the suspension of everyday experience and the cultivation of aesthetic perception:
However, in the context of performance art, since [1] there is an absence of the predisposition of intentionality, such as ‘I will have accomplished something absolutely real today,’ [and] since [2] there exists the predisposition of intentionality, such as ‘I will hear or
see [something] extraordinary that is superior to the distinctive savoring of the rapture
accessible to all the viewers,’ [the spectator] has forgotten the commonsense experience
due to relishing the delightful songs and music, and for this reason, he has his heart similar to a stainless mirror.29

This statement is also applicable in analyzing self-deception, with the prominence of
two terms: intentionality and forgetting. The audience is psychologically willing and
ready to escape everyday experience in the quest for something sublime. This intentionality facilitates forgetting, as the subjects forget their commonsense experience,
with their cognitive modalities occupied with the rapture engendered by the drama.
What allows the viewers to suspend their commonsense experience and also to
suspend their disbelief, following Abhinava, is the uncommon rapture, the epiphany
of wonder, the aesthetic relishing, which, by its nature, is more enjoyable than everyday reality. This quest for rapture is for something more sublime than the quest for the
‘pleasure principle,’ as Freud would have it. Rather than the rasa experience being
guided by the id, a higher order judgment and telos are involved in this aesthetic
judgment. This makes Abhinava’s aesthetic judgment value-oriented, and also helps
make a distinction between raw emotions and an uncontrolled display of basic instincts. This distinguishes the systematic display of emotions in theatrics from the
carnival of non-reflexive overpowering immersion in emotions. That a rasa experience is a value-oriented judgment is explicit in Abhinava’s claim that the enjoyer
seeks an uncommon experience that transcends the rapture engendered by everyday
experience. This, of course, is beyond Freud’s pleasure principle, but in the sense that
it is more sublime, and, if making use of Freudian terms, it is closer to the Super Ego.
This association of the epiphany of rapture in aesthetic experience to Abhinava’s rasa
experience relates it with a higher teleology, making aesthetic experience the guiding
principle for morality.
For Abhinava, the self is intrinsically blissful, and the lack of self-awareness constitutes suffering. Along these lines, theatrics allows the subjects to return to their
primordial nature, the inner blissful state, and in the tranquil state of self-recognition
subjects are able to make a moral judgment. He argues:

Sthaneshwar Timalsina

115

The spectator, with his self-awareness immersed in the acts of the protagonist [tad] and his
mind filled with the epiphany of wonder, universalizes [this experience] in each person
through the vantage point of self [-experience] in the span of just five or six days. [The
viewer perceives] only generalized instances of consciousness, delivered [through his
empathic gaze] in the form of an imperative [found in the syntactic structure of ] liṅ as
‘this [is what happens] for one doing this,’ with reflexive consciousness not particularized
in terms of space and time. [In this epiphany, the subject is] content with the experience
of rasa [which results as a consequence of ] the predisposition of the marvelous songs and
music that accompany the relishing of the rasa that resembles [the bliss of the amorous
play] with a lover that stimulates specific modes of consciousness. For this reason, [he]
relishes [the epiphany] without experiencing even a fraction of the loss of bliss even
when [pierced] with hundreds of arrows deep into the heart. For the reason that his
mental state is always content with the desire to achieve virtue and abandon vice, [the
spectator] conducts virtuous acts and abandons the vicious ones.30

Abhinava’s arguments for a performance art that leads the viewer to moral acts,
needless to say, come within the pretext of theatrics as a means for self-recognition
and theatrics as a means for moral action. Abhinava acknowledges the connection
between dramatic universalization, which allows the viewer to empathize with the
character, and the universal nature of moral imperative. Just like the ritual commands,
moral imperatives are not guided to one specific subject but have a universal appeal.
Abhinava relates rasa-catharsis to a pristine state of heart, which he views as the
source of moral acts. Moral imperatives, accordingly, come from one’s own heart
and the role drama plays is in allowing the subjects to encounter their inner selfnature.
Following Abhinava’s statement cited directly above, the audience has their
self-awareness immersed in the acts of the protagonist, and in the surge of the epiphany of wonder all real-world cognitive functions are momentarily suspended. The
audience universalizes experience by transcending the gaze from the vantage point
of oneself, and this allows them to reprogram their embodied memory through the
very compressed time in which the drama occurs. Accordingly, habit memory is both
the means for transcending commonsense experience, as aesthetic saṃskāras are the
constituents of a connoisseur and aesthetic relishing allows the subjects to reprogram
their basic tendencies required for making a value judgment. Following Abhinava,
the moral imperative experienced in theatrics is in the form of command, comprehended in the form of syntactic injunction. The complexity of aesthetic judgment in
Abhinava’s paradigm is epitomized when he incorporates carnal experience with
rapture, while still maintaining the possibility of moral judgment as syntactically accessed. Relating the aesthetic to the somatic, he compares this epiphany with carnal
orgasm, an example often used to vivify the collapse of subjective and objective
horizons. While being fully embodied, this rapture makes other somatic experiences
negligible, even if they are the basic sensations of being pierced by arrows in the
heart. In this experience of being within the self, the subject regains his awareness,
escapes from false egos and their appropriations and judgments, and becomes capable of making a moral judgment.

116

Philosophy East & West

Notes
Many thanks go to Dr. Arindam Chakrabarti for bringing to my attention the selected
passages from the Abhinavabhāratī, meticulously discussing these sections with me,
and eventually encouraging me to write this article. I also thank Mrs. Mary Hicks for
her editorial support.
The following abbreviation appears in the Notes:
AB in NŚ

Abhinavabhāratī, in Nāṭyaśāstra of Bharatamuni. See Nāṭyaśāstra of
Bharatamuni in References below.

1 – For a detailed analysis of Nāyaka’s position, see Pollock 2010, pp. 143–184.
2 – Nāyaka’s application of bhāvanā also rests on the Mīmāṃsā understanding
of the term, which can be broadly analyzed as ‘modal’ and semantic ‘sacrifice’
in the imperative sentences that prescribe ritual sacrifice. In general, bhāvanā
stands for the function of the agent that is supportive of materializing the
event.
3 – Śaṅkara’s Advaita is simple in this regard for maintaining the concepts of sākṣin
or the witnessing self and jīva or the phenomenal self. The Pratyabhijñā system
identifies a series of subjective states where beings can evolve and devolve
according to the degree of expression of the intrinsic powers of will, cognition, and action. The highest in this series is Paramaśiva, the transcendent, allencompassing witnessing self; and the subject at the bottom of this hierarchy is
sakala or the one with the attributes of limiting factors (kalā).
4 – . . . saṃbhavāmi dehavān iva bhavāmi jāta ivātmamāyayā. . . . (Bhāṣya of Śaṅkara on Śrīmadbhagavadgītā 4.6).
5 – The discourse on self-deception is too big and the literature too extensive to
address here all the issues related to this topic. Prominent among the contemporary writings are the bibliographic account of Foss (1980), Champlin (1977),
and Haight (1980). For a brief overview of the topic, see http://plato.stanford.
edu/entries/self-deception/.
6 – Bach 1981, pp. 351–370.
7 – I am adopting Hellman’s (1983) arguments in this synopsis.
8 – I am adopting Leeuwen’s (2007) arguments in this synopsis.
9 – na cittavṛttīnāṃ śokakrodhādirūpāṇām | na hi naṭo rāmasadṛśaṃ svātmanaḥ
śokaṃ karoti | sarvathaiva tasya tatrābhāvāt | bhāve vā’nanukāratvāt | na cānyad
vastv asti yac chokena sadṛśaṃ syāt | (AB in NŚ 36 : 1–3).
10 – Based on this description, only the consequent bhāvas (anubhāvas) can be
‘performed.’ There are distinct anubhāvas for each rasa experience. A smile or
suggestive glance, for instance, is the consequent of śṛṅgāra. In the case of
tragedy, a consequent role can be played by despondency, suspicion, envy,

Sthaneshwar Timalsina

117

anxiety, anger, et cetera. It is noteworthy that both the psychological and corporeal conditions fall under the consequents. For a detailed list of consequent
bhāvas in the secondary literature, see Nardi 2006, pp. 144 –146.
11 – I am thankful to Arindam Chakrabatri for making this suggestion. In his reading,
anuvyavasāya refers to ‘ideam asyānukaraṇam iti camatkārātmakaṃ jñānam’ or
the awareness that can be described only in terms of epiphany while still retaining the consciousness that the act of T imitates the acts of S.
12 – sūcyādyabhinayāvalokanodbhinnapramodaśokāditanmayībhāvaḥ pāṭhyākarṇanapātrāntarapraveśa-vaśāt
samutpanne
deśakālaviśeṣāveśānāliṅgite
saṃyaṅmithyāsaṃśayasambhāvanādijñānavijñeyatva-parāmarśānāspade rāmarāvaṇādiviṣayādhyavasāye
tatsaṃskārānuvṛttikāraṇabhūtatatsahacarahṛdyavasturūpagītātodyapramadānubhavasaṃskārasūcitasamanugatataduktarū
parāmādhyavasāyasaṃskāra eva bhavan. . . . (AB in NŚ 35 : 12–17).
13 – Jayaratha explains anuvyavasāya in the following passage: mana eva hi
kalpanānantaraṃ cakṣurādi-vyavasitam apy artham anuvyavasyan niścayadaśām adhiśāyayat tad ekānekarūpaṃ dvayam avalam-bamānā etāḥ kriyādikalpanāḥ kuryāt | (Viveka on Tantrāloka 9.278–279). In this understanding,
vyavasita is something cognized by the sense organ (precepts), and anuvyavasāya as an ascertainment, a reflexive consciousness that confirms what
has been given by the sense organ. This consciousness is subsequent to perception, and is a mental activity. This consciousness is quite similar to what
Vijñānabhikṣu has pointed out in the following passage: kiñ ca mā bhavatv
anavasthā vṛttigocarānantavṛttikalpanāgauravaṃ tv aparihāryam eva, asmābhir
lāghavena sakalavṛttigocaraikavibhujñānakalpanād iti | (Vārttika in Yogasūtra
4.21). Accordingly, a singular consciousness that manifests all the mental modifications, including percepts and concepts, is what manifests cognitive events
or vṛttis that are not reflexively cognized.
14 – For a minor difference, Vācaspati, while expounding upon the Yogasūtra,
holds that the self is reflected onto the mental mode that in itself is not reflexive, and thus the mental mode becomes reflexive. Vijñānabhikṣu, on the
other hand, contends that the self is reflected on the mental mode and this
reflection is reflected back on the self. For further discussion, see Sinha 1958,
vol. 1, pp. 214 –221.
15 – idānīm upāyasaṃvedanālābhāt tadidam anukīrtanam anuvyavasāyaviśeṣo
nāṭyāparaparyāyaḥ | nānukāra iti bhramitavyam | (AB in NŚ 35 : 23–24).
16 – anubhāvāṃs tu karoti | kin tu sajātīyān eva | na tu tatsadṛśān| sādhāraṇarūpasya
kaḥ kena sādṛśyārthaḥ | trailokyavartinaḥ sadṛśatvan tu na viśeṣātmanā yaugapadyenopapadyate | kadācit krameṇa niyata evānukṛtaḥ syāt | sāmānyātmakatve ko ‘nukārārthaḥ | (AB in NŚ 36 : 3– 6).
17 – tenānuvyavasāyavat viśeṣaviṣayīkāryaṃ nāṭyam | (AB in NŚ 36 : 9).

118

Philosophy East & West

18 – . . . anuvyavasāyasya pratyakṣakalpanāṭye hṛdyagītādyanusyūtatayā camatkārasthānatvād hṛdayānupraveśayogyatvam | (AB in NŚ 36 : 12–13). I have followed
Darius Cooper in interpreting the term camatkāra in terms of the “epiphany of
wonder.” He quotes the Abhinavabharati to explain camatkāra: “camatkāra is
an uninterrupted (acchina) state of immersion (āveśa) in an enjoyment characterized by the presence of a sensation of inner fullness (tṛpti). It might be
said indeed that camatkāra is the action proper to a tasting (cam) or enjoying
subject, i.e., to a person immersed in the inner movement (tṛpti) of a magical
(adbhuta) enjoyment” (Cooper 2000, pp. 24 –25).
19 – The fourfold abhinayas in Bharata and Abhinava’s theatrics are: āṅgika or the
gestures of corporeal limbs, vācika or speech, āhārya or physical decorations
and costumes, and sāttvika or the corporeal reflexes or physical response to
psychological states such as tears, shaking, et cetera.
20 – prastāvanādinā naṭajñānasaṃskārasācivyaṃ. . . . (AB in NŚ 36 : 14).
21 – The term nāṭya, derived from the root naṭ + ṣyañ (in the accusative) refers to all
the skillful expressions of the body. Following Amarakoṣa I.7.10, the term nāṭya
refers to all dancing, singing, and playing of musical instruments. In Bharata’s
understanding, the term nāṭya collectively expresses all three artistic expressions in terms of nāṭya or dramatic expression, nṛtta or artistic expression of a
theme, and nṛtya or skillful mimetic expression. When Abhinava identifies nāṭya
with reflexive consciousness, he is not addressing the ontology of drama but
rather the phenomenological analysis of a performance art. I have avoided the
terminology of ‘representation’ as the term presupposes something (S) being
represented (by means of T), as this understanding does not align with that of
Abhinava.
22 – . . . rañjakasāmagrīmadhyānupraviṣṭena pracchāditasvasvabhāvena prākpravṛttalaukikapratyakṣā-numānādijanitasaṃskārasahāyena
sahṛdayasaṃskārasacivena hṛdayasaṃvādatanmayībhāvanāsahakāriṇā prayoktrā dṛśyamānena yo
‘nuvyavasāyo janyate sukhaduḥkādyākāratattaccittavṛttirūparūṣitanijasaṃvidānandaprakāśamayaḥ, ata eva vicitro rasanāsvādanacamatkāracarvaṇanirveśabhogādyaparaparyāyaḥ tatra yad avabhāsate vastu tan nāṭyam | (AB in NŚ
36 : 14 –19).
23 – tac ca jñānākāramātram āropitaṃ svarūpaṃ sāmānyātmakaṃ tatkālanirmitarūpaṃ cānyad vā kiñcid astu | (AB in NŚ 36 : 19–20).
24 – . . . tasmād anuvyavasāyātmakaṃ kīrtanaṃ rūṣitavikalpasaṃvedanaṃ nāṭyam |
tadvedanavedyatvāt | na tv anukaraṇarūpam |. . . . (AB in NŚ 36 : 23–24).
25 – na sādṛśyena yamalakavat | na bhrāntatvena rūpyasmṛtipūrvakaśuktirūpyavat
| nāropeṇa samyag-jñānabādhānantaramithyājñānarūpeṇa mukhacandra itivat
| na tadadhyavasāyena gaurvāhikavat | not-prekṣamāṇatvena candramukhavat |
na tatpratikṛtitvena citrapustavat | na tad anukāreṇa guruśiṣyavyā-khyāhevāka-

Sthaneshwar Timalsina

119

vat | na tātkālikanirmāṇendrajālavat | na yuktiviracitatadābhāsatayā hastalāghavādimāyāvat | sarveṣv eteṣu pakṣeṣv asādhāraṇatayā draṣṭur audāsīnye
rasāsvādāyogāt | (AB in NŚ 34 : 14 –20).
26 – Even one of the foundational texts, the Śiva Sūtra (3.9), describes the self in
terms of a performer: nartaka ātmā.
27 – For both Bhartṛhari and Baudrillard, everyday experience is a simulation of reality. For Bhartṛhari, our reality is an anukāra of the Brahman (Vākyapadīya I.5).
28 – yathā hi kalpanāmātrasāraṃ tata evānavasthitaikarūpaṃ kṣaṇena kalpanāśatasahasrasahaṃ svapnādivilakṣaṇam api suṣṭhutarāṃ hṛdayagrahanidānam
atyaktasvālambanabrahmakalpanaṭoparacitaṃ rāmarāvaṇādiciṣṭitam asatyaṃ
kuto ‘py abhūtādbhūtavṛttyā bhāti | tathā bhāsamānam api ca pumarthopāyatām
eti | tathā tādṛg eva viśvam idam asatyanāmarūpaprapañcātmakam atha ca
śravaṇamananādivaśena paramapumarthaprāpakam iti | (AB in NŚ 5 : 16 –21).
29 – nāṭye tu pāramārthikaṃ kiñcid adya me kṛtyaṃ bhaviṣyatīty evaṃbhūtābhisandhisaṃskārābhāvāt
sarvapariṣatsādhāraṇapramodasārāparyantavirasamādaraṇīyalokottara darśanaśravaṇopayogī bhaviṣyāmīty abhisandhisaṃskārād
ucitagītātodyacarvaṇāvismṛtasāṃsārikabhāvatayā vimalamukurakalpībhūtanijahṛdayaḥ. . . . (AB in NŚ 35 : 9–12).
I have understood ‘abhinsandhi’ here as intentionality, and it can also be
translated here as ‘concept.’ I am using this in the sense of ‘desire’ rather than
the way intentionality is used in contemporary phenomenology.
30 – pañcaṣair divasaiḥ sacamatkāratadīyacaritamadhyapraviṣṭasvātmarūpamatiḥ
svātmadvāreṇa viśvaṃ tathā paśyan pratyekaṃ sāmājiko deśakālaviśeṣeṇāparāmarśena evaṃkāriṇām idam iti liṅātmakavidhi-samarpitaṃ saṃvijjātīyam
eva
saṃvidviśeṣarañjakaprāṇavallabhāpratimarasāsvādasahacararamyagītātodyādisaṃskārarasānubhavavaśena
hṛdayābhyantaranikhātaṃ
tata
evotpuṅkhaśatair api mlānimātram apy abhajamānaṃ bhajaṃs tattacchubhāśubhaprepsājihāsāsatatasyūtavṛttitvād eva śubham ācaraty aśubhaṃ
samujjhati | (AB in NŚ 35 : 17–23).
References
Amarakoṣa: With the Commentary Rāmāśramī. Edited with Exposition by Haragovinda Shastri. 1982. Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit Sansthan.
Bach, Kent. 1981. “An Analysis of Self-Deception.” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 41 : 351–370.
Champlin, T. S. 1977. “Self-Deception: A Reflexive Dilemma.” Philosophy 52.
Cooper, Darius. 2000. The Cinema of Satyajit Ray: Between Tradition and Modernity.
Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press.

120

Philosophy East & West

Dasgupta, Surendranath. 1924. Yoga as Philosophy and Religion. London: Kegan
Paul, Trench, Trubner and Co.
Davidson, D. 1985. “Deception and Division.” In Actions and Events: Perspectives
on the Philosophy of Donald Davidson, edited by Ernest LePore and Brian P.
McLaughlin. Oxford and New York: Basil Blackwell.
Foss, Jeffrey. 1980. “Rethinking Self-Deception.” American Philosophical Quarterly
17.
Haight, M. R. 1980. A Study of Self-Deception. Brighton, Sussex: Harvester Press.
Hellman, Nathan. 1983. “Bach on Self-Deception.” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 44, no. 1 : 113–120.
Leeuwen, Neil Van. 2007. “The Product of Self-Deception.” Erkenn 67 : 419– 437.
Mele, Alfred R. 1987, “Recent Work on Self-deception.” American Philosophical
Quarterly 24 : 1–17.
——— . 2001. Self-Deception Unmasked. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Nardi, Isabella. 2006. The Theory of Citrasūtras in Indian Painting: A Critical Reevaulation of their Uses and Interpretations. Abingdon: Routledge.
Nāṭyaśāstra of Bharatamuni: With the Commentary Abhinavabhāratī by Abhinavaguptācārya, vol. I. 1981. Edited by R. S. Nagar. Delhi: Parimal Publications.
Paluch, Stanley. 1967. “Self-Deception.” Inquiry 10 : 268–278.
Pears, David. 1984. Motivated Irrationality. New York: Oxford University Press.
Pollock, Sheldon. 2010. “What was Bhaṭṭa Nāyaka Saying? The Hermeneutical
Transformation of Indian Aesthetics.” In Epic and Argument in Sanskrit Literary
History: Essays in Honor of Robert P. Goldman, edited by Sheldon Pollock,
pp. 143–184. Delhi: Manohar.
Rorty, Amélie Oksenberg. 1980, “Self-Deception, Akrasia and Irrationality.” Social
Science Information 19 : 905–922.
Sinha, Jadumath. 1958. Indian Psychology. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Śrīmadbhagavadgītā: With the Commentaries of Śaṅkara, Ānandagirī, Nīlakaṇṭha
et al. 1978. Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal.
Tantrāloka: With Viveka Commentary of Jayaratha. 1987. Edited by R. C. Dwivedi
and Navajivan Rastogi. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Yogasūtra: With the Vārttika of Vijñānabhikṣu. See Yogavārttika of Vijñānabhikṣu
1981.
Yogavārttika of Vijñānabhikṣu. . . . 1981–. Edited by T. S. Rukmani. Delhi: Munshiram
Manoharlal Publishers.

Sthaneshwar Timalsina

121

