Journal of Indian Philosophy
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10781-020-09439-w

(0123456789().,-volV)
(0123456789().,-volV)

Aham, Subjectivity, and the Ego: Engaging the Philosophy
of Abhinavagupta
Sthaneshwar Timalsina1,2

© Springer Nature B.V. 2020

Abstract This paper engages Abhinavagupta’s (11th C.) philosophy of “aham,” “I”
or “I-am,” in a global philosophical platform. Abhinavagupta reads aham to ground
speech in experiencing and expressing subjectivity. The aham, in this background,
has three distinctive topographies: aham as the ego of the empirical subject, aham as
the subject of experience that objectifies the ego, and aham as the ego that embodies
the totality (It is generally problematic to assign any specific concept to a particular
philosopher. For example, the all-embracing nature of aham is already found in
Utpala’s writings (Dyczkowski 1990, p. 11). Nemec (2011, p. 42) reiterates the fact
that the concept of pūrṇāhantā or the vocabulary to support this concept is absent in
Somānanda. Besides Abhinava, I am incorporating later Śākta commentarial texts in
this analysis. My justification for giving Abhinava main credit is that he formally
established this concept and later commentators primarily expand upon his insights.
See also Bäumer (2011, pp. 101–124). While aham in its most exalted sense relates
to the absolute I-consciousness that embraces the totality, it immanently encloses all
individualities within its embrace, enveloping all to find a singular identity through
its transcendental gaze. Aham in this sense is the “I-am” in which all those within
the parameters discover their individuality while also finding collectivity. It is the
I-sense that determines or delimits the parameters of the body, and in this sense
aham also stands for the embodied self-experience.
Keywords aham · ego · subjectivity · ānanda · Abhinavagupta ·
Finite element analysis

& Sthaneshwar Timalsina
samvidullasa@gmail.com;
timalsin@sdsu.edu
1

San Diego State University, 11289 Silver Buckle Way, San Diego, CA 92127, USA

2

Department of Religious Studies, San Diego State University, San Diego, CA 92182, USA

123

S. Timalsina

Abbreviations
APS Ajadapramātrtāsiddhi
˙
˙
PTV Parātrı̄śikāvivarana
˙
TĀ
Tantrāloka
YH Yoginı̄hrdaya
˙

Background
The objective of this essay is to engage the concept of “aham,” “I” or “I-am,” in
Abhinavagupta’s (11th C.) philosophy in a broader perspective.1 My approach is
mostly exegetical.2 I read select examples from Utpaladeva (10th C.) and use other
references only to buttress their arguments. My focus is on “aham,” acronymically
read in triadic and dyadic forms. These philosophers read aham to ground speech in
experiencing and expressing subjectivity.3 The aham, I argue, has three distinctive
topographies: aham as the ego of the empirical subject, aham as the subject of
experience that objectifies the ego, and aham as the ego that embodies the totality.
Again, the word totality here is not to be read in the Hegelian sense, as this “aham”
retains its generative power, it embodies diversity within, and in many regards is an
assemblage of mutually exclusive-inclusive self-determining potentialities (śakti/
mātṛkā). While aham in its most exalted sense relates to the absolute I-consciousness that embraces the totality, it immanently encloses all individualities within its
embrace, enveloping all to find a singular identity through its transcendental gaze.
Aham in this sense is the “I-am” in which all those within the parameters discover
their individuality while also finding collectivity. It is the I-sense that determines or
delimits the parameters of the body, and in this sense aham also stands for the
embodied self-experience.

1

Dyczkowski in Self-awareness, own awareness, and egoity, © Author, 1990, p. 11). Nemec (The
ubiquitous Śiva: Somānanda’s Śivadrsti and his tantric interlocutors, Oxford University Press, New York,
˙˙˙concept of pūrṇāhantā or the vocabulary to support this concept is
2011, p. 42) reiterates the fact that the
absent in Somānanda. Besides Abhinava, I am incorporating later Śākta commentarial texts in this
analysis. My justification for giving Abhinava main credit is that he formally established this concept and
later commentators primarily expand upon his insights. See also Bäumer (Abhinavagupta’s Hermeneutics
of the Absolute: Anuttaraprakriyā: An Interpretation of his Parātrı̄śikā Vivarana, D. K. Printworld, Delhi,
˙
2011, pp. 101–124.
2

If explored historically, this concept of affirmative “aham” is not just an evolution of ideas within
Śaiva/Śākta monism but this is also a result of a sustained dialogue with the Buddhist philosophers. For
the conversation of these ideas, see Eltschinger and Ratié (2007) and Ratié (2007). For a comparative
approach, see Ganeri (2011) and MacKenzie (2011).
3

For this identification, see for example Parātrı̄śikāvivarana (PTV), pp. 4–5: sā ca śaktiḥ lokānugra˙
havimarśamayī prathamataḥ parāmarśamayyā paśyantyā
āsūtrayiṣyamāṇānantaśaktiśatāvibhinnā
prathamataraṃ paramahāmantramayyām adeśakālakalitāyāṃ saṃvidi nirūḍhā, tāvat paśyantyudbhaviṣyaduktipratyuktyavibhāgenaiva vartate |. Read also Padoux in Vāc: The concept of the word in
selected Hindu Tantras, Sri Satguru Publications, Delhi, 1990, pp. 190, 380, and 386. For the analysis of
phonetic expression in light of triadic mysticism that becomes central to the analysis of aham, also see
Tantrāloka (TĀ), Chapter 3, verses 66–234. For the expression of speech in accordance with the
manifestation of aham, see TĀ, Chapter 3, verses 236–240.

123

Aham, Subjectivity, and the Ego: Engaging the Philosophy of Abhinavagupta

The more we read Utpala and Abhinava, the more we realize that the subject of
experience in their system is plastic. Yogic practices are meticulously designed to
reinforce the idea that one’s own sense of “I-am” is subject to expansion or
blossoming. At the basic level, there is no categorical difference between human
and animal ego-sense, as this is determined by the body. This also means that our
primary sense of self-consciousness relates to our bodily consciousness and bodily
being. The plasticity of the ego comes into play when we engage the way these
philosophers understand speech: not just that our self-awareness has semanticity, it
is also flexible.4 Mantric speech is utilized to reinforce the idea that one’s own sense
of “I-am” is in fact the object to be constructed by meticulous visualization. While
at times this speech is depicted as mantric, meaning it has transformative power,
most often this remains secular speech, or the mechanism of conceptualization that
constitutes the foundational concepts of the self and other. Reading aham, therefore,
is not a project of taxonomy but of phenomenology.
From an Abhinavaguptian perspective, the self has both transcendent and
immanent domains. It can be expunged of horizon, or of the sense of interiority and
exteriority, while retaining its dynamism. When consciousness is actualizing its own
immanence, it is transcendent (viśvottīrṇa). This is because it is not expressing itself
by means of the totality of the expressed entities. When consciousness transcends
itself and encounters the other, it is explained in terms of immanence (viśvamaya) as
this is where consciousness finds itself in the myriads of forms. This is not therefore
contradictory for consciousness to manifest as expunged of conceptualization
(nirāsaṃśa) while at the same time remain full (pūrṇa).5
From the perspective of Abhinavagupta, the evolution of the ego begins from the
self-actualization of aham as full, as the totality. This experience of allencompassing singularity of the self is not in negation of the other; the other has
not emerged from within. The aham then unfolds itself, giving rise to the manifold,
by the primordial division of subject and object. The aham, however, is not a
monadic singularity as the freedom embedded within it is defined in terms of its
mirroring or assuming the manifold. When the aham is merely gazing within, the
polarities of illumination (prakāśa) and reflexivity (vimarśa) are homogenized. In
other words, reflexivity grasps the illuminating aspect of itself while the
illuminating aspect illuminates its own reflexivity. When reflexivity is externalized,
there is the first expression of “this” (idam) and the absolute ego experiences its
singular presence, with it being divided in terms of a mere illumination and a mere
reflexivity. That is, consciousness itself constitutes its horizons and gives sense of
something being out there and subject as spatially located within.
On this backdrop, we can glean that the emergence of the embodied ego is a
gradual process that begins with the absolute ego. While the absolute ego
encompasses the totality, similar to the body determining its singular being, the
4

I am deriving this on the basis of a gradual evolution of the ego in the Trika system. Starting from an
individual ego (sakala) to the absolute, Parama Śiva, this system provides seven stages for the surge of
subjectivity.

5
Wenta (2016, pp. 364–367) interprets pūrṇa in Utpala’s writings in three distinctive senses of the
fullness of sensory experience, the fullness of I-ness, and the composite of the transmental (unmanā) with
the mind (samanā).

123

S. Timalsina

individuated ego determines itself within the epidermis, like an organ discovering
its own vitality. Just as a person can define himself based on his individual or
collective identity, so too does this aham express itself in collective as well as
individual forms. For Abhinavagupta, the real challenge is not of explaining or
categorizing aham but in nurturing the aham from its fragmented actualization to
the totalized realization. This totalization dawns with experiencing oneself as “I am
this” (so ’ham) where that which is externalized and objectified becomes one and
the subject and object interpenetrate and merge in a singular identity. The metaphor
of sexual union to describe this homogenization further highlights that while the
embrace gives the sense of oneness, this does not erase difference.6

Aham and the Lacanian Ego
Following Jacques Lacan, the jubilant moment of “aha” parallels virtual wholeness,
but since this is experienced in the initial stage of mirroring, it is not possible for
subjects to attain this wholeness again.7 That is, we are biologically conditioned in
such a way that this primordial experience is not possible to repeat. We can find
parallel to this “aha” in Abhinavagupta’s orgasmic expression of “ah,” as it is in this
moaning (śītkāra)8 that the wholeness reveals itself, and the “m” added in the “ah”
to compose “aham” or I-am, is merely the banging together (saṅghaṭṭa) of the two
polarities of revealing and reflexivity. Subjectivity (pramātṛtā) is an aftermath of
this experience. Just as aham swallows differences within, subjectivity designates
the expunging of diversity. This subjectivity, for Abhinava, can have a course from
the absolute aham to the embodied and spatio-temporally determined ahaṃkāra.
The difference is, the integral experience in innate and retraceable for Abhinava.
The freedom of consciousness, for Abhinava, lies in its capacity to remain in its
own immanence even when it transcends itself and actualizes its horizons. The
jubilant “aha” moment in Lacan or the orgasmic “aha” moment in Abhinava are not
different in phenomenology. The difference is, while the orgasmic “aha,” or the
primordial state of totality is achievable, Lacanian “aha” is biologically determined
and is accessible only as an infant. Abhinava uses the embrace of the primordial
couple, Śiva and Śakti as a metaphor to depict the mingled and as if inseparable
relation of the two domains of consciousness: prakāśa, or illumination and vimarśa
or reflexivity. Furthermore, Abhinavaguptian analysis culminates with an

6

This is one of the central themes of the Yāmala Tantras. I have addressed the dialogical aspect of
consciousness elsewhere (Timalsina 2014). For example: rudrasya rudrāyāś ca yad yāmalaṃ saṅghaṭṭaḥ
nirvibhāgapraśnottara-rūpasvarūpāmarśanaprasarād ārabhya yāvad bahir anantāparigaṇanīyasṛṣṭisaṃhārabhāsanaṃ yatrāntaḥ . . . PTV, p. 103, lines 2–4.
7

For basic Lacanian concepts, consult the entry by Adrian Jonston (2018), Jacques Lacan: https://plato.
stanford.edu/entries/lacan/
Also read Bruce 1995. Lawrence (2008, pp. 47–48, 143, 152) made first attempt to read cosmic I-sense
of pūrṇāhantā in light of Lacan.

8
For Abhinava’s application of the term śītkāra, see TĀ 3.167, 5.112. For saṅghaṭṭa, see Tantrāloka
28.47, 29.49,29.53, 29.49,29.53, 29.116, 29.136, 29.140, 29.144, 29.152, 32.56.

123

Aham, Subjectivity, and the Ego: Engaging the Philosophy of Abhinavagupta

actualization of “I am that” (so ’ham), as the moment of “ah” is not described
merely in terms of rapture but as total awakening or the recognition of the self as the
totality.
When it comes to alienation and the discovery of moi or aham, I do find
something that resonates with Lacan. Yet again, I am not reading ‘mirroring’ as with
a fixed temporal location. On the contrary, I read mirroring as an internal property
of consciousness that can manifest as the external conditions emerge. Basically,
mirroring is not a singular event. It is inherent to consciousness and it is the aham
that mirrors or simulates, both as a unitary whole that can grasp the totality of
subject and object and also as the fragmented poles of subject and object. Aham
therefore is constantly mirroring itself and this mirroring gives it diversity. For
Abhinava, this mirroring is an expression of the inherent potency of being the
manifold. The example of mirroring comes oftentimes to demonstrate a simultaneous presence of the entities that have been externalized. There is however,
another dimension of mirroring: an inverse mirroring. Once the subject actualizes its
mirror-like nature, it can trace the gaze back to its primordiality and rediscover its
pristine form. The experience of “I am that” (so ’ham), for instance, describes this
inverse mirroring where the subject takes control of the experience that is remote
but not lost. The experience engendered in this process is therefore described in
terms of “recognition” (pratyabhijñā) rather than fresh experience. That is, the
experience of tracing back to this identity unfolds as being merged with recollection
rather than in the form of pure experience.
In terms of the discovery of the ego, I do not read a line between the imaginary
and symbolic, as does Lacan. As far as the real ego is concerned, it is always in flux,
constantly interacting between the imaginary and symbolic. Nevertheless, the ego is
the sum of all possibilities and a constantly modifiable plastic entity. Abhinava uses
this plasticity as an example for the potential of the ego for self-transcendence.
Every new experience presents to the ego a new possibility and in every mode of
transformation, the ego reconstitutes itself, discovering its new identity. Even
though the transcendent self, nirāsaṃśa or devoid of concepts, is hardly given any
constitutive role, it is reasonable that every new constitution of the ego rests on this
self. It is because change implies difference and only the entity that transcends both
the differing entities can be credited for maintaining the flow. It is the freedom
inherent to consciousness that makes the shift in the ego as well as the
transcendence of the ego possible.
What is unique to Abhinava is, he does not conceive of consciousness expunged
of the potentials that embody difference. There lies some form of speech in
consciousness, even in its most pristine form, and it is for this reason that the ego
recognizes itself and differentiates among each other. There is therefore, a subtle
form of speech, even if merely in self-referential form, in the first initial gaze of the
ego actualizing itself. This is where “aham” is expressed that is both “I am” and “I.”
As “I am” it already has a semantic structure. If a line were to be drawn between
Lacan and Abhinava with regard to their understanding of what constitutes “real,”
that which is actually real for Abhinava is the pre-given, or pre-presented, preobjectified self. What Lacan calls “real,” in contrast, is a product of the imagination
in collaboration with the symbolic to generate the sense of real ego. For both,

123

S. Timalsina

phenomenal ego endures for a longer period of time, or at least maintains the
illusion of being continuously identical, with similar ego-selves constantly
modifying themselves and preserving homogeneity that is then translated into
identity.
Along these lines, the “recognition” in the initial stage that Lacan calls mirror
stage is not “mis-recognition” in Abhinavaguptian terminology. The initial stage of
fullness is “recognition” only in the sense that the nirāsaṃśa recognizes itself in
terms of fullness, but it is not a real recognition because this is the first emergence of
aham; the first encountering of the absolute ego, the first experience. It is therefore
noteworthy that “mirroring” for Lacan and Abhinava are not the same. Mirroring,
for Abhinava, is both the simulation of the ego as well as all that is externalized. It is
in the externalized world that consciousness mirrors. For Abhinava, everything that
can be objectified is objectified, including the very ego. Even the encountering of
the ego, objectifying “I-am” is itself a mirror image. Abhinava’s use of the mirror
metaphor is not an analysis of the ego per se. On the contrary, it is to explain
teleology. It is to re-educate what he calls the aspectival (sakala) ego for the
possibility of re-blossoming, or regaining fullness. This is where the philosophy of
recognition comes into play.
There is yet another dimension of the ego that Lacan does not address, the role of
saṃskāras. This ego is not merely “extimité” or internal externally, crystalizing the
desire of the other.9 For Abhinava, it primarily crystalizes its own desires from deep
seated memories, and is on this basis that Abhinava acknowledges the chain of
memory to transcend a particular embodiment. In other words, memory goes
beyond a particular individuation. The moi of Abhinava is therefore both the finite
ego that determines its extension within the body and the “aham” that circumscribes
the totality. Moreover, the other in Abhinava’s philosophy is not the ultimate or
absolute other. The parameters that determine the self and the other are not just
negotiable but can also be subsumed within the overarching aham. This also is not
the case that the ego is just the mirror of the other. The dialogical other is often the
mirror of the ego, a mutual exchange of subjectivity that makes recognition of other
egos possible even in the un-recognized state. But fundamentally, what Lacan
would call the “absolute other,” the God, is the very self for Abhinava. In the full
blossoming of the ego, the other is felt within the domain of the self. One can argue
that this position threatens the privacy of the other, as in the recognized state, the
domain of the other and that of the self are one and the same. In this sense, the
transcendent absolute other is fully revealed not when it is exposed as the other but
in the fullness of the ego. Even if the other is subsumed within the absolute ego,
making it a room without walls, the potency for individuation is not erased.
The same applies to desire. Desire in Abhinavagupta goes much deeper, as it lays
the foundation for the emergence of subjectivity. The reflexivity that transforms into
active agency, allowing the embodied ego to interact both inter-subjectively and
with objects and things, for Abhinava, is inherent to consciousness, or the self that
goes beyond the discovery of subjectivity. It is in the blueprint of consciousness that
9

The word icchā has a wide range of applications. For instance, volition, will, and desire. While I have
read icchā in this paper as ‘desire,’ this is just to engage psychoanalytical theories.

123

Aham, Subjectivity, and the Ego: Engaging the Philosophy of Abhinavagupta

desire is imprinted. In other words, it is not possible to expunge desire from
consciousness, only that the directionality of desire can be altered. Desire, in this
account, is fundamental to reflexivity. Externality and objectivation are embedded
within reflexivity, as what constitutes vimarśa is not just in being aware of itself, it
is in discovering the other. In contrast to Lacan, Abhinavaguptian desire is not
something determined by our need and demand. It is the desire that even desires the
needs. Moreover, desire is not necessarily a relationship with other. In other words,
desire is not constituted in reaction to other as even the very constitution of the
other, the mirroring requires desire. Without denying the constructive nature of
desire and also of the ego, this is to affirm that the ego and the desire that constitutes
the ego are both dynamic but their possibility is pre-given in the very formation of
the ego, which is then expressed in interaction with other subjects/objects.
Abhinava is interested in developing a soteriology that makes it possible for the
ego to rediscover itself, to rescue itself from being a simulation and actualize its
fullness, reclaiming the absolute ego. When we discuss the authentic self in
Abhinava, this is what it implies. It is the foundation wherein the ego is constituted
and is constantly being remodified. This is where we can compare jouissance with
ānanda, because just like Lacanian jouissance,10 orgasmic bliss for Abhinava is
beyond the pleasure principle and is therefore not to be confused with mere sensory
satisfaction. To extend further, ānanda retains the embodied “āhā” moment that is
explained in terms of the orgasmic embrace. This is also where we can compare the
ways transgression has been accommodated by both Abhinava and Lacan.
Nevertheless, Abhinava’s ānanda is not to be conflated with the jouissance. To
begin with, the jouissance that is beyond the pleasure principle is not ‘more
pleasure,’ not the surge of ānanda that expands and encompasses the totality the
way Abhinava would have, but instead pain. Both Lacan and Abhinava consider that
there is a limit to which subjects can experience pleasure. However, Abhinava
creates a hierarchy of subjects, successively transcending the horizons of each in
their capacity to experience ānanda and their ability to expand and encompass the
totality. For Lacan, the result of transgressing pleasure is pain. There is no growth,
no expansion in the subject’s horizon of experience, but simply subject succumbs to
pain at the apex of pleasure. This is why Lacan links jouissance to aggression of the
death drive.
For Abhinava, all drives are the drives to recognize the absolute ego, aham. Even
abnegation of subjectivity results in this account of the discovery of foundational,
overarching being, complete with bliss and awareness. It is therefore not to be
conflated with an actual death drive. In every account of self-negation, what is
confirmed is a foreground, some foundation, upon which subjectivity has exercised
its freedom of self-annihilation. The fundamental telos of the individuated ego is
therefore to “re-cognize” (pratyabhijñā) the oneness of the ‘I’ and ‘this,’ expressed
in terms of “I am that” (so ’ham).

10

See Laplanche and Pontalis (1988) and Iversen (2007) for discussion on jouissance.

123

S. Timalsina

I Am That: So ’Ham
To say that the teleology for the ego is to discover itself as the absolute ego is to
argue that every instance of consciousness is directed towards recognizing itself in
terms of “I am that” (so ’ham). There is no categorical epistemic difference in the
ego discovering objectivity and it recognizing itself as the totality. This is where
Utpala’s phenomenology encounters his teleology:
The reposing in its own essential nature or the reflexivity in the form of “I am
that” is the fulfilment of the finite reflexivity, [expressed] as “this.”11
“This,” or objectivity, according to Utpala, is a finite reflexivity, as consciousness
discovers its own finiteness when manifesting the other. Utpala consistently
describes objectivation in terms of being non-sentient (jaḍa). In other words, when
consciousness constitutes something as its own other, it also determines that entity
as non-sentient. This is why even the determination of another subjectivity relies
upon either affirming it as an extension and expression of the very self, or
ascertaining it in terms of an object. Following Bhartrhari’s treatment of the second
˙
person,12 Abhinava expands on this issue and addresses that the “you,” or second
person, is a mingling of “I am” and “this.” It has both subjective and objective
domains. The state of consciousness that recognizes “you” is distinct from the
recognition of “I am that” (so ’ham), since in the latter recognition, what was
objectivated before becomes one with the subject. Whereas, in the recognition of
‘you,’ there is a recognition of something both as object and subject. Utpala explains
this recognition further, saying, “that which manifests as this is myself, [as I] is
manifest in the forms of every single entity,” (so ’yam aham eva tattadbhāvavaicitryātmanā prakāśe iti | Ajadapramātrtāsiddhi (APS), Vrtti, verse 15). When I and
˙
˙
˙
this become one, that is, in the phenomenology of the manifestation of an object
when there is an intermingling of the subject and object, the reflexivity inherent to
consciousness is bestowed upon the object for its self-recognition.13
Utpala lays the foundation for two tiers of the ego in the following lines:
This self is twofold, finite and infinite. One restricted by the life-force etc. is
finite, and the absolute self is infinite. The resting ground of both [the egos]
and also of the consciousness of all objects is singular, as is confirmed by
synthesis. No other [foundational ground] is established.14
11
idam ity asya vicchinnavimarśasya kṛtārthatā | yā svasvarūpe viśrāntir vimarśaḥ so ’ham ity ayayam ||
APS, verse 15.
12
If compared closely, Abhinavagupta’s treatment of three persons clearly follows the way Bhartrhari
˙
analyzes the grammatical persons in the chapter Puruṣasamuddeśa of the Vākyapadīya.
13
As Utpala adds further: caitanyaprakāśatādātmyād ahaṃpratyavamarśātmā jīvitasthānīyo yadāśrayāj
jaḍam api vastu vimraṣṭṛsvabhāvapramātraikyād ahaṃbhāvaviśrānter ajaḍatvam āyāti | Vrtti of Utpala
upon APS, 15. (I have read vimarṣṭṛ here instead of vimarśṣṭṭ as it appears in the print). ˙
14

dvidhā sa eṣa evātmā mito’parimitas tathā | prāṇādinā niruddho ’ṇuḥ paramātmā tv akhaṇḍitaḥ || APS
16.
ubhayo ’py eṣa paryantabhūmiḥ sarvārthasaṃvidām | eka evānusandhānād ato ’nyo nopapaddyate ||
APS 17.

123

Aham, Subjectivity, and the Ego: Engaging the Philosophy of Abhinavagupta

My analysis of the hierarchy of the ego rests on above-mentioned parameters. Even
with regard to the premise of the analysis of aham, it is not possible to exhaust the
entire Abhinavaguptian literature in a single essay. I therefore focus primarily on the
Parātrı̄śikā-vivarana (PTV). Even in this, I am primarily analyzing the two-tier
˙
structure of the ego with a particular focus on the semantic and speech domains of
aham. Preliminarily speaking, aham stands for both “I” and “I am,” and as
Abhinava explains, this also functions as an acronym for Sanskrit phonemes, /a/-/h/.
This is to say that there is a verb expressing dynamism infused within the ego. In
other words, ego is constantly in motion. Both the phenomenology and soteriology
of ego in Abhinava follows the parameters laid out by Utpala. While this is a
monistic picture, it is not a passive singularity. Neither is there negation of
dichotomies. This actually is the singularity of contrasting and commingling
potentialities, particularly epitomized by equating the ego with mātṛkās or the
phonemes.
Aham is presented here in various ways: it is a singular indivisible entity as I; it
represents the dyad of “a” and “ha” representing the primordial couple and also
explaining two properties of consciousness; and it also has a triadic structure
explained in terms of /a/-/h/-/m/. Besides these, the term also resonates an orgasmic
expression of “ah,” stressing bliss as foundational to self-awareness. Even the
analysis of aham in dyadic terms grounds its singularity since “I” is singular, albeit
expressed in terms of the dyad of subject and object, illumination (prakāśa) and
reflexivity (vimarśa). If equated with the foundational triad of body, mind, and
speech, the ego we encounter here, with aham, is radically different from the
Cartesian ego, as this embodies both speech and the body. I have already argued for
its plasticity. Now we encounter the ego as embodied. If “I” acronymically stands
for all the phonemes and they in turn stand for all the potentialities of consciousness,
we also encounter this “I” as synthetic. At the same time, it is the ego without a
nucleus, as “I am” is identified with “I,” which in turn is a composite of all the
potentialities. Manifold, in other words, is splashing within the ego to overflow,
objectivity and manifold as its inherent nature. In essence, the ego in Abhinavaguptian paradigm is original. .
Abhinavagupta correlates the three phonemes /a/-/h/-/m/ with the triadic deities
of Parā, Parāparā, and Aparā, where the first and the last terms stand for the
transcendent and immanent, while the middle term stands for their union. A problem
with these anthropomorphized philosophical categories is that it becomes easier to
engage theology but we miss phenomenology entirely. The ego that we encounter in
light of this triad is the ego that is both transcendent and immanent, but also has a
distinctive category of the fusion of both. This also explains the modes of
consciousness that engage in a triadic parameter of inside-outside-middle, and also
suggest full transcendence. The ego in this depiction not only transcends the
manifold, it also is very much the manifold and the epistemic means to bridge the
inside and the outside. This presents us with the ego both as the manifold and also as
transcendence of the manifold, both as ontology and also as function. The
subjectivity that is subsumed under this ego, therefore, is “dynamic subjectivity” or
“subjectivity in the flux.”

123

S. Timalsina

By borrowing Bhartrhari’s analysis of three grammatical persons, Abhinavagupta
˙
explains that these three persons are phenomenologically given in terms of subject,
object, and the fusion of both. In other words, the ego or aham is a fusion of all, is
an expression of the totality, and therefore is not just in its transcendent form but
also in its most objectifiable form of the embodied ego. Abhinava explains this by
alluding to Mātrkā, the matrixes, that represent the cosmic forces depicted in terms
˙
of the Sanskrit phonemes with initial ‘a’ and the final ‘ha.’ It is in this articulation of
aham that the creative forces identified collectively in terms of Mātrkā are
˙
expressed. It is thus in the very encounter of the ego or aham that the totality is
exposed in seminal form. In Abhinava’s terms:
In this context {tatra}, that which is located exclusively in the self, that is
yoked with the property of insentience, and is therefore of the form of “nara,”
just as “the pot stays.” What is left is, this is the object of the first-person
subject. On the other hand, that which is being manifest as “this” and that which
is being summoned has the form of śakti in the sense that this is described by
the term “you”, as in, “being this” circumscribed by the sense of “being I”,
corresponding to the speaker. This is the meaning of you in the example of “you
stay,” in addition to being summoned. That is, just as “I stay”, this stays the
same way. [The subject] summons that with respect to having the form
circumscribed by the form of I which is the relishing or the wonder of
subjectivity [expressed as] freedom, as in the form of uninterrupted relishing of
subjectivity. This is the all-surpassing luminosity {bhagavatī} of Parāparā.
There then emerges the majestic Parā with the reflexive awareness of
subjectivity that is not contingent upon anything else [as it is of the character
of] uninterrupted relishing/wonder, as in “I stay.” This is where the
transcendentality (uttamatva) of the purusa lies. . . Even while being of the
˙
character of Śiva, one enters the bodies as characterized by nara and śakti by,
as if having consciousness expunged. In the examples such as “who am I?”, “I
am this,” “Oh! Me”, “shame on me”, “bravo to myself”, for instance, freedom
[that characterizes the self] is subordinated while what manifests as primary is
“thisness” as being finite, wherein arises the all-surpassing luminosity
{bhagavatī} Aparā.15
The passage above needs further unpacking. First, it is easy to miss the
phenomenological arguments in the thicket of tantric esotericism. Also, Abhinava
15
tatra yat kevalaṃ svātmany avasthitaṃ tat kevalaṃ jaḍarūpayogi mukhyatayā narātmakaṃ ghaṭas
tiṣṭhati itivad eṣa eva prathamapuruṣaviṣayaḥ śeṣaḥ | yat punar idam ityapi bhāsamānaṃ yad
āmantryamāṇatayā āmantrakāhaṃbhāvasamācchāditatadbhinnedaṃbhāvaṃ yuṣmacchabdavyapadeśyaṃ
tacchāktaṃ rūpam, tvaṃ tiṣṭhasi it yatra hi eṣa eva yuṣmacchabdārthaḥ, āmantraṇatattvaṃ ca | tathā hi
yathā ahaṃ tiṣṭhāmi tathaivāyam api iti | tasyāpi asmadrūpāvacchinnāhaṃbhāvacamatkārasvātantryam
avicchinnāhaṃcamatkāreṇaiva abhimanvāna āmantrayate, yathārthena madhyamapuruṣeṇa vyapadiśati,
seyaṃ hi bhagavatī parāparā | sarvathā punar avicchinnacamatkāranirapekṣasvātantryāhaṃvimarśe’haṃ
tiṣṭhāmīti parābhaṭṭārikodayaḥ, yatra uttamatvaṃ puruṣasya | . . . śivasvarūpam api cojjhitacidrūpam iva
naraśaktyātmakaṃ vapur āviśaty eva | ko ’haṃ, eṣo ’haṃ, aho ahaṃ, dhiṅ mām, aho mahyaṃ ityādau hi
aham iti guṇīkṛtyāvicchinnaṃ svātantryaṃ, mukhyatayā tu vicchinnaiva idantā pratīyate yatra bhagavatyā
aparāyā udayaḥ | PTV of Abhinavagupta, pp. 25–27 (Commentary upon verses 3–4).

123

Aham, Subjectivity, and the Ego: Engaging the Philosophy of Abhinavagupta

does not like to repeat things that he has said elsewhere and we need to read this
passage in light of the entire text. First of all, it is evident that “aham” is not merely
the first person but the totality of subjectivity discovered in the subjective I and
objectified “him” as well as in “you”, the fusion of both. While these three are
separate egos, aham as a singular ego also stands for the collection of all three. The
first person, in this account, is identified with the transcendent ego, as it is linked
with Parā. Aparā, or ‘not-transcendent’ is likewise equated with the third person.
Parāparā, referring to the state that stands for both the transcendent and immanent,
is equated with the second person.
As I have outlined earlier, the transcendence recognized in the state of Parā
actually denotes the immanence of consciousness as it is in this stage that the gaze
of consciousness reflexively returns to itself. The same applies to Aparā, as the
immanence of Aparā is that of consciousness transcending itself and reaching out by
both objectivating and objectifying. If we return back to aham, this is where the ego
transcends itself and objectifies the other egos. These three stages are the modes of
consciousness or the powers inherent in consciousness, expressed in terms of three
different forms of subjects. This anthropomorphism now assists us in grounding
embodied subjectivity which anticipates objectivity, and is determined in dialogue
with objectivity. Parā, in this sense, is reflexively given and therefore immanent, but
is transcendent as far as sensory perception is concerned. What constitutes the ego,
aham, is not precisely in its transcendence nor immanence but in the totality of its
expression since it is the very ego that assumes both these modalities. It is because it
is not just Parā but also the other two, including Aparā, that is integral to the ego,
aham. Borrowing from Bhartrhari, the scope of Parāparā assumes the middle
˙
ground, a compromise, between the subject and object, between exteriority and
interiority, between transcendent and immanent. Once again, these three modes are
expressions of the inherent potencies of consciousness or citi, anthropomorphized in
terms of the triadic deities.
The ego or the aham presented by Abhinava is therefore not to be reduced to how
ego is analyzed by other philosophers.16 Most importantly, it is not in its
subjectivity nor immediacy that the ego is constituted. It is not even in it being selfpresent or in sentience, as the other, the outside, is as much an integral part of aham
as the inside, the subject. Additionally, he makes semantics inextricably essential to
the ego. That is, “I am” presents itself as a subject and a predicate, and as immanent
and transcendent. It is in this “I am” that the threefold grammatical persons are
imprinted. Every experience in which the ego is confirmed has then two horizons of
subject and object. That is, it is in being in the world or in directionality that the
aham expresses or actualizes itself.
What the first-person subject that has been objectified and treated as the third
person lacks is reflexivity, the essential precondition for being a subject. On the
other hand, if semantics bestow reflexivity upon inanimate objects, they relish
subjectivity, that is, the experience of “so ’ham” or “I am that.” This is to say that
16

In particular, this is not the Cartesian or Husserlian Ego. While Freud’s analysis of the unconscious
subverts the Cartesian ego as it rejects the equation among subject, ego, and consciousness, this also is not
the Abhinavaguptian aham.

123

S. Timalsina

when the other enters the periphery of self-awareness, it also borrows its
subjectivity: the outside becomes the inside. But it is also where the inside
becomes outside, or it objectifies itself in the midst of the myriad of things. The
discovery of the absolute ego, therefore, is not in finding transcendental subjectivity
—which does not exist, but in a dialogue that infuses the inside with the outside.
The second person, “you” presents a unique case as this is not pure objectivity, it is
not pure externality, but neither is this the subject in its immanence. The dialogical
expression of consciousness grounds the second person “you,” as it is in this person
that both horizons merge. When the “you” is objectified, there is already a semantic
structure, as it is the subject of the speech act that makes the other subject as its
object, calling him “you,” bringing the sheer invisible subject to its visibility,
making it objectifiable.
The plasticity that we find in consciousness expresses itself by means of pratibhā
or creativity. This stands for inherent creativity and is a foreground for the
emergence of the ego, aham. The triad explained above, both in deified form and in
the triadic structure of grammatical persons, is this very pratibhā, the potential of
self-expression. Here again, we have to separate the esoteric discourse and the
anthropomorphized form of Pratibhā for any philosophical conversation. What we
glean yet again from this is that externality and internality or being an object and
subject are thus modes of the same ego, aham, and it is this euphoric expression of
the ego that is what we call the manifold. Grasping of this manifold is possible when
the consciousness manifests in the triadic form of subject, object, and their meeting
ground, a state being inter-penetrated by both, a chiasm. Aparā literally translates as
the “other.” Noteworthy here is, Aparā is as much an integral mode of
consciousness as Parā, and she enjoys as much subjectivity as Parā does. It
therefore makes sense to explain Aparā as the other subject, the subject that has
been objectified. Rather than this being a state of materiality that has expunged
consciousness from within, this is the subjectivity that has accomplished its process
of externalizing itself and discovering its objectivity.
What makes objectivity possible, then, is the very externalized subjectivity and it
is in the absolute ego that all the opposite poles are subsumed. The second person,
you, which the Sanskrit grammarians call the “middle person” (madhyama-puruṣa),
is where both the subjectivity and objectivity are merged. And it is in you, the
chiasm, that the fluidity of these two poles is epitomized. Consciousness,
accordingly, is the foundation, with the potential of pratibhā or creativity that
makes the “resting within” as well as “expressing” possible. Therein the selfexpression of consciousness first manifests as the absolute ego and then in the
triadic form, gradually objectifying itself. Since “aham” is not an expression of
difference, there is no categorical difference when it comes to consciousness that
can be constituted as subject and object. In other words, subjectivity is not a
precondition for consciousness and objectivity is not outside of its periphery. Just as
both constitute two poles of the same ego, the very expression of the ego is a
condition determined by the freedom inherent to consciousness. The experience of
“I am,” therefore, is not a mere phenomenology, as the ego, or aham is both
ontology and semantics. It embodies not just the transcendent pole of experience but
also that what is experienced. At the same time this experience is not bereft of

123

Aham, Subjectivity, and the Ego: Engaging the Philosophy of Abhinavagupta

speech, as aham or “I am” is given as semantically structured in the first
encountering of the ego.
There is no categorical difference between ātman or the self, which also
describes ‘inherent nature’ and aham, the absolute ego. When a contrast is made, it
is in relation to the embodied ego that determines self-experience within the
epidermis. Abhinavagupta says with regard to the self that:
The self is the life, the essence, devoid of any limitation, a unique form of
experiencing within. This is the reflexive awareness in the form of “I” that has
the character of resting on freedom that is characterized as not relying on
anyone else.17
Noteworthy here is, the experience of ego is not described in terms of bodha or
jñāna or other similar terms to mean ‘awareness.’ It is rather explained in terms of
parāmarśa. This term, along with others like pratyavamarśa are synonymous to
vimarśa, reflexive awareness. In the case of parāmarśa, there are both the
parameters of without and within (para + ā(ṅ)+ √mṛś), and therefore the
consciousness identified in terms of parāmarśa encapsulates both the immanent
and transcendent forms of experiences, the reflexivity that circumscribes itself in its
exteriority and discovers itself within. There is a subtle form of recognition, a
judgmental consciousness, on the foundation of parāmarśa.
“I am that” (so ’ham), in this account, is the real parāmarśa, or reflexively being
aware of one’s own ego. Consciousness in essence manifests as a loop in which
there are not just objective and subjective poles but a dialogical middle ground
where the ego is externalized and the object is subjectified. This is the triadic
account of the ego.

The Dyadic Structure of the Ego
The above conversation has brought to light that the ego is an integral state of the
triadic expression that accounts for the “middle ground” besides the two poles of
subjectivity and objectivity. Sanskrit terminology of madhyamapuruṣa or the
“middle person” explains this better than the term second person, as according to
this depiction, “you” refers both to subject and object. Following this account,
“you” is not just an objectivation of the other ego, it is also an acknowledgement of
subjectivity. This triadic depiction is both a taxonomy as well as the functionalist
account of the ego. As for its ontology, the dyadic structure explains it better.
A superficial reading of the dyad is that /a/ and /a/ stand for the first and the last
phonemes, and again acronymically the word aham stands for the totality that is
expressed by means of prakāśa or illumination and vimarśa or reflexivity.
Extending the earlier conversation further, this dyad stands for intersubjectivity
between two dialogical subjects but it does not circumscribe that which has been
expunged from the scope of the ego. The dyadic structure is therefore expressed
17
ātmā jīvitabhūtaḥ sārasvabhāvo vicchedaśūnyo ’ntarabhyupagamakalpo ’nanyamukhapre-ṣitatvasvātantryaviśrāntirūpo ’ham iti parāmarśaḥ | (Īśvarapratyabhijñā Vimarśinı̄, Vol. 1, pp. 302–303).

123

S. Timalsina

before externality arises within the realm of consciousness. If this is a dialogue, it is
between two coextensive subjects, between two subjects without boundaries. What
is buried underneath the metaphor of two polarities is that /a/ and /h/ are not two
ontologically distinctive categories, and that the primary aham antecedes the dyadic
analysis of consciousness in terms of prakāśa and vimarśa. That is, the separation is
merely an analytical device, a conceptual framework for analyzing properties of a
single event, similar to breaking a word into prefix and the base and suffix. Just as in
the triadic expression of the ego, there is no ontological division in this dyad that is
collectively expressed in aham. Abhinava credits Somānanda for this dyadic
interpretation when he cites a passage that identifies /a/ with Śiva.18 What goes
without saying is that the second phoneme /h/ stands for Śakti. Abhinava’s
contribution here is in the equation of the primordial dyad with two functions of
consciousness. Abhinava explains aham by adopting this paradigm in the following
lines:
The reflexive consciousness (parāmarśa) when it is full (nirbhara) within the
non-dual nature of śiva and śakti, having the character of the absolute
[referring to the phoneme /a/] and the reflexive consciousness [referring to the
phoneme /h/], is called “I am.”19
Even terms such as samarasa or “mingling of the fluids” and yāmala, or pair, are not
meant to establish an ontological divide. On the contrary, these tropes are there to
reject fundamental dualism of what is phenomenologically presented in two poles of
subject and object, or as illumination and reflexivity. Just as reflexive awareness is
not a second order consciousness, or a higher gaze, objectivity is also not distinct
from subjectivity: these two poles are constituted within the ego, aham, and they
appear as opposites only in the post-experiential analytical mode of consciousness.
This is to reject that pure phenomenology supports dualism.
I have compared above the fragmenting of the ego in terms of the dyad and triad
with grammatical analysis. This is to say that pure phenomenology reveals the
absolute ego effulgent in its totality and what is given to us in dyadic and triadic
structures are post-experiential, analytical states, similar to what the Sanskrit
grammarians call prakriyā daśā or a “state of analysis,” a hypothesized state of
morphing words where words are broken into prefix, base, and suffix, and where
separate meanings are derived from each part. Even then, grammarians maintain
that meaning is integral. It is the same consciousness that manifests and also
reflexively grasps its own act of being manifest, and these two functions of
consciousness inherently reveal dynamism. Once we acknowledge the ego with its
own syntactic structure, we can easily derive the primacy of operation or the
primacy of action because Sanskrit semantics confirm the primacy of the verb in a
sentence. The ego is understood in this sense as an integral state that embodies both
modes of consciousness. Along the same lines, subjectivity is subsumed within the
18

tad uktaṃ śrīsomānandapādair nijavivṛttau - a-bījaṃ śuddhaśivarūpam | PTV, p. 20:1–2.

19

anuttaravimarśātmaśivaśaktyadvayātmani| parāmarśo nirbharatvād aham ity ucyate tadā || TĀ III.203.
tasya pratyavamarśo yah paripūrno ’hamātmakah | sa svātmani svatantratvād vibhāgam avabhāsayet || TĀ
˙
˙
˙
3. 235.

123

Aham, Subjectivity, and the Ego: Engaging the Philosophy of Abhinavagupta

absolute ego, maintaining that pramātṛtā or subjectivity as well as prameyatā or
objectivity are circumscribed within aham. In this dyadic presentation, the phoneme
/m/ depicts the seminal drop, the center, bindu, which in essence is the confluence of
these two polarities. If this bindu is the center of a maṇḍala, this is not in addition to
the polarities when we unpack the metaphor of the genesis of the drop. In a
mandalic depiction, the drop stands for the subject with its periphery being
˙ ˙˙
compared to the body. Yet again, this neither gives primacy to the drop nor poses
any form of dichotomy.

The Morphology of the Ego
As evident in the above conversations, tantric texts excavate deeper into the
meaning of the ego by means of the morphology of “aham.” Most scholars fail to
read the philosophical framework for such an analysis, as the depiction is rich with
technical terminology and infused with tantric esotericism. With an intent to
uncover philosophy buried under tantric esotericism, I read the following passage
from Saṅketapaddhati:20
[The phoneme] /a/ is the first among all the phonemes and is luminosity and
the supreme Śiva. /h/ or the last [phoneme] is of the character of Śakti [or
kalā], which is known in terms of reflexivity. . . The head of the first part [or
the phoneme /a/] is identified as Raudrı̄, the face as Vāmā, arms as Ambikā,
and Jyesthā relates to the tip of the nails. [With regard to the last phoneme /h/]
˙˙
desire (icchā) constitutes the head, action (kriyā) the torso, and cognition
(jñāna) constitutes the feet. The resting energy (śāntā) [or the last aspect of /h/
] is located in the middle of the heart.21
If we ignore technical terms and anthropomorphized concepts, we derive the first
phoneme /a/ and the last /h/ as integral wholes on their own that can be analyzed in
four parts each. Aham, therefore, is the eleventh, if we consider this as yet another
integral whole.22 Or, the ego is an emergent structure that has within it at first
instance, illumination and reflexivity. Accordingly, both illumination and reflexivity
have four aspects, expressed in terms of distinctive dynamic potencies.
If we analyze the eight constituent potentialities that are morphed into the
absolute ego, we derive a unique perspective. Ambikā, the last of the aspects within
/a/ relates to seeing or actualizing the expression of the world and this is also
identified as absolute speech that has not been objectified (parā vāc).23 Vāmā, the
first of the aspects embedded within /a/, is defined as the force that emits or releases
20

This text is not currently available and I am using the passages based on citations.

21

akāraḥ sarvavarṇāgryaḥ prakāśaḥ paramaḥ śivaḥ | hakāro ’ntyaḥ kalārūpo vimarśākhyaḥ prakīrtitaḥ||.
. . ādāv asya śiro raudrī vaktraṃ vāmā prakīrtitā | ambikā bāhur ity uktā jyeṣṭhā caiva nakhāgragā || icchā
śiraḥpradeśasthā kriyā ca tadadhogatā | jñānā pādagatā hy asya śāntā hṛnmadhyagā bhavet ||
Saṅketapaddhati. Cited in the Artharatnāvalı̄ commentary upon Nityāsodaśikārnava, p. 35.
˙ ˙
˙
22
For the elevenfold analysis of aham, see Vidyānanda’s Artharatnāvalı̄, Nityāsodaśikārnava, p. 35.
˙ ˙
˙
23
ātmanaḥ sphuraṇaṃ paśyed yadā sā paramā kalā | ambikārūpam āpannā parā vāk samudīritā ||
Yoginı̄hrdaya (YH) I.36.
˙

123

S. Timalsina

(metaphorically “vomits”) the world out from within the belly of consciousness.24
This is also the stage where the speech reflexively actualizes itself, or comes to the
stage of paśyantī vāc or the speech that has not been separated from within
consciousness. Two additional states of Jyesthā and Raudrı̄ relate to the further
˙˙
expressed forms of speech, madhyamā or the “middle” and vaikharī or the expressed
25
speech.
Just as the aspects of /a/ are linked with speech, the aspects of /h/ explicitly relate
to desire/volition (icchā), cognition (jñāna) and dynamism or action (kriyā).
“Aham,” in this account, is both the speech in immanent and transcendent forms as
well as the articulation of consciousness in terms of volition, emergence of
consciousness with its directionality, and the dynamism where it incorporates
physicality. Aham therefore is not just the consciousness directed towards the
physical object, it also is physicality, as epitomized in embodiment. If we bracket all
the technical terms, what we derive is that there is no ego in this paradigm in
isolation from speech, desire and action. Ego, therefore, is the dynamic force that
expresses itself or expunges from its transcendence toward objectivity. Desire is its
integral form, as there is no ontology of the ego in isolation of desire. The potencies
within the ego are called as such, following YH (I.41) because they “manifest the
world within itself and also without.”26 The ego, then, is the totality, and it is within
the ego that subjectivity and objectivity are carved. Even then, exteriority is first
constituted within the ego, before the fragmentation or before being determined as
the center and the periphery.
When we reflect upon commonsense experience, we immediately encounter the
bifurcation of subjectivity and objectivity. And this is what the division between /a/
and /h/ relates to. The above passage dilutes even the distinction between prakāśa
and vimarśa wherein externality is attributed to reflexive consciousness. It is
because the two primary modes of the surge for externality both relate to the first
phoneme /a/, also identified as prakāśa or illumination. These are:
1 Seeing or actualizing the blossoming of oneself as the world, identified as
Ambikā.
2 The externalization of the world that first manifests within ego, identified as
Vāmā.
Accordingly, illumination or prakāśa is a synthetic unity of four distinctive
functions, and this is the same case with reflexivity or vimarśa. What is lost in this
exposition is that aham antecedes this bifurcation and all we can say is the analysis
of the potentialities are similar to doing morphology for deriving a terminal
meaning.

24

vāmā viśvasya vamanād aṅkuśākāratāṃ gatā || YH I.37.

25

jñānaśaktis tathā jyeṣṭhā madhyamā vāg udīritā ||YH I.38 . . . kriyāśaktis tu raudrīyaṃ vaikharī
viśvavigrahā || YH I.40.
26

bhāsanād viśvarūpasaya svarūpe bāhyato ’pi ca| etāś catasra śaktyas tu. . . . || YH I.41.

123

Aham, Subjectivity, and the Ego: Engaging the Philosophy of Abhinavagupta

Ego Embodies Speech (vāc))",5,2,1,0,150mm,150mm,5mm,100mm>
As we peel off layers from the text cited above, what we encounter is that aham or
ego is the will that “sees” its own externalization or blossoming and that actualizes
its othering by means of discovering a cognitive horizon and by exerting action that
requires corporeality. This at the same time is an integral form of the speech that
gradually morphs into the expressed words, starting from its absolute state of Parā
that is identical to pure consciousness to its articulated form of vaikharī where
corporeality and physical action are central. The body, mind and speech, are thus
already interwoven within the very fabric of the absolute ego. Rather than it being a
transcendent subjective pole, this is the potency that encloses within itself all the
dichotomies. Ego therefore is both the potency and its expression, as this embodies
both the speech and volition wherein corporeality is explained in terms of the
morphing of volition.
Parā, the latency identified in terms of speech, embodies both the signifier and the
signified and is therefore the foreground for the speech to manifest. It is this
foundation that has the zeal towards effulgence, a dynamism that finds its
completion with externalization. The drive for differentiation is embedded within
this seminal speech, as this is the first amongst the ripples within the absolute ego
that emits the world outside, or more literally, vomits externality, making it possible
for consciousness to constitute the other. This emergence of externality or the first
mirroring of consciousness is identified with speech paśyantī, as this is where what
has been externalized is being gazed upon. It is in this stage of speech that the
expression and the expressed are inseparable. It is where sense and reference are not
split apart. Moreover, it is where the self-seeing consciousness and its articulation in
terms of speech are not separated. However, it is also the stage where the inside and
outside are conceived upon. This also is the foundation where volition (icchā)
emanates.
The next stage of speech identified as madhyamā conceptually resonates the
grammarian’s “middle person” (madhyama puruṣa) where subjective and objective
commingle. It is because this “intermediate” speech retains its subjective character,
its interiority, its immanence, as well as its exteriority, as this is fully objectified by
the subject. This is also the stage of jñāna, cognition, of judgmental consciousness
or of propositional knowledge. This is where conceptualization becomes manifest.
Or, the subject can distinguish a concept as a concept and a reference as a reference.
Finally, the most externalized form of speech is vaikharī which also is the
articulation of the potencies for action. The fundamental divide between the
signifier and the signified are thus subsumed within the absolute ego aham that
embodies the potentialities constituting the fundamental divide of /a/ and /h/ which
blossom in the form of articulated speech on one hand and dynamism and
materiality on the other.
Speech, in this paradigm, is not a vessel to carry meaning, as the objective world
penetrates the very being of the speech. We cannot conceive of paśyantī without
having the reference intermingled with the sign. There is no truth that transcends the
absolute ego and there is no objectivity that is beyond the scope of speech. Both the

123

S. Timalsina

propositions, that language is meaningful only in conveying the truth that escapes its
grasp, or that there is no truth for language to describe since language is selfreferential, fail to recognize the embedded creative thrust that the vāc embodies.
This is not about it referring itself or about signifying something else but it is in
actively and agentively creating something that transcends the parameters of speech
that the novelty of speech lies.
Accordingly, the emergence of volition and speech are simultaneous. Volition,
just like paśyantī, retains double intentionality, with it being directed towards
objects while at the same time revealing itself to consciousness, which is its very
inner fabric. The approach to exfoliate desire from consciousness, to trace back to
pure consciousness, is futile in this paradigm, as desire is what constitutes
consciousness; it is one of its inherent potentialities. There is always some form of
intentionality, even in consciousness objectifying itself within this paradigm.
Therefore, even to expunge consciousness of its intentionality is not possible.
A question emerges, what is nirāśaṃśa, free of conceptualization then? I read
this as identical to what Abhinava identifies as the state of Bhairava wherein the
paradoxes reside not as paradoxes but subsumed under the gaze of Bhairava. This is
fully blossomed active subjectivity that not only circumscribes the totality but also
transcends the totality: it is both transcendent and immanent.
This state is metaphorically described as empty (riktā) and full (pūrṇā). The gaze
of Bhairava describes this state with his bulging eyes glaring outside while the gaze
remains inward. The paradox intended here is that consciousness is simultaneously
expressed in terms of the totality but is still retaining its pure phenomenology. Both
speech and desire are inherent within the “I-am,” or consciousness affirming itself,
depicted as Bhairava. Purity of consciousness is not therefore a lack of potentials, as
all the horizons of consciousness merge in this inward gaze that circumscribes the
totality and expresses itself as “I-am.” Just as paśyantī expresses the reflexive aspect
of speech that is still object-directed, desire fulfils itself by means of intentionality
or its object-directedness without being expunged of the foundational consciousness
in the very fabric of being. This is to say that desire is expressed in a stage that is inbetween subjectivity and objectivity, a reflexive flash that grasps itself being
objectified. There is no materialized desire that is expunged of reflexivity in this
paradigm. This is because desire is the articulation of this very reflexivity.
If speech is the means by which subjectivity is actualized, what is affirmed in this
recognition is not something expunged of speech: this is the speech, knowing itself,
that confirms subjectivity. Madhyamā, therefore, is not just a stage of speech
manifest in the conceptual form, it is also the subject discovering its objectivation. It
is in the concept or in the realm of immanence that the subject first encounters itself.
With regard to the gazing subject, madhyamā is fully objectified, is external to the
subject, or is phenomenologically given in its objectified form. However,
madhyamā does not transcend itself by means of self-objectivation; it is still
contained within the mind-body complex. This resonates the stage of subjectivity
that has been objectified but not expressed outside.
The objectivity that finds its first expression in paśyantī is fully blossomed in this
“intermediate” ground while still being circumscribed within the periphery of
subjectivity. The bodily subject confines the objectified consciousness in the form of

123

Aham, Subjectivity, and the Ego: Engaging the Philosophy of Abhinavagupta

concepts even though this has been ejected outside of the horizon of the subject,
with the subject splitting itself from the body, pulling as if outside and accessing the
body as if from outside. The subject that was not separated from what was there to
unfold as object under the state of paśyantī is now completely separated in this
intermediate zone, creating for the first time an immanent horizon. While in
paśyantī the very gaze is the speech and this is both subject and object, here in the
intermediate zone, objectification has been accomplished, having the conscious gaze
expunged from what now has been externalized.
In all accounts, the inherent dynamism of consciousness is central to the analysis
of the absolute ego. If we look for the defining terms to explain this state, what we
encounter are the terms such as “throbbing” (sphurattā), “splendor” (ullāsa),
“spreading” (vistāra), “wave” (ūrmi), or “blossoming” (vikāsa), each expressing
some form of dynamism. Even in its singularity, the absolute ego is therefore
teeming with the potentials of the manifold. This therefore is not the totality that
absolves differences, but rather, this is the holographic singularity with each
possibility replicating within. The manifold, in this account, is the aham actualizing
itself: just as it regains its absolute ego by the recognition in terms of “I am that” (so
’ham), it actualizes its potentials, or better put, the potentials recognize their being
within the manifold. If we describe pure phenomenology as the absolute ego
recognizing itself, the world is the śaktis or the potentials recognizing themselves. In
other words, there is no state that is encompassed by the two modes of
consciousness described in terms of illumination (prakāśa) and reflexivity
(vimarśa).
Creation or the expression of the inherent latencies is therefore to be understood
as the “surplus” in the mode of transformation. Pariṇāma is not merely an alteration
of the structure; there are new emergent properties that are additional to the
potentials embedded within the cause. The point is, these properties do not exceed
the latencies that are determined within the singularity of the absolute ego.
Pariṇāma, therefore, is not merely a reassembly of the forms but of gaining
something new. The metaphoric blossoming explains the fact that creation is not a
mere alteration of the structure. There are no flowers in the seed but only potentials.
Creation discovers newness in a way that every emergent structure is unique but at
the same time there resides some form of homogeneity, identity, between the cause
and the effect. What constitutes one as the cause and the other as effect is not the
diametric opposition, but it is the surplus that the effect makes in being different.
There never is a state in which aham is bereft of these powers. Nor is consciousness
expunged of its power to express by means of speech. It is in this effulgence that the
aham discovers its fullness.

The Dynamism of the Ego
What I need to reiterate before finishing this conversation is that both the aspects
that constitute the ego are described in terms of potentialities, and this is the case
with the potentialities that they do not rest in passivity. The aham or the ego, then, is
not an object among objects, nor a pole against the other, an object. It is the

123

S. Timalsina

constantly unfolding dynamism that is pre-given in the poles of subjectivity and
objectivity. If we cannot conceive of aham without vimarśa, we cannot likewise
conceive of vimarśa as passive. Aham, then, is dynamic, that the absolute ego is
constantly unfolding itself and as it unfolds, the totality of being becomes equated
with the totality of things. The essential fabric that constitutes the aham is its
immanence, and so there is no moment when it manifests as fragmented. Even in it
“splitting itself” and discovering the transcendental object, it retains to some extent
the sense of fullness. The dynamic nature of aham does not preclude it from
assuming spatio-temporality, neither does this mean that this is spatio-temporally
finite. On the contrary, this dynamism as an inherent dimension of aham makes
spatio-temporality possible, allowing directionality for consciousness. Aham, along
these lines, is not a mere vimarśa, a mere reflexive mode, it is also parāmarśa, a
consciousness that epitomizes an inverse gaze. It is in this bi-directional effulgence
of consciousness that the concept of mantra is conceived in tantrism. Accordingly,
just as speech expresses itself and divides itself as the signifier and the signified, it
can trace itself back to its pristine state and this is what mantras are for. Speech,
therefore, assumes both poles of uncovering the absolute ego by means of inward
flow as well as projecting the external and being identified with it. Because every
articulation has the same Parā as the foundation, the absolute ego is inscribed in
every mode of expression. Since the absolute speech of Parā antecedes every
instance of subjectivity, the vāc underscored here is not a mere vessel for meaning
but an articulation of the absolute ego to express its manifold.
The metaphors of the mirror image or simulation miss the point of the absolute
ego confining itself within the body and turning into an embodied ego. A more
suitable metaphor would be that of a hologram, for each and every ego retains every
single potential, albeit in seminal form, of the absolute ego. Therefore, the
embodied aham is not categorically distinct from the absolute aham. Just as being
embodied and actualizing the manifold is an expression of the intrinsic potentials of
the absolute aham, so also is the transformation or the evolution of the ego in
different stages. Every single potential within the aham depicted above comes in
iconic form; every aspect retains the potentials to be fully embodied. Returning to
vāc, it is the very life that pulsates first in terms of speech and it is in this living that
the being discovers the rapture of being: a circle completed in the act of selfrecognition. If “I am” incorporates both life and speech, living and self-expression
that incorporate speech are not two distinctive modes of being.
It is the very being that expresses itself through vitality and speech and these
aspects are integral to the absolute ego. Therefore, it is while in the body that the
ego discovers its felt and tangible domains and self-recognition is possible. It is not
that embodied ego needs to be liberated from bodily bondage. If embodiment is one
extreme of the expression of the being, reversing the gaze to the immanent, then
absolute ego is the other. It is in materiality that the potentials are expressed and it is
in this lived moment that the recognition of the self-embeddedness of the totality
becomes possible. Every form of objectivity, every dust particle in a sense, is
teeming with life in its potential form, and when it is expressed, vimarśa actualizes
itself. Furthermore, there is no subjective experience removed from the dynamism
expressed in the dichotomous yet complementary terms of prakāśa and vimarśa.

123

Aham, Subjectivity, and the Ego: Engaging the Philosophy of Abhinavagupta

When we synthesize all these aspects, we come to the conclusion that the self is
inherently dynamic = saspandam ātmatattvam, rather than resting and expunged of
creativity.
Every mode of actualizing subjectivity implies recognizing this inherent
dynamism within. Furthermore, experiencing the self-nature or encountering one’s
own subjectivity equates with experiencing freedom, the freedom that demands its
totalization, its enveloping all that is there, with it assuming externality and grasping
that what has been externalized. Every instance of experiencing subjectivity is thus
the expression of the powers inherent to consciousness and this expression includes
actualization not just of the self as the self but also of what has been expunged from
within the periphery of the ego; the world that manifests as something other is now
recognized within the domains of the own expressive powers of the reflexively
gazing self. Recognition of the self, in this reading, is not about negating
subjectivity and one’s embodied being. On the contrary, it is experiencing the
absolute ego within the embodied ego; it is allowing the totality to manifest while in
the body. Therefore, to experience oneself as the pulsating heart in the dyadic form
of Śiva and Śakti is diametrically different from the approach of expunging the self
from within experience.
The model of causality that explains the manifold while retaining the singularity
of the absolute ego in this platform is that of expression (abhivyakti) combined with
transformation (pariṇāma). While the second category in this explains the effect
without making the cause irrecoverable, the first explains the emergence of the
potentials that are latent in the cause but are not accessible without their expression
in the form of the effect. Accordingly, the two poles of subjectivity and objectivity
and their mingling in embodiment is an expression or blossoming of the ego, aham,
that has all potentials in seminal form. Amrtānanda therefore explains that:
˙
atrotpādanaṃ nāma kāraṇe sata eva kāryasya sphuṭīkaraṇam |27
Emergence here means the vivification of the effect that is already there in the
cause.
This understanding of the world or externality embedded within the ego is further
confirmed in Amrtānanda’s statement:
˙
garbhabhāvenātmodaragatasya viśvasya bahir vamanād vāmā |
Vāmā is called as such for expunging out the world that resides in her womb in
an embryonic form.28
To sum up, the inextricable connection between volition and speech, as is manifest
in the reflexive mode of speech called paśyantī, and its emergence, either in the
form of cognition and action or in the form of the intermediate and articulated forms
of speech, lies at the heart of the ego that is in constant dynamism. Just as the
expressed form of speech is inherently embodied within consciousness, so too is
action (kriyā), identified as the force embedded within aham. Just as recognition
(pratyabhijñā) implies a reflexive gaze upon the absolute ego, it also stands for the
27

Dı̄pikā on the YH I.40.

28

Dı̄pikā upon YH I.40.

123

S. Timalsina

recognition of one’s own embodiment. When “I-am” manifests as “I-am-that” this is
not a recognition of something other at the cost of the self but the fusion of two
horizons of immanence and transcendence.
Compliance with ethical standards
Conflict of interest I as the sole author of the paper, Aham, Subjectivity and the Ego: Re-engaging
Abhinavagupta, state that there is no conflict of interest.

References
Johnston, A. “Jacques Lacan”, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2018 Edition). E. N. Zalta
(Ed.), https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2018/entries/lacan/
Bäumer, B. (2011). Abhinavagupta’s Hermeneutics of the Absolute: Anuttaraprakriyā: An Interpretation of
his Parātrīśikā Vivaraṇa. Delhi: D. K. Printworld.
Dyczkowski, M. (1990). Self-awareness, own awareness, and egoity. Author.
Eltschinger, V., & Ratié, I. (2007). Self, no-self, and salvation: Dharmakīrti’s critique of the notions of self
and person. Wien: Verlag der Österreischischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Fink, B. (1995). The Lacanian subject: Between language and Jouissance. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Ganeri, J. (2011). “Subjectivity, selfhood and the use of the word ‘I’, in self, no self?: Perspectives from
analytical, phenomenological, and indian traditions. New York: Oxford University Press.
Īśvarapratyabhijñā. With the Vimarśinı̄ of Abhinavagupta. Ed. K. A. S. Iyer and K. C. Pandey. Delhi:
Motilal Banarsidass, 1986.
Iversen, M. (2007). Beyond pleasure: Freud, lacan, barthes (reﬁguring modernism). Pennsylvania: Penn
State University Press.
Laplanche, J., & Pontalis, J.-B. (1988 [1973]). Pleasure principle (pp. 322–325). In The language of
psychoanalysis. London: Karnac Books.
Lawrence, D. (2008). The Teachings of the odd-eyed one: A study and translation of the
virūpākṣapañcāśikā, with the commentary of vidyācakravartin. New York: State University of
New York Press.
MacKenzie, M. (2011). Enacting the self: Buddhist and Enactivist approaches to the emergence of the
self. In Self, no self?: Perspectives from analytical, phenomenological, and indian traditions. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Nemec, J. (2011). The ubiquitous Śiva: Somānanda’s Śivadṛṣṭi and his tantric interlocutors. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Nityāṣoḍaśikārṇava. With the commentaries Rjuvimarśinı̄ of Śivānanda and Artharatnāvalı̄ of
˙
Vidyānanda. Ed. Vrajavallabhava Dviveda. Sampurnanand
Sanskrit University, Varanasi, 1984.
Padoux, A. (1990). Vāc: The concept of the word in selected Hindu Tantras. Translated by Jacques
Gontier. Delhi: Sri Satguru Publications.
Parātrīśikāvivaraṇa of Abhinavagupta: The secret of Tantric Mysticism. Translation, Jaideva Singh.
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2005.
Siddhitrayī of Rājānaka Utpala Deva. With Hindi translation by Surya Prakash Vyas. Chaukhambha
Sanskrit Sansthan, Varanasi, 1989.
Tantrāloka of Abhinavagupta. With the commentary Viveka of Jayaratha. Ed. R. C. Dwivedi and
Navajivan Rastogi. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1987.
Ratié, I. (2007). Otherness in the Pratyabhijñā Philosophy. Journal of Indian Philosophy, 35, 313–370.
Timalsina, S. (2014). The dialogical manifestation of reality in Āgamas. The Journal of Hindu Studies, 7,
6–24.
Vākyapadīya of Bhartrhari. Chapter III Part II. Ed. K. A. Iyer, with English translation and exegetical
˙
notes. Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass, 1974. For Purusasamuddeśa, see pp. 91–94.
˙
Wenta, A. (2016). Utpaladeva: Philosophy of recognition.
Ed. Raffaele Torella, and Bettina Bäumer.
Delhi: D. K. Printworld.

123

Aham, Subjectivity, and the Ego: Engaging the Philosophy of Abhinavagupta
Yoginīhṛdaya. With the commentaries Dı̄pikā of Amrtānanda and Setubandha of Bhāskararāya. Ed.
˙
Gopinath Kaviraj. Sampurnanand Sanskrit University,
Varanasi, 1979.

Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
and institutional affiliations.

123

