EDITOR KISOR KUMAR CHAKRABARTI
EDITORIAL BOARD
OWEN FLANAGAN
Duke University
ASHOKE KUMAR GANGOPADHYAY
University of Calcutta
ROBERT P. GOLDMAN
University of California at Berkeley
JONATHAN KRAMER
North Carolina State University
TOMMI LETHONEN
University of Vaasa
CHRISTOPHER MINKOWSKI
University of Oxford
JITENDRA N. MOHANTY
Temple University
STEPHEN H. PHILLIPS
University of Texas at Austin
KARL H. POTTER
University of Washington
SUKHARANJAN SAHA
Jadavpur University
J. L. SHAW
Victoria University at Wellington
Mark Siderits
Illinois State University
ASSOCIATE EDITOR CHANDANA CHAKRABARTI
Copyright 2021 by Society for Indian Philosophy and Religion

Printed and type setting by Modern Creative Centre, Q-18, Srinagar,
Kolkata-700 094.

NOTES TO AUTHORS
The Editor, the Associate Editor and the Editorial Board of the Journal
of Indian Philosophy and Religion welcome specialized articles in
all areas of Indian philosophies and religions. The aim of the journal
is to disseminate high quality research in Indian philosophies and
religions and promote comparative studies of them with other
Eastern and Western philosophies and religions.
Articles should usually not exceed 10,000 words and be typed in
double space with end notes. They should be submitted in triplicate
(non-returnable) with an abstract. Since manuscripts are reviewed
anonymously, the authors should avoid identifying themselves within
the texts of the articles : the authors names and affiliations should
appear only on a separate cover page. The Chicago Manual of Style,
Thirteenth Edition, The University of Chicago Press, Chicago and
London, 1982 should be followed in preparing the manuscripts. It
is the responsibility of the authors to ensure that all quotations are
accurate and that all references are complete.
The Journal of Indian Philosophy and Religion is published annually
in the month of December by the Society for Indian Philosophy and
Religion, 4/83, Vidyasagar Upanibesh, Kolkata - 700047.
Annual subscription rates inclusive of second class postage and
handling :

Individual : $ 35
Institution : $ 75

All enquires and manuscripts should be mailed to Dr. Chandana
Chakrabarti, Associate Editor, P. O. Box 79, Elon, NC 27244, USA.
Subscriptions should be paid to the Society for Indian Philosophy
and Religion.

JOURNAL OF INDIAN
PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION
CONTENTS
1. Negotiating the Nonnegotiable : Human Rights in the
Aporia of Justice1
3
GORDON HAIST

2. Gandhi’s Metaphysics as Encountering the
‘Unreasonable :’ Liberal Multiculturalism,
Self-Suffering, and the Comedy-Satyagrahi

31

MICHAEL ALLEN

3. Environmental Ethics and Sustainability in Indian
Thought : Vision of Mahatma Gandhi
55
RANA P. B. SINGH

4. Tagore : Global Author Through A Pepperean Lens88
JOHN HAROLD

5. Rasasvada : A Comparative Approach to Emotion
and the Self
115
STHANESHWAR TIMALSINA

6. Yoga, Ethics and Philosophy

140

LEIGH DUFFY

7. ANNOTATED TRANSLATION OF UDAYANA’S
AATMATATTVAVIVEKA
156
KISOR KUMAR CHAKRABARTI

Volume 26

December

2021

GORDON HAIST

3

Negotiating the Nonnegotiable:
Human Rights in the Aporia of Justice1
Gordon Haist
The September 2001 wanton destruction of the World Trade
Center in New York City immediately resulted in executive action
with the gravest import. Nine days after the carnage President
Bush declared war, not against a country, but against terror.
Thus began the most prolonged military campaign in U.S.
history, coursing through Afghanistan, Iraq, and in and around
other countries and regions, resulting in over 800,000 people
killed and 37 million people displaced as of September 2020.2
By 2002 captured terrorists and suspected terrorists, labelled
“unlawful enemy combatants” (not “prisoners of war” over
which the Geneva Convention would have jurisdiction), were
being sent to an off-shore facility, the Guantanamo Bay
Detention Center, for indefinite stays without the benefit of
habeas corpus. During the 18 years of its operation so far,
roughly 800 prisoners have passed through with around forty
still remaining while U.S. military involvement in Afghanistan
winds down.
The War on Terror and with it the presence of these prisoners
in indefinite suspension darkens an era of human rights
launched at the end of World War II with the UN Universal
Declaration of Human Rights (1948) and the updated and
expanded Geneva Convention (1949). These documents sought
respectively to restore the foundation for peace on what the
preamble to the UN Declaration described as the “inherent
dignity” and the “equal and inalienable rights of all members of

4

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

the human family,” and to protect the rights of prisoners. They
were responses to the atrocities of two world wars and the
unimaginable horrors whose place names are now infamous:
Auschwitz, Hiroshima, Nagasaki, and Bataan.
Now Guantanamo Bay has become another infamous place
name, along with the infinitely more grievous insult to humanity,
the World Trade Center bombings that precipitated it. They
were not the first assaults on human rights since the UN
Declaration, only the more deliberate—and the more ominous,
because they succeeded in cancelling the moral burden of the
most powerful nation, the U.S, consistent with its own
Declaration of Independence, always to rise above revenge and
to defend the rights of all humans.
The result has not been attractive. Despite two signed
treaties in Iraq and Afghanistan, limited combat continues as
does the threat of violence to noncombatants throughout all
affected areas. Despite efforts to bring Guantanamo Bay
prisoners to trial in U.S. courts of law, a U.S. federal appeals
court panel most recently determined that aliens “without
property or person” and without U.S. citizenship cannot invoke
due process.3 Thus the politics of terror creates a “state of
exception” regarding the Geneva Convention and the
observance of human rights, a perverse coinciding with radical
Islam’s wholesale rejection of human law. The mute, sad irony
in this coinciding is that instead of turning swords into
plowshares, the throes of unresolved conflict is rendering the
idea of justice parochial and intolerant of differences.
Emmanuel Levinas, the philosopher who found ethics in the
relation of face to face, wrote that politics, “left to itself”
…deforms the I and the other who have given rise to it, for it
judges them according to universal rules, and thus as in
absentia.4
A more insightful comment for our situation could not be
found. Human rights are formal rights that necessarily cut across
all divisions of humanity to refer to all humans. They were

GORDON HAIST

5

declared with an awareness that the rights of others whose
identities are ethnic, indigenous, or foreign, experience a
deformation when politics blinds itself to the “I and the other”
and strategizes on the universal level to exclude the right of even
the guilty to a fair trial. The past twenty years have been filled
with polemics and violence that has hardened prejudices and
fostered a generalized fear of differences which currently fans
the flames of hatred. This fear of otherness is weaponized in the
War on Terror and the war metaphor mandates judgment of the
enemy “in absentia.” Dismissing the other silences the ethical
call of the face of the other, a call which for Levinas means we
should respond to by “infinitizing,” or at least, by overcoming
our habits of totalizing.5
The totalizing “lift” Levinas is describing from particular to
universal in politics is not what logicians call a universal
generalization. Fallacious reasoning is important to identify, but
it is even more important to measure the gap somehow
between reasoning and rationalizing. Untamed by logic, politics
is not a universe of discourse with invariable properties.
Anything can be political and capable of providing judgments of
particulars in absentia. The gap is substantial between the logic
of universals and the abandonment of particulars, as wide in
fact, as that between the preposterous claim that the solution
to the political problem of COVID-19 is to test less for it and the
rational truth that the problem does not disappear by remaining
ignorant about it.
The appearance of this gap is the occasion of this paper. It is
a paper in search of a positive rationality for these times, one
that does not begin by denying the contingency of our reasoning
and the finite limits of our answers.

I
Issues of human rights affect us all but their status is often
shrouded in doubt. Are they rights specific to our species? Do
other species have rights? Are they based on what makes us

6

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

distinctive, our mind or intelligence? Or are they political and
limited to our socio-political settings? Suppose we were to draw
a vertical line between what they are by nature and what by
convention. Where would our rights stand? Are we free by
nature? Do we have rights by phusis as Callicles the Sophist in
Plato’s Greece said? How far up the scale towards convention,
Greek nomos or law, would we need to ascend before we got to
other rights that the Sophist ignored but which are now included
in the International Bill of Rights, rights such as equality, fair
trials, etc.? For Kant, freedom is our sole innate or natural right;
we enter society to extend that right and to achieve formal
equality with others. Whereas the Greek lived the tension
between phusis and nomos, Kant of the Enlightenment saw not
tension, but the progressive unfolding of freedom and reason
from nature to culture. Yet today, our human rights are
threatened by a deteriorating nature and by social and political
strife.
My title, “Negotiating the Nonnegotiable,” suggests that
human rights are distinctive in another way, that whether they
are natural or conventional, and whatever is their number, they
are not negotiable. Life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness, for
example, are not negotiable, even at the expense of a
deteriorating environment or the cost of anarchy. There is
something deeply inconsistent in this notion, and it must be
addressed. For rights are not entitlements only. They also
impose duties. A case in point today is what some claim is the
“freedom” not to wear a mask in public during the worldwide
COVID-19 pandemic we are all experiencing. Individuals are free
by nature, as Kant says, but does wearing a mask for the sake of
public health compromise that freedom? Does not wearing
clothes also “compromise” that freedom? The unwillingness to
recognize mask-wearing as a social duty distorts and trivializes
freedom. It makes it appear as condition-less and quite possibly
delusory—as being above the fray—a delusion that free agents
can live as if they were souls in Plato’s Myth of Er, watching the

GORDON HAIST

7

Spindle of Necessity turn as the fates of mortals are
determined.6 But these souls had only a moment of duty-free
respite before they would be plunged into the mortal lives they
would be assigned to lead, for good or ill as the fates would have
it. For that transitory moment, it is worth adding, they did have
freedom, the freedom to choose the life they would be plunged
into, just as we are free to expose ourselves to COVID-19. But
once chosen, each soul had to live that life out, whether that life
would be nasty, brutish, and short (Hobbes), or a peaceful
pursuit of the summum bonum (Rousseau).
The phrase, “negotiating the nonnegotiable” comes from the
French deconstructionist philosopher, Jacques Derrida. At the
time (an explosive year in French politics, 1987) Derrida was
speaking about exchanges between ethics and politics,
commenting specifically on the French student riots and the trial
of a terrorist, Georges Ibrahim Abdallah. In those times, as
occurred similarly in the United States in the 1960s, strong
sentiments were voiced against politics in the name of ethics.7
Both times seemed “out of joint,” as Derrida liked to say,
neologizing Hamlet’s phrase; urgency was in the air. Urgency is
différance, Derrida neologizes once again, this time to indicate
that urgency is both untimely and uncertain—an impossible
condition, and a phenomenal description of a not uncommon,
especially in these days, experience of time.
The point about urgency is that it calls for a response, and if
that response is to be responsible, it will require negotiation—
for two reasons. First, one must listen to the other, understand
the situation, and second, decide what steps can actually defuse
the urgency. Beating protesters senseless with police batons or
kneeling on someone’s neck until they can’t breathe does not
defuse the urgency of the situation. They transmute it
elsewhere, and as with countless instances of violence, they
require a genealogy of violence to address them adequately. But
negotiation is often difficult, and it can risk too much.

8

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

Derrida reasons about urgency more philosophically. He
reminds us that we are temporal beings, that our situatedness
in time is inescapable. We are not souls in the Myth of Er. That
may seem obvious, but when urgent matters attend, we may
also resort to techniques that make sense in the abstract but not
in the moment. From our inescapable situatedness in time
negotiation can inherit what he calls an “aporetic fatality,” a
contradiction from which it cannot emerge.
An aporia is a blocked passageway. Its use in logic dates back
to Zeno and the Eleatics. Barnes notes that Zeno may be credited
with inventing reductio arguments, but his fragments contain no
reductio. Zeno “takes an hypothesis and infers an absurdity from
it; but he never makes the characteristic move of reductio, the
inference to the falsity of the hypothesis.”8 The comment is
suggestive. Aporiai may be thought of as reductio as absurdam
arguments without the conclusions drawn—paradoxes, in other
words, which become problematic when applied to natural
phenomena like motion and time. Aristotle famously described
time as aporetic, observing that a part of time “has been and is
not,” while another part “is going to be and is not yet”9 and
moreover that the ‘now’ is not part of time since it is not a
measure of the whole of time.10 Since we are beings in the now,
we find ourselves on a logical pathway that is always blocked. In
an urgent situation, which ethical and political or ethico-political
conflicts create, negotiation suffers an aporetic fatality when it
tries to get by the situation without addressing the principles
that need to be preserved, seeking deliverance instead. But
where lies the place of these principles? We shall come back to
this.
An aporia is a blocked pathway, but it is not a dead end. It is
more like a mirror one cannot see through. An aporetic fatality,
like a mirror, returns us to our presence, our countenance, even
as its seeming transparency promises to lift us beyond it. We
become tempted and find ourselves deceived by the lucidity

GORDON HAIST

9

that draws us nigh. That is our first hint that the problem lies
within the aporia, not above it or elsewhere.
Reaching urgent but responsible decisions is unlike making
tactical decisions in full algorithmic clarity to continue a program
or a practice. The latter is more like negotiating between
negotiables. If people are willing to open emails that may have
a virus, they negotiate with the expectation that the risk of a
virus won’t affect them, that their cybersecurity program will
protect them. Many of the decisions we make are tactical, and
some of them, such as the infringement of privacy rights by
cybersecurity, do involve an element of uncoerced
irresponsibility, of reckless abandon. One perhaps doesn’t
appreciate the urgency of the situation. That, however, is a flag
that the right to privacy ought to have greater value than the risk
of a virus warrants. In fact, privacy is a human value. It is a
human right which one should not ask or be asked to violate in
normal conditions. (Finding the true vote count in the recent
elections in Belarus or the impeachable evidence of a sitting
President’s misdeeds in office are not normal conditions.)
Derrida describes the aporetic fatality of urgently deciding
responsibly as follows: “One should not have to negotiate
between two negotiables. One must negotiate the
nonnegotiable.”11 A little later he adds: “…must negotiate the
nonnegotiable, to save its being nonnegotiable.”12 His essay is
on ethics and politics, and it is evident what this implies. Ethics
is the philosophy of ideals considered nonnegotiable even when
they are compromised, whereas politics is the art of the
possible, therefore the negotiable, even if at great cost. He
intends the conjunction: is it an aporia? Does it produce an
aporetic fatality? The nature of this “must,” that one “must”
negotiate the nonnegotiable, invites our scrutiny.
The social restiveness (the protests, the riots, the
international, cross-cultural and interfaith interferences) we are
witnessing around the world, combined with the uneven
responses to the pandemic that endangers us all, not only

10

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

suggest this is a provocative, if not an impossible command to
follow. It also can be easily misread. Human rights are universal,
but they are not nonnegotiable in the sense that they are
absolute. As Oliver Wendell Holmes said, one does not have the
right to falsely shout ‘fire’ in a theater and cause a panic.
Setting that aside for the moment, what would it mean to an
assaulted Hindu in the recent Bengaluru riots to negotiate the
nonnegotiable, and for the sake of saving its being
nonnegotiable? Or to an angry Muslim seeking revenge or
atonement for the fallen state of Kashmir? To Hong Kong
protesters against arbitrary extraditions by China? To American
Blacks protesting police brutality as it continues to repeat itself?
To American Indians fighting corporate invasion of their
reservation to build pipelines? Or to people in the streets almost
anywhere struggling to social distance and avoid maskless
carriers of COVID-19?
Conversely, violence against individuals does not attack the
causes of these protests and does little to resolve the issues. But
does that mean one should not negotiate with—or against—
violators who harm individuals for the sake of achieving peace
or security? In a democracy, liberty, justice, and equality are
nonnegotiable human rights. In urgent situations, should they
become negotiable? Should we negotiate freedom for equality,
or justice for security? Should we accept the world’s poor as
unavoidable, or do we have a duty (for rights confer duties) to
prevent the starvation and misery of others?
Derrida’s claim goes to the heart of these issues, and in the
speech I have been discussing he casts strife as urgency—as the
ethical and political urgency of decision-making—of deciding,
not instituting decisionist policies, which institutions do. We
institutionalize ethics by giving them a code: they are to provide
the principles for human conduct. Lately this has become a code
of many branches, as different institutions draft their own
ethical ‘guides’, their own ethics. Politics then becomes the
agency for enacting this code. Yet for Derrida, beneath these

GORDON HAIST

11

structures and strictures the lava of human engagements flows
according to its own temperature. Can an ethics direct its flow,
channel it into the ocean of politics to become aired, eventually
to cool and stabilize? Whether it could do so as institutionalized
is an important Derridean issue, for then not only is its
universality regionalized and limited to the interests that rely on
it. The reliance on rules to navigate this flow also and
unavoidably disinvests itself from the moment-to-moment
urgency wherein decisions are always contingent and must be
made under conditions of uncertainty.
Derrida addresses that problem by adopting—and defending
in part, a Kantian understanding of ethics.13 By ethics he means
the prescriptive power that universal claims on behavior make,
like Kant’s unconditional determination of the moral worth of
the imperative to always act so that you treat other persons as
ends and not as means only. By a Kantian understanding I mean
the rational grounding of ethical principles through universal
generalization that gives them imperative force. In “Force of
Law: The ‘Mystical Foundation of Authority’” Derrida touches on
this mixture of principles and imperatives or in his terms,
constatives and prescriptions. He argues that prescriptions
cannot themselves be just; they are the voice of convention
delivered with an “irruptive violence” that outstrips the
demands of theoretical rationality. Constatives rely on a
performative structure that “always thus presupposes the
dimension of justice of the performative utterances…”.14 The
implication is that all ethical guidance that relies on moral codes,
whether Kantian in form or not, defers to these codes despite
the difference created by the event calling for decision. Ethical
theory and practice impact one another in a state of urgency and
arise as a condition of différance.
The unconditionality associated with ethical universals is
perhaps too uncomfortably like Krishna’s advice to Arjuna on the
eve of battle in the Bhagavad Gita (2.47-48):

12

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

Be intent on action / Not on the fruits of action;
/avoid attraction to the fruits / and attachment to
inaction!
Perform actions, firm in discipline, / Relinquishing
attachment; / Be impartial to failure and success- /
This equanimity is called discipline.
I owe it to Aditka Adarkar for explaining that ‘discipline’ in
this passage translates ‘yoga’, and that yoga connotes being
yoked to something. Arjuna is yoked to Krishna, and this,
Adarkar explains, is Bhakti, a theology of devotion.15 Discipline
is equanimity in the midst of violent action. Arjuna must engage
discipline to fight force but also, as Bhakti implies and as Joe
Simmons said, to fight evil without evil.16 Simmons composed an
interesting comparison of Indian and Platonic traditions, writing
that Plato serves as the point of compromise between the two
cultures. Nonviolence, ahimsa, is a central value in the Hindu
tradition, based on the spark of divinity in all life, so the
challenge Arjuna faces in the Bhagavad Gita is to achieve a state
of impassive violence, perhaps as butchers in a stockyard do. But
the dominant values in the Greek heroic tradition preceding
Plato were determined by the hero seeking his honor, for out of
his self-interest the hope of the community could survive. In
both traditions, Simmons says, the warrior becomes the
peacemaker. Given the Homeric epics of warriors warring for the
sake of honor, it is indeed significant that Plato would write in
the Laws that “…justice, self-command, and wisdom, combined
together and seconded by valor, are better than mere valor by
itself”17 as mentioned by Simmons. But temperance, courage,
and wisdom were the dominant virtues of the Homeric tradition,
to which Plato, working out of the philosophical tradition, added
a much more civil form of justice, minding one’s own business
well. As the Sophist reaction made clear in Plato’s time,
however, these virtues sustained more than they tempered the
Greek fixation on the heroic.

GORDON HAIST

13

The inability of the Platonic tradition to achieve a peaceful
resolution to the problems posed by its values serves as an
object lesson for why the universality of ethical principles was so
important in the ages that followed it in the West. The
requirement of universality need not mean that lying is always
wrong, for example. As painfully evident as it is today, the
habitual and even malicious lying of a country’s president does
not depose him of his power. Nor does the value of the ethical
universal consist in the consequences of bad behavior, since
that, too, is a function of position and power. The only real
difference between ‘Lying is wrong’ and ‘Lying is sometimes
wrong’ is that only the former is capable of providing a norm or
a code for unpredictable or uncertain events. But that capability
was absolutely critical to the formation of an orderly society.
Given the failure of the Platonic tradition to develop norms for
social cohesiveness out of the values of its culture, and given the
fact that the similar crises have occurred throughout the ages
since, Derrida’s argument, first that justice is undeconstructible,
second, that it is not law, and third, that law is always
deconstructible to justice, is important. The argument is a critical
reminder that laws, norms, and codes, are only as effective as
the values that sustain them. The rules that are established in
the manufacturing of codes or the passage of laws in a
legislature are limited in efficacy less by the punishments affixed
to their violation than by the values that authorize them. When
those values are no longer lived, the force of the codes or laws
they authorized lose their legitimacy, as most recently the
decriminalization of marijuana laws in some U.S. states
demonstrates.
The question of authority, and of the force of authority as
Derrida frames it, is very largely a question of limits. The
Bhagavad Gita would establish those limits through the
invincibility and superiority of Krishna’s divine insight.
Interestingly, and in an important sense quite tellingly, Derrida
explores the mystical dimension of authority, citing Pascal,

14

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

Montaigne, and Walter Benjamin, but does so cautiously, in a
Wittgensteinian direction, he says.18 The motive is the same: to
articulate, identify, or lay bare the force of authority, but the
outcome is different. In the absence of what Benjamin called
divine or sovereign violence, if in other words ethical principles
lack supreme authority, through what violence do they move or
“shake up” the status quo? Derrida’s answer to this comes in his
assessment of performatives, mentioned earlier. That is the
source of their mystique and what is ‘mystical’ about them:
Since the origin of authority, the foundation or
ground, the position of the law can’t by definition
rest on anything but themselves, they are
themselves a violence without ground….Even if the
success of performatives that found law or right (for
example, and this is more than an example, of a
state as guarantor of a right) presupposes earlier
conditions and conventions (for example in the
national or international arena), the same
“mystical” limit will reappear at the supposed origin
of said conditions, rules or conventions, and at the
origin of their dominant interpretation.19
A performative in J.L. Austin’s linguistics, is an utterance that
performs an action.20 For Derrida it is more. It renders an
interpretation as well. But as an interpretation it ‘overflows’
itself, gets ahead of itself. As a dimension of justice it emerges in
a “structural urgency and precipitation of justice” and creates
“dissymmetry and some quality of violence” without a horizon
of expectation.21 Authority announces itself through this
dissymmetry and violence as the mystique created by this
‘overflowing’, a term suggestive of a wellspring.
Just as Krishna laid out a theological limit, Kant set forth a
moral limit; that is, a limit to actions that can claim to have moral
worth. Other ethical systems in the secular West do that as well:
utilitarianism through the frequent revisions it has made to its
summum bonum, pleasure; aretaic ethics through the

GORDON HAIST

15

differentiation it has always retained since Aristotle between
human excellence and technical expertise; and so forth. Even
the morality of humanism expressed by Colonel Rainborough in
the 17th Century at the time of the English Civil Wars, and as
quoted at the tragic turn of this century by Ted Honderich,22 sets
a moral limit, a limit that transmits a politics: “Really I think that
the poorest he that is in England hath a life to live as the greatest
he…”. Honderich pointed out that four score and seven years
later Abraham Lincoln gave political footing to this morality,
declaring “a new nation, conceived in liberty, and dedicated to
the proposition that all men are created equal.” For Honderich,
writing as the dust of 9/11 was gradually filtering through the
skyline of New York City, this humanism may be the best
morality for judging modern terrorism.23 It is a morality that
materializes on the basis of good lives and bad lives and weighs
the question whether we wronged ‘them’ before addressing
questions of responsibility.
These represent two very different perspectives on
deinstitutionalized ethics: Honderich on the worth of life and
Derrida on saving the nonnegotiable in ethical and political
negotiations. The one can serve as counterfoil to the other,
particularly concerning the notion of limits. For if the poorest he
hath a life to live as the greatest he, then the nonnegotiable
must include or involve respect for the singularity of the other
“beyond the universal and formal rule of this respect” as Derrida
describes it. One should “have the right to consider it a duty” (a
circumlocution made necessary because Derrida is here talking
about facing an urgency) “…never to stand clear of the most
uncompromising, radical deconstructive critique…of the
axiomatics that are the most untouchable: the rights of man, the
human quality in the other to be respected, the being-with, etc.,
etc.”24
For ‘the poorest he’ and ‘the greatest he’, what does this
translate into? Honderich produced a list of six “great goods” to
inform his “principle of humanity:”

16

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

1.
2.

A decent length of life,
A quality of life owed to such material means as fillings for
teeth,
3. Freedom and power, certainly including what the
Palestinians lack,
4. Respect and self-respect, including what is lacked by
workers paid hardly anything for the profitable stuff they
produce but afraid to form a union,
5. Relationships both personal and as members of smaller and
larger groups,
6. A culture or way of living, including the tradition of a people
and a language, and knowledge in place of ignorance.25
Great goods and bad lives are the contrastive elements of this
principle of humanity. Bad lives are lives that have been cut
short, lack enough material goods to live well, lack freedom,
power, and safety, are deprived of human standing, or are lived
long enough but have little of the other great goods.26
Measuring human rights this way, on the scale of mortality,
invariably takes into account the quantity and quality of lives
lived. That involves, in Derrida’s language, a deconstructive
critique of the axiomatics of rights which critical thought
continually calls for and has called for since Socrates found it
necessary to deflate the puffery in oratory to discern the truth.
Richard Beardsworth, who wrote a book-length interpretation
of Derrida as a political thinker, made a strong case that the role
Derrida accords to judgment—judgment in aporias—has been
misunderstood and its political relevance has been ignored.27
The measure of rights in mortal compass is what makes human
rights specific to our humanity and comprehensive of all
humans. It clarifies the status of human rights as
nonnegotiables. That mortal compass appears on the
horizonless landscape of what Beardsworth calls “the excess of
time over ‘human’ organization,” a spectral landscape shaped by
an absolute future that will never be achieved but subsists as the
promise that the “‘we’ of the community…--qua the ‘we’s radical
lack of identity--will have returned from the beginning to haunt

GORDON HAIST

17

any determination of the community.”28 That is, to deconstruct
all arbitrary limits placed on the community. Because human
temporality is aporetic, we judge, if you will, less on our visions
or our dreams and more on what haunts us. What haunts us is
what ought to be, which we judge from behind the curtain of
what we want to be.
The spectral theme, the hauntology Derrida develops in
Specters of Marx, and the messianism of his ‘to come’ argument
(“The messianic…would be urgency, imminence but, irreducible
paradox, a waiting without horizon of expectation,”)29 drive
home the sense of contingency which requires us to ‘wait
without expectation’ for a future that remains absolute. Levinas
said the infinity of the infinite “lives in going backwards.” “The
debt increases in the measures that it is paid,” he added,
reasoning that our positive response to the infinite prepares our
approach to the other.30 The spectralization so apparent in
Specters of Marx is, Beardsworth says, “nothing less than a way
of describing the effects of technicization.”31 Derrida is aware
more than most, of the revolutionary impacts technology is
having on the disappearing seam between the human and the
nonhuman, on minding the gap between teletechnology’s time
and human time, and on human identity generally. But
Beardsworth’s point is more structural: Derrida thinks of
technics as a finite organization of time, like logic in this respect
but unlike it in the metaphysics it develops. Pure logic disavows
time in order to constitute itself, whereas pure technics
obliterates the border between the human and the nonhuman.
It was Derrida’s deconstructive approach that revealed the
aporia of time as irreducible to either metaphysics and
demonstrated that these finite organizations of time always
remain contingent:
Pure technics is pure metaphysics. Subordinated to
the passage of time, technics is, however, finite
and the future contingent. For deconstruction,
therefore, philosophy’s reflection on the technical

18

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

recalls its processes to the finitude which makes
them possible in the first place. This move repeats
in the domain of the technosciences Derrida’s early
deconstruction of the human sciences….32
Given our times, given the obvious fact that time is not our
time but repetitively framed as though it could either be
transcended or rendered perpetual, Derrida’s philosophy is
necessarily political because it is a thinking of time. Beardsworth
makes that point well.

II
I’d now like to relate to you a stunning example of
nonnegotiability that Amartya Sen wrote about in The
Argumentative Indian.33 I have been writing about time as
aporetic, as a clue to what we value and the rights we accord to
our human identity—an identity which might be changing due
to the profound influence of technology on our lives. But those
changes do not deny the aporias of time and mortality. The
question of death also determines our rights.
In The Argumentative Indian Sen relates Arrian’s anecdote
about Alexander. My reason for sharing this with you is not only
to respect the Jains, but also to capture that lava-like flow of
human engagements mentioned previously. As we engage, so
too we divide, and as we differ, so too do the ethics we generate
need to stabilize our political differences.
According to the anecdote, Alexander asked Jain
philosophers why they paid him, their great conqueror, so little
attention, and received the following answer:
King Alexander, every man can possess only so
much of the earth’s surface as this we are standing
on. You are but human like the rest of us, save that
you are always busy and up to no good, travelling so
many miles from your home, a nuisance to yourself
and to others!...You will soon be dead, and then you

GORDON HAIST

19

will own just as much of the earth as will suffice to
bury you.34
Plutarch relates that Alexander admired the prone Diogenes
for asking him to stop blocking the sun’s rays on him, saying that
if he were not Alexander, he would choose to be Diogenes.35
Arrian commented, according to Sen, that Alexander admired
this encounter with the Jain philosophers just as much. Death is
nonnegotiable, but these Jain philosophers knew to negotiate it!
In the West, Heidegger described death as Dasein’s ownmost
possibility, the possibility of the impossibility of any existing at
all. (Dasein means being there, there-being, the way of our being
as beings thrown into the world.) “When one has an
understanding Being-towards-death—towards death as one’s
ownmost possibility—one’s potentiality-for-Being becomes
authentic and wholly transparent,” he argued.36 Derrida,
however, repudiated Heidegger’s existential analytic of death,
arguing in Aporias that if death is the possibility of Dasein’s
impossibility, it becomes “the most improper possibility and the
most ex-propriating, the most inauthentic one.” The existential
analytic cannot support its claim that we all end differently, that
we either die, perish, or demise.37 Death is the ultimate aporia;
it is Heidegger’s attempt to circumscribe Dasein’s being from life
to death that is the real impossibility. Derrida’s judgment is
thorough: Heidegger’s existential analysis bears witness to the
very culture from which it tries to distance itself, the “JudeoChristiano-Islamic experience of death,” exchanging places with
it, in effect, in a “strange topography of edges.”38
Thus, death is not likely to be a rounding off, more like facing
a wall, as Sartre envisioned it. Derrida suggests it can be just the
cutting off of life. In any case, we do not transcend or overcome
the aporia of death, any more than we overcome the aporia of
time. No matter how much we angle our vision in the mirror, we
do not see through it to the other side. So when it concerns our
rights as humans, It is not how we die or even that we die that
establishes the nonnegotiability of our rights. It is instead, how

20

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

we live, how we avoid bad lives and pursue the great goods that
give us our humanity.
Thus far we have worked through the sense of urgency that
underscores the ‘must’ in Derrida’s phrase, “one must negotiate
the nonnegotiable.” It is clear that this “must” is not algorithmic;
it requires deciding instead of a decision procedure. By the use
of a counterfoil we have entertained what a deconstructed
axiometrics of rights might involve, but we have yet to situate
that in a politics. It is now time to move in that direction.
To resume the theme, the balance between ethics and
politics is not as simple as I allowed it to appear by suggesting
ethical principles guide political action. Our ability to theorize
about human value structures often relies on presuppositions
made necessary for theory more than fact. “A man’s virtue may
be but the defect of his desire, as his crime may be but a function
of his virtue,” Robert Penn Warren had his leading character,
Jack Burden, say in concluding his novel of dirty politics in the
American South, All the King’s Men.39 In fact as in fiction, this
insight holds: virtue can be blind, the righteous can be deceived,
and politics can and often has become the crime of
misappropriated power. It Is in the context of this awareness
that we can heed Nietzsche’s—and Heidegger’s—admonition to
“think against values,” against, that is, our practice of
objectifying them by lifting them out of the warp and woof of
our experiential entanglements and inverting them, building
concepts out of them to bind acts before mastering the
sophisticated performance whereby actions announce their
value. If you recall, Derrida did accord Heidegger the status of a
witness whose testimony can inform the tradition, and one
reason why this is valuable is because Heidegger’s historical
grasp of the connotative richness of language is unparalleled.
If we think of theory as structure and its principles as
centered by it, then Derrida’s concept of “contradictory
coherence,” which by the way is another way of thinking of
différance, can be illuminating. In “Structure, Sign and Play in the

GORDON HAIST

21

Discourse of the Human Sciences,”40 Derrida critiques the
concept of structure, arguing that structure, as used in
Structuralism, for example, is indeed a centering device with a
peculiarity. It lends coherence to the system it establishes (of
kinship mythology, dreams, economic productivity, etc.), but
“interdicts” the center from any permutations or
transformations it might undergo. The center itself “escapes
structurality” and thus remains within the totality of the
structure and also remains outside it. The totality “has its center
elsewhere.”
The concept of centered structure—although it
represents coherence itself, the condition of the
epistēmē
as
philosophy
or
science—is
contradictorily coherent. And as always, coherence
in contradiction expresses the force of a desire.41
Noting that the concept of structure is as old as science and
philosophy in the West, Derrida holds that the history of
metaphysics has consisted of a series of substitutions, a “linked
chain of determinations of the center,” a scaffolding, if you will,
that limits the play of the center in order to interpret it as a fixed
origin, as Being as presence.
Decentering this structural system has been the purpose of
several projects: the Nietzschean critique of metaphysics, the
Freudian critique of self-presence, the Heideggerian destruction
of metaphysics. But these all are destructive critiques and are
trapped in a circle, according to Derrida. They cannot step
outside the concepts of metaphysics, which is engrained in our
language, and therefore cannot “shake” metaphysics.42
Quite possibly this is why the American philosopher, Calvin
O. Schrag, proposed to think with deconstructive philosophy in
order to think against it. In two works, Communicative Praxis
and the Space of Subjectivity and The Resources of Rationality,
he takes seriously the challenge of deconstructive philosophy
and develops a theory of communicative praxeology based on
decentered subjectivity “bearing the wisdom gleaned from the

22

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

arduous venture of deconstruction as a task never completed
but rather to be performed time and again.”43 For Schrag this
means three things I can only briefly mention here: first, that the
dualisms of logic and the ontology of the subject must be broken
down, to free the center of its structural confines and to
decipher the ontology of the subject as an ontology of
communication and praxis. Second, that the failure of
deconstruction to provide a positive vision of reason, the legacy
of its anti-logicism, accentuates the need for a “communicative
rationality that offers its own resources of critique, articulation,
and disclosure.”44 This Schrag names “transverse rationality.”
Concerning this point, Schrag writes that its directive is to
“acknowledge the reality of the other.” It is an application of
what he calls an “ethic of the fitting response:”
Disputes between Arab and Jew, Indian and
Pakistanian, Irish Republican Army and British
Crown, all of which exhibit a strong undertow of
political and religious differences, become
negotiable only to the degree that there is an
acknowledgement of the reality and integrity of the
other as other. The rationality of such negotiations
resides in an understanding of the particular
traditions in which each of the parties are situated
and in a recognition of the need to make
accommodations and adjustments through a
transversal movement of responding to that which
is at once other and alien.45
The third point I take from this communicative praxeology
concerns its implications for social justice. The coin of our realm
has been Derrida’s critique of logocentrism and all that flows
from it under the name of human rights, but the best purchases
made on it have been Schrag’s. Especially concerning social
justice: a transversal rationality requires justice to attend to the
other as other. A community’s accepted beliefs and practices are
not enough to meet the ethical requirements of justice, nor are

GORDON HAIST

23

our rights and duties linked to our histories. What issues of social
justice call for is a fitting response, one that is based on a “praxial
rationality, communicatively situated and transversally
postured, displaying interdependent moments of discernment,
articulation, and disclosure.”46
It has been only a short three decades since Schrag wrote
these words, and the topography of justice has changed
dramatically. There are evidences that a praxial rationality has
not succeeded (not that it has ever been tried): Brexit,
Guantanamo Bay, Border Wall, Brazil, terrorism, now imaginary
voter fraud, and so on. Schrag’s point that deconstruction failed
to provide a positive rationality remains true, and with that the
logocentric tradition continues to linger—but in some cases,
lazily so. Even though the concept of politics is idealistically
framed, issues of justice emerge in the details. Onora O’Neill
noted wrily that “Boundaries creep into political philosophy
almost without our noticing.” For example, rights on a universal
scale (which are nonnegotiable) imply the support of state
powers, and “…before we know it we are talking about the
justice not of a state but of states,” she said.47 Universal justice
provides a justification of state power in the abstract but
conflicts of justice are always particular. They materialize
territorially, in states, even though states lack powers to
negotiate non-territorial behaviors. Witness in that regard the
economic and social upheavals produced by transnational
corporations and global communications industries,
respectively, not to mention the economic and ecological
upheavals of global warming. All such disturbances impact
states and announce the poverty of separate states addressing
them through their own versions of the art of the possible. Even
addressed collectively, through the United Nations or the World
Health Organization, they remain limited by the competitive
structure alliances breed in lieu of a fitting response.
The descent from universal justice to political realities leaves
a trace and the suggestion of return. Issues of social justice

24

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

emerge on this line of descent, or at least they are experienced
as if resulting from a fall or falling off, for example, from the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Appeals for social justice
transgress the limits, even when not the boundaries, of
particular states and do so with an urgency that interrupts
reflection and demands action. Populisms emerge as actionoriented responses, as mechanisms to influence government
policies. As a hopeful sign of transverse rationality at work,
O’Neill suggests negotiating with non-state institutions, nonterritorial ‘networking institutions’ to create just institutions
that share responsibilities with governments. She reasons that
governments are effective as coercive, while networking
institutions specialize in productive power. These are the seeds
for developing shared governance and shared sovereignty, and
for developing means for achieving cosmopolitan justice beyond
territories. Thus far this has been a path only quietly taken.
There are, of course, many conceivable responses to the
needs for social justice. Such appeals are based on singular
events and appeal to the singularity of human suffering,
whether it is the suffering of an Eldridge Cleaver accusing White
America (circa 1968) of ‘colonizing’ Black souls48 or the chant
now heard around the world, “I can’t breathe.” Tommi Lehtonen
argues for a “subjective, global multi-attractedness” needed at
the base of our social awareness to displace partisanship and
direct political decision-making toward all the people.49 This idea
suggests a certain limit to the adversarial system of politics,
which requires winners and losers as ways of commandeering
the popular vote. Nevertheless it does tie down, so to speak, the
paradox that politics can no longer be local in a global age when
locality can be made anybody’s business. This is part of the
reason why Amartya Sen’s approach, addressing injustices
rather than theorizing about justice, is illuminating. I turn to this
now, in closing.
In his work on justice, Amartya Sen presented a constructive
contrast between two types of justice, niti or justice in polity and

GORDON HAIST

25

nyaya, comprehensive justice.50 To bring this to theme, where
would the “must” in Derrida’s statement that “one must
negotiate the nonnegotiable” fall in these categories?
Procedural justice, due process, niti justice, certainly involve
‘must’ statements, but the nonnegotiable demands that arise
are practical rather than theoretical. At times they appear as
autoimmune interferences because they threaten to block
democracy’s capacity for self-critique.51 Is this the sense of
nonnegotiability Derrida has in mind? Or is it more on the level
of comprehensive justice, nyaya justice or what we might call
deep justice? ‘Must’ concepts would not seem to function as
well or as clearly here because of all the separate justifications
for actions they would involve. Derrida does say, in The Politics
of Friendship, that “No praxis can correspond to indications
contained in a lexis,” and more emphatically, “no politics has
ever been adequate to its concept.”52 If that is so, the status of
the nonnegotiable has to do with general principles. But then,
does it function as a theology or a metaphysics? Or is the sense
of it contained in the reminder, throughout Derrida’s works, that
human institutions and practices, however established by
tradition, are contingent and revisable? Every generation should
revise the Constitution, U.S. President Thomas Jefferson said.
What is important about Sen’s distinction is that it is a
contrast between an arrangement-focused and a realizationfocused approach to justice, both of which reflect praxial
rationality rather than a logocentric view of reason. Sen
specifically presents an idea of justice that sets aside John Rawls’
theory of justice as fairness, because the latter develops its
concept of fairness as though on Plato’s meadow of Er, that is, a
thought experiment carried out behind a veil of ignorance. Sen
interprets rights as freedoms, arguing that freedoms provide a
mutual foundation for considering our rights as well as the rights
of others. He argues for “threshold conditions” based on the
relevance of freedom for human rights. This is a way of

26

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

specifying what the right means in positive terms. For example,
he lists the possible freedoms of a person named Rehana:
1. Rehana’s freedom not to be assaulted
2. Her freedom to be guaranteed some basic medical
attention for a serious health problem
3. Her freedom not to be called up regularly and at odd hours
by her neighbors whom she detests
4. Her freedom to achieve tranquility, which is important for
Rehana’s good life
5. Her ‘freedom from fear’ of some kind of detrimental action
by others (going beyond the freedom from the detrimental
actions themselves)53
These possible freedoms suggest that the first two should be
nonnegotiable, and that the others would need to be negotiated
on the basis of Rehana’s experience and personality. The “must”
in Derrida’s nonnegotiables would clearly apply to the first two.
But situations demand discernment: terrorism may well make
Rehana’s freedom from fear nonnegotiable as well.
In sum, I began looking at human rights under the aporia of
justice, that aporia which directs us to look towards “justice to
come” as with “democracy to come,” both integral features of
Derridean politics, both reminders that the ideas of justice and
democracy haunt our presence with every discrepancy between
them and the realities we experience. Yet through his ability to
abjure a logocentric theory of justice and revitalize ideas of
justice that serve to move us from what both Derrida and Schrag
call negative rationalities, Amartya Sen has provided us a way to
move with discernment between negotiables and
nonnegotiables when it comes to issues of justice concerning
human rights. As an exercise in praxial rationality, Sen’s
approach responds to the delay of time, the différance that
reminds us of our human situatedness, and redirects our
horizonless expectations toward the possibilities inherent in
what Schrag calls an ethic of the fitting response.
University of South Carolina, Beaufort

GORDON HAIST

27

NOTES
1. An earlier version of this paper was presented by Zoom at a Jain
University Conference on Social Justice and Human Rights on
August 27, 2020. The author is grateful to Jain University and to
the Society for Indian Philosophy and Religion for granting this
presentation.
2. Statistics retrieved by Wikipedia (en.m.wikipedia.org) from
William Smith, “The Truth about the War on Terror” (The Hill,
September 25, 2020) and David Vine, “The U.S. ‘War on Terror’
Has Displaced 37 Million People” (CounterPunch, September 25,
2020), respectively.
3. New York Times (September 2, 2020): “Court Rules Guantanamo
Detainees are not Entitled to Due Process” by Carol Rosenberg
(https://www.nytimes.com/2020/09/02/us/politics/huantanamo
-detainees-due-process.html?smid=em=share
4.

Emmanuel Levinas, Totality and Infinity, tr. Alphonso Lingis
(Pittsburgh: Duquesne University Press, 1969), p. 300.

5.

For Levinas, to “infinitize” means to be open to otherness, to the
particulars of difference. “The idea of infinity is the mode of
being, the infinition, of infinity,” he writes (Totality, p. 26). In
contrast to this, totality signifies closure, as a universal category
encloses particulars. The individual gains meaning and purpose in
totality, but only because it is totalized, closed off from
exteriority. In a striking statement, Levinas says that “War does
not manifest exteriority and the other as other; it destroys the
identity of the same” (Totality, p. 21).

6.

Plato, Republic, 617c-621b

7.

Indeed, Derrida is given to wonder why “…over the last twenty or
twenty five years that all of the sudden a reference to the ethical
should dominate as a protest against an ‘everything is
political’….” He concluded that these ethical protests were
political because they used ethical principles to hold politics
accountable. “Ethics and Politics Today,” in Negotiations, ed.

28

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

Elizabeth Rottenberg (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2002),
p. 303
8.

Jonathan Barnes, The Presocratic Philosophers (London et al:
Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1982), p. 236.

9.

Aristotle, Physics 218a2

10. Physics 218a6ff
11. “Ethics and Politics Today,” p. 304.
13. “Ethics and Politics Today,” p. 310.
14. In the Question/Answer section of “Ethics and Politics” Derrida
argues that the universal in Kant serves as the third party in a
relation of obligation and his practical discourse “leads the way
to a democratic politics that is articulated with pure practical
reason, because there is indeed a third” (“Ethics,” p. 313).
14. Jacques Derrida, “Force of Law: The ‘Mystical Foundation of
Authority’” in Deconstruction and the Possibility of Justice, ed
Drucilla Cornell et. al. (New York and London: Routledge, 1992),
p. 27.
15. Aditka Adarkar, “The Ethics of Steadfastness in the Hagiography
of Mirabar” Chapter Three in Revisiting Mysticism, ed. Chandana
Chakrabarti and Gordon Haist (Newcastle, UK: Cambridge
Scholars Publishing, 2008), pp. 58-70.
16. Joe Simmons, Vision and Spirit: An Essay on Plato’s Warrior Class
(Lanham, MD: University Press of America, 1988), p. 16.
17. Plato, Laws 630a.
18. “Force of Law,” p. 14. The passage Derrida must have in mind is
entry 6522 of Ludwig Wittgenstein’s Tractatus LogicoPhilosophicus, (tr. D.F. Pears and B.F. McGuinness [London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1961], p. 151. Wittgenstein writes:
“There are, indeed, things that cannot be put into words. They
make themselves manifest. They are what is mystical.”
19. “Force,” p. 14
20. J.L. Austin, How to Do Things with Words, ed. J.O. Urmson (New
York: Oxford University Press, 1965), p. 6 et passim.

GORDON HAIST

29

21. “Force,” p. 27.
22. Ted Honderich, After the Fall, Edinburgh University
Edinburgh, Scotland, 2002.

Press,

23. After the Fall, p. 52.
24. Ethics and Politics, p. 299.
25. After the Fall, p. 52.
26. After the Fall, p. 53.
27. Richard Beardsworth, Derrida & the Political (London and New
York: Routledge, 1996), p.XIV.
28. Beardsworth, p. 146.
29. Jacques Derrida, Specters of Marx, tr. Peggy Kamuf (New York and
London: Routledge Classics, 2006), p. 211
30. Emmanuel Levinas, Otherwise Than Being, tr. Alphonso Lingis
(Pittspurgh, PA: Duquesne University Press, 1998), p, 12
31. Beardsworth, p. 147.
32. Beardsworth, p. 150.
33. Amartya Sen, The Idea of Justice (London: Penguin Books, 2010).
34. Sen, p. 87
35. Plutarch, Plutarch’s Lives, tr. John Dryden (New York: The Modern
Library), p. 810.
36. Martin Heidegger, Being and Time, tr. John Macquarrie and
Edward Robinson (New York: Harper & Row, 1962), p. 354 (307 in
the original).
37. Jacques Derrida, Aporias, tr. Thomas Dutoit (Stanford: Stanford
University Press, 1993), p. 77.
38. Aporias, p. 79f.
39. Robert Penn Warren, All the King’s Men (New York: Bantam
Books, 1974), p, 437.
40. “Structure, Sign and Play in the Discourse of the Human
Sciences,”Chapter Ten in Jacques Derrida, Writing & Difference,
tr. Alan Bass (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1978), pp.
278-93.

30

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

41. “Structure,” p. 279.
42. “Structure,” p. 280.
43. Calvin O. Schrag, Communicative Praxis and the Space of
Subjectivity (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1986), p. 11.
44. Calvin O. Schrag, The Resources of Rationality (Bloomington and
Indianapolis: Indiana University Press, 1992), p. 165.
45. Resources, p. 170.
46. Resources, p. 175.
47. Onora O’Neill, Bounds of Justice (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2000), p. 168.
48. Eldridge Cleaver, Soul on Ice (New York: Delta, 1999), p.14.
49. Tommmi Lehtonen, “Justice Expressed as the Capacity to Change
the Point of View,” Chapter One in Perspectives on Culture,
Values, and Justice, ed. Chandana Chakrabarti and Tommi
Lehtonen (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2015), pp. 925.
50. In Sen, p. 20ff.
51. In Rogues, Derrida works out the historicity of the concept of
democracy, coining it as “democracy to come,” and says of it that
“Democracy is the only system, the only constitutional paradigm,
in which, in principle, one has or assumes the right to criticize
everything publicly, including the idea of democracy, its concept,
its history, and its name.” Jacques Derrida, Rogues, tr. PascaleAnne Brault and Michael Naas (Stanford: Stanford University
Press, 1995), p. 87.
52. Jacques Derrida, The Politics of Friendship, tr. George Collins
(London: Verso, 2005), p. 114.
53. Sen, p.369f.

MICHAEL ALLEN

31

Gandhi’s Metaphysics as Encountering the
‘Unreasonable:’ Liberal Multiculturalism,
Self-Suffering, and the Comedy-Satyagrahi
Michael Allen
Abstract
In this article, I reconsider Gandhi’s relationship to liberal
democracy. I argue that a properly Gandhian approach to this
relationship should emphasize the role of the satyagrahi
facilitating conflict resolutions and progress in truth. Above all,
this approach calls upon courageous, exemplary individuals to
pass over and join the viewpoints of ‘unreasonables’
marginalized by the liberal state. However, I also argue that
contemporary Gandhians should explore cultural adaptations of
the satyagrahi-role appropriate to highly materialistic,
multicultural liberal-democracies. In these societies, the
traditional figure of the ascetic or saint may lack popular cultural
resonance. Moreover, moral learning and spiritual insight often
derives from popular culture and entertainment as much as
religious traditions, or devotional practices. Contemporary
Gandhi’s scholars should thus consider the prospects for
‘alternative satyagrahis’ embracing some materialist values and
cultural motifs, as appropriate sources spiritual growth and soulforce.
Keywords: Satyagrahi Conflict Resolution Liberal Democracy
Multiculturalism Religious Devotion Popular Culture

32

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

Introduction
Most Gandhi scholars see his political thought as broadly
sympathetic to liberal ideals, such as toleration and the civil
peace.1 However, many also disagree about the precise nature
of the relationship and the extent of Gandhi’s sympathy for
liberalism. In this article, I examine two recent contributions to
the study of his political thought taking very different positions
on this relationship. In the first contribution, Stuart Gray and
Thomas Hughes2 stress the devotional aspect of Gandhi’s
politics, arguing he was not “merely attempting to reform liberal
political institutions.”3 Instead, Gandhi was, at most, a “friendly
critic of liberal democracy, with the implication that he was not
a supporter of those institutions.”4 In the second contribution,
Sanjay Lal5 emphasizes the importance of Gandhi’s metaphysics
for his political thought. However, Lal argues that Gandhi offers
“recommendations for liberal society… [that are] … unique and
indeed downright revolutionary.”6
Indeed, Lal promises to “explicate the ways in which
Gandhian philosophy challenges modern-day liberals to improve
their societies.”7 He contends liberal democracies
overemphasize formal rights, leaving them incapable of solving
value conflicts in their religiously pluralistic and multicultural
societies. Gandhi’s metaphysically-infused political thought
revolutionizes liberalism by offering a way out of the political
gridlock it creates. According to Lal, this is accomplished by
harnessing state power and authority to promote religious
multicultural instruction in the public-schools, equipping young
people with the virtues and capabilities of Gandhian
nonviolence. Having learned such virtues under the auspices of
the liberal state, they become capable of resolving value
conflicts nonviolently in later life, thus overcoming the problem
of gridlock.
What should we make of these contradictory claims
concerning Gandhi’s relationship to liberalism? Is Gandhi merely
a friendly critic, but not a supporter, of liberalism, consistent

MICHAEL ALLEN

33

with Gray and Hughes? Alternatively, does he potentially
revolutionize the liberal project, consistent with Lal? I argue that
neither Gray and Hughes nor Lal succeed in providing convincing
accounts of the Gandhi/liberalism relationship. On the one
hand, Gray and Hughes fail to consider how Gandhi’s devotional
politics and liberalism could be mutually supportive. On the
other hand, Lal fails to see that harnessing state power and
authority to promote nonviolence through multicultural
religious instruction is both inconsistent with Gandhi’s
metaphysics and ultimately self-defeating. Harnessing state
power contradicts Gandhi’s basic metaphysical commitment to
encountering all conflicting viewpoints, including those
viewpoints liberals regard as ‘unreasonable’ for rejecting liberal
institutions and values.8 The result is not conflict resolution but
a further entrenchment of political gridlock.
Consequently, I argue for an alternative approach to Gandhi’s
relationship to liberalism. This emphasizes the satyagrahi role of
enlightened anarchist operating independently of state power
and authority. First, I discuss how Gray and Hughes distance
Gandhi from the liberal project considering his metaphysics of
truth and transcendence. Second, I discuss how these same
metaphysical considerations lead Lal to align to Gandhi’s
political project with the liberal state. Third, I argue both for a
mutually supportive relationship of Gandhi and liberalism and
against aligning his political thought to the state with its powers
of coercion. Finally, I sketch my alternative approach to this
relationship, appealing to a perhaps rather surprising example:
the self-suffering comedy satyagrahi. In this latter respect, I offer
some remarks on the need for contemporary Gandhians to
adapt the traditional satyagrahi role of ascetic or saint to the
context of today’s highly materialistic liberal democracies.
The importance of my research lies in its contribution to
exploring the ongoing relevance of Gandhi’s thought for liberal
democracies like the United States. It points to new research
lines into the satyagrahi role in such materialistic societies.

34

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

Gandhi scholars should explore the prospects for liberal
democracies providing novel sources of spiritual insight and soul
force.

Gandhi as Friendly Critic, but not Supporter,
of Liberalism
Gray and Hughes distance Gandhi from the liberal project by
arguing that his “conceptual framework does not grow out of a
political dialogue with liberals, but instead out of a critical
reading and expansion of Tolstoy’s religious thought and Hindu
ideas.”9 In this respect, they contend Gandhi was a “hybrid”
thinker, appealing to cross-cultural religious influences. Gray
and Hughes support this contention by exposing Gandhi’s
influence from Tolstoy concerning experimentation and
experience as the only path to truth and God, along with his
Hindu-inspired conceptions of satyagraha, swaraj, and
Ramarajya. Indeed, according to Gray and Hughes, these latter
conceptions “do not point to traditional liberal institutions, nor
do they suggest more familiar Western concepts such as the
lawful use of violence.”10

Satyagraha
On the one hand, Gandhi derives his conception of satyagraha,
or soul-force, from Tolstoy’s replacing “the method of violence
for removing tyranny or securing reform with the method of
non-resistance to evil.”11 On the other hand, he derives it from
the Gita’s teaching that “renouncing attachment to the fruit of
one’s actions should prevent the temptation to commit harm,”
consistent with our “devotional duty to pursue truth.”12 As
derived from these two sources, satyagraha thus establishes
“the glaring importance of equality” in the public sphere.13 This
partly means political equality “embodied in the new Indian
constitution.”14 However, such equality also “operates as the
metaphysical basis of the atman,” that is, an “eternal force

MICHAEL ALLEN

35

underlying all human beings.”15 As metaphysical “ground for our
being,” the atman “supports both a fundamental equality
among all human beings and points toward a better
understanding of God.”16 It does so “because the qualitative
status of one’s soul is predicated on one’s devotion to God and
truth, and human beings are equal in their capability of devotion
and cultivating soul power.”17
This establishes a basis for political equality because social
“status does not equate to moral worth.” Indeed, all individual
atmans are equal qua atmans, “regardless of their various
karmic residues,” guaranteeing “equality of treatment for all
religions as [well as] the so-called untouchables.”18 However,
Gandhi’s metaphysically grounded conception of atmanequality “does not rely on Western liberal notions of
autonomy.”19 For Western liberals, autonomy entails only in a
thin, secular conception of the moral capabilities of persons, as
willing to abide by reciprocal terms of cooperation.20 This is
detached from any devotional obligation to “pursue truth” or
“understand God.”21 Further, as I discuss shortly, Western
liberals see detachment not from the fruits of one’s actions as
per the Gita, but rather from the pursuit of metaphysical truth
and the understanding of God as a method of avoiding tyranny
and evil in the public sphere.

Swaraj
According to Gray and Hughes, Gandhi’s separation from the
conceptual framework of Western liberalism becomes even
more apparent if we examine the basis of swaraj, or self-rule, in
the Gita. Indeed, “if one takes Krsna’s (or God’s) teaching
seriously and devotedly [and] follows the path of duty that
points towards truth, one will be able to rule effectively over
oneself, and this will then render national politics and stateoperated judicial mechanisms unnecessary.”22 Gandhi’s political
ideal is thus an “enlightened anarchy” in which “there is not
political power because there is no state.”23 Enlightened anarchy

36

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

means “ruling begins with the individual and only moves
outward after self-rule is achieved.”24 A central aspect of this
ideal is “that it is village-centered, with power most
authoritative at the small community level where panchayats
(small, popularly elected bodies in charge of running village
affairs) had legislative, executive and judicial power, and
weakest at the federal level.”25 In this respect, Gray and Hughes
contend Gandhi’s ideal political system is “the inverse of a “topheavy state-centered system.”26
Contrary to Gray and Hughes, Barun Mitra’27 argues such a
dispersal of power from the federal to individual and local levels
supports his own view of Gandhi as a classical liberal or
libertarian. However, I find that hardly plausible. Classical
liberals are mostly concerned with protecting the rights of
property from state intrusions. Gray and Hughes rightly
emphasize Gandhi’s reasons for keeping the centralized state
weak are spiritual rather than material. Consistent with his
metaphysics of individual selves or atmans, Gandhi provides a
“theological” explanation for why “one must rule over oneself
before turning one’s attention towards others.”28 As realized
through devotion, a well-ordered soul is prerequisite for ruling
ourselves in such a way that we are never a “hindrance” to our
neighbors.29 In this respect, even Mitra admits his classical
liberal interpretation of Gandhi requires us to “forget the
Mahatma.”30 That, however, entails abandoning Gandhi’s
uniquely devotional approach to politics.

Ramarajya
Gray and Hughes would undoubtedly see Mitra as mistaken to
“focus solely on swaraj without relating it to the religiously
loaded concept of Ramarajya.”31 Rather than a “mystical divine
kingdom,” Ramarajya is “a spiritual and existential condition”
connected to swaraj. 32 This connection is both political and
metaphysical. It is political to the extent atman-equality could
produce a “manifest form of Ramarajya” when all participants in

MICHAEL ALLEN

37

the social and political order – Brahmin and Dalit, Hindu,
Muslim, Christian, and so on – are treated as “interconnected
equals.”33 However, the “implication” of such social and political
equality is metaphysical in that it “points towards and brings us
closer to God.”34 Hence, in the manifest form of Ramarajya, the
“universal soul rules over individual human souls.”35 Again, this
is a far cry from Western secular liberalism according to which
the value and function of equality consists solely in stabilizing
and maintaining a civil peace rather than facilitating diverse
experimental paths to transcendence. Pointing to the ultimate
goal of transcendence, Gandhi’s devotional approach to politics
thus overdetermines the requirements of political legitimacy in
stability and peace from the perspective of Western liberals.
This underlines Gray and Hughes’ assessment of Gandhi as,
at most, a friendly critic, but not a supporter, of liberal values
and institutions. Gandhi is friendly to liberalism insofar as he can
embrace its ideals of social and political equality. However, he is
a critic and ultimately not a supporter insofar as liberalism
rejects the connections he wants to make between equality,
devotion, and God. Indeed, Gandhi’s wanting to make these
connections is not simply a matter of his subjective preference
for devotional duty in pursuit of God and truth. Instead, they
follow logically from his conviction that spiritual discipline is –
objectively-speaking – a necessary condition for creating a
nonviolent social and political order, as manifest form of
Ramarajya. In this respect, Gray and Hughes reject as mistaken
Anthony Parel’s36 alternative, nondevotional interpretation of
Gandhi, according to which his “political thought develops out
of a constructive dialogue with liberal political actors.”37 As a
result of this dialogue, Parel claims to find a “clear difference”38
in Gandhi’s thought between nonviolence as creed and as policy.
According to Parel, “Nonviolence as policy or civic
nonviolence is what he [Gandhi] expects from the average
citizen.”39 Such civic nonviolence “permits the lawful use of
violence for the sake of the public good, such as the

38

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

maintenance of public order and the right of self-defense.”40 By
contrast, Parel claims creedal or heroic nonviolence is “an option
only available to exceptional individuals.”41 Gray and Hughes,
however, dismiss this distinction as lacking “any reference to
Gandhi’s written or spoken word.”42 Denying any exegetical
foundation for Parel’s distinction, Gray and Hughes conclude
“Gandhi is not nearly as elitist as Parel makes him out to be” and
his “devotional politics is equally available to and practicable for
everyone.”43 As I have argued elsewhere,44 Gray and Hughes’
dismissal of Parel is rather cavalier because one can marshal
considerable evidence from the Gandhi corpus to support his
implicit endorsement of this distinction. Rather that remake that
case here, I turn next to Lal’s45 Gandhian dialogue with liberalism
as not merely constructive but “downright revolutionary.”46

Gandhi’s Thought as Revolutionizing Liberalism
Like Gray and Hughes, Lal takes seriously the idea that Gandhi
motivates his political thought through his metaphysics. Rather
than distancing Gandhi from liberalism, however, Lal contends
Gandhi’s metaphysics lays the basis for revolutionizing the
liberal project. In this respect, Lal appeals to Gandhi’s
transformation from his “early view that God is truth to his
famous conclusion that truth is God.”47 This emphasizes that,
“while the objective validity of the concept of God can be
doubted and denied, the objective validity of the concept of
truth cannot be denied, without, at the very least acknowledging
it.”48 ‘Truth is God’ does not desacralize Gandhi’s philosophy
insofar as truth is the path to transcendence. On the contrary,
Gandhi maintains the traditional Hindu standpoint that truth is
identical with reality (sat), as an unknowable Absolute
“undifferentiated one.”49 Consequently, we can only ever know
our own relative viewpoints on truth. In this respect, Lal
reproduces much of Gray and Hughes’ metaphysical analysis of
Gandhi’s thought, despite this refocus on truth over God.

MICHAEL ALLEN

39

Passing Over and the Civil Virtue of Nonviolence
However, Lal contends this refocus establishes an epistemology
of civil nonviolence in the method of passing over. Shunning
coercion, each of us should “pass over” from “one point of view
to another… com[ing] back to [our] own point of view with
greater insights.”50 On the one hand, passing over divergent
viewpoints before returning to our own means we must “be
willing to correct ourselves.”51 On the other hand, it means that
we must be “willing to continually undergo self-purification.”52
Gandhi thus accepts “the traditional eastern view (which has
included Socratic thinkers, among other Westerns, as its
subscribers) that the body always distorts and limits one’s
perceptions (to whatever extent).”53 As such, “bodily existence
cannot be completely free of attachments.”54 Although the
focus is now on experiments in truth through the method of
passing over, these experiments depend on self-purification,
disciplining ourselves to let go of our attachments to violence as
coercively imposing our viewpoints on others. This, again,
coheres with Gray and Hughes’ analysis of devotional duty and
practice as necessary to facilitate our spiritual progress.
Given these similarities with Gray and Hughes, how does Lal
conclude that Gandhi’s metaphysics revolutionizes liberalism
rather than providing a basis for friendly criticism of – if not
support for – its institutions and values? Lal himself is not
entirely clear on this score. He argues that the method of passing
over provides the basis for a Gandhian criticism of liberal
democratic societies. Such societies do not “truly live up to their
promises” concerning citizens’ capabilities “to exercise their
formal rights:”55 freedom of expression, conscience, and so on.
However, this alone is insufficient to distinguish Lal’s position
from that of Nicholas Grier56 who argues Gandhi merely reforms
rather than revolutionizes liberalism. According to Grier, citizens
must first learn self-discipline by cultivating entirely general civic
virtues, like patience, moderation, and courage. As learned in
the context of diverse community traditions, these general

40

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

virtues are the basis on which we each personally appropriate
the “nexus of public justification, tolerance, and moderation …
central to liberal virtue.”57

Liberal Neutrality and Avoidance
Consistent with Parel, Grier argues Gandhian non-violence is not
only an “optional personal virtue” of exceptional individuals. It
is also “a required civil virtue”58 equivalent to Rawls’ liberal
virtue of civility. Hence, Gandhian civil nonviolence and Rawlsian
civility both call upon ‘the average citizen’ to exercise discipline
and restraint presenting public reasons to all members of a
culturally and religiously diverse polity. Grier notes correctly his
Gandhian reform of liberalism means that the liberal state is not
“morally neutral”59 concerning religious traditions. It is not
neutral because it recognizes them as vital resources for its
citizens learning to be civil to one another. Nevertheless, Grier’s
Gandhian reform of liberalism falls short of fundamentally
challenging, or overturning, its neutrality. Indeed, the liberal
state remains neutral to the extent it does not lend its
ideological or financial support to any one or other religious
viewpoint or favored set of viewpoints.
Moreover, if, as Grier argues, civil nonviolence is about
discipline and restraint in public reasoning, then it need not
engage Lal’s method of passing over multiple viewpoints.
Citizens could appropriate the liberal nexus of public justification
and toleration if they learn discipline and restraint from, at least,
one viewpoint. This might sacrifice insights gained into truth;
that is, insights establishing alternate pathways to
transcendence and knowledge of ultimate reality. Nevertheless,
one viewpoint is sufficient for the liberal project of public
justification and toleration. At most, citizens would be required
to tolerate conversions from their own viewpoint to different
viewpoints and pathways. Not needing to employ Lal’s method
of passing over, Grier’s approach is thus consistent with John
Rawls’ alternative method of avoidance.60 This calls upon

MICHAEL ALLEN

41

citizens exercising the virtue of civility to avoid making any kind
of appeal to the metaphysics of truth and transcendence when
offering public reasons for policy proposals.

Gandhian Revolution and the Multicultural Curriculum
Nevertheless, Lal goes beyond Grier’s reformist equation of
nonviolence and civility by arguing citizens will be incapable of
exercising their formal rights effectively “if societies do not take
active steps to develop their moral characters.”61 Despite “court
rulings that have supposedly settled questions regarding the
legality of abortion and of prayer in public school intense
disagreement among various social communities on such
matters have seriously hampered attempts of the members of
liberal societies to harmoniously coexist.”62 Under this
circumstance, the liberal democratic state cannot “be successful
in being both pluralist and justifying political and social rules to
the satisfaction of those with diverging life plans, interests, and
conceptions of the good.”63 This failure to simultaneously
valorize pluralism and justify political and social rules results in
a “seemingly never-ending political gridlock commonly
bemoaned in liberal states.”64 Lal thus contends the liberal state
must take the extra step of lending its ideological and financial
power to the moral cultivation of its citizens though
“government promotion of religion.”65
Indeed, this is Lal’s revolutionary proposal. Extended to “the
world’s great religious traditions,” state endorsed, publicly
financed multicultural instruction is “essential “to prevent moral
decay among the citizenry.”66 Consequently, the liberal state
should require all young people to pass over the “associated
tenets.”67 of the great religions. Applying the method of passing
over to the public-school curriculum would not only help them
gain insight into their own relative viewpoints on truth, putting
them on the path to Absolute Truth. It would also lay the
foundation for their resolving otherwise intractable value
conflicts in their later lives by cultivating in them now the civil

42

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

virtue of nonviolence. Nevertheless, supporting multicultural
religious instruction, the liberal state must back down from its
commitment to the method of avoiding any engagement with
the metaphysics of truth and transcendence. Lal’s proposal is
thus revolutionary rather than reformist insofar as it effectively
overturns liberal state neutrality concerning metaphysical
questions of truth and God.

Avoidance by Default
To be sure, this does not mean that the liberal state endorses
any one or other competing viewpoint on truth and
transcendence. Instead, it endorses all of them – or, at least, all
of those it deems suitable for inclusion in the public-school
curriculum. To this extent, the state necessarily endorses
Gandhi’s metaphysics of truth as a conception of multiple
relative truths establishing alternative pathways to an ultimately
unknowable Absolute Truth. In this respect, Lal could argue that
the method of passing over is not fundamentally at odds with
Rawls’ aims concerning the method of avoidance. Hence, Lal
could argue that Gandhi’s metaphysics of truth is not a
comprehensive doctrine in the sense Rawls uses that term. After
all, Gandhi’s metaphysics does not present a comprehensive
view of the ‘whole truth’ for ‘all of life’ that is knowable to its
adherents. According to Rawls, all claims to possess a
comprehensive or Absolute knowledge of truth and reality are
sources of violence. Indeed, the adherents of different doctrines
compete for the uses of state power to impose their views on
others who make different comprehensive or Absolute
knowledge claims.
Consequently, Lal could argue that Gandhi’s metaphysics is
consistent with Rawls’ method of avoidance by default. The
method of passing over avoids state endorsement and support
for any comprehensive or Absolute knowledge claims because it
denies that the tenets of the world’s great religious traditions
are properly sources for such exclusive knowledge claims.

MICHAEL ALLEN

43

Passing over leads to ‘insights,’ not comprehensive or Absolute
knowledge of truth. To this extent, the liberal state retains its
neutrality regarding claims to a comprehensive knowledge of
truth in the great religious traditions. Applied to the publicschool multicultural curriculum, the method of passing over
their associated tenets might appear innocuous to liberals
worrying about how comprehensive truth claims lead to
intolerance and violence.
At this point, I have laid out the positions, on the one hand,
of Gray and Hughes and, on the other hand, of Lal. I have argued
both ground Gandhi’s thought metaphysically, despite profound
differences in how they conceive his relationship to liberalism. I
want to argue now, contrary to Gray and Hughes, that Gandhi’s
thought is generally supportive of liberal values and institutions.
However, I also want to argue, contrary to Lal, that Gandhi’s
thought does not revolutionize the liberal project in anything
like the manner he suggests.

Reassessing Gandhi’s Relationship to Liberalism
Why Gandhi is Generally Supportive of Liberalism
Gray and Hughes’ position is that, because his political thought
is devotional, Gandhi is not a supporter of liberal institutions and
values, even though he is friendly towards liberal ideals of social
and political equality. However, Gray and Hughes do remarkably
little to explicate or defend this claim. If he embraces these
ideals, which Gray and Hughes tell us he does, then Gandhi is
surely a supporter of liberalism in, at least, some important part.
For them to make good on their claim he is not a supporter, Gray
and Hughes would need to establish that liberalism’s social and
political ideals fundamentally clash with Gandhi’s devotional
politics. In other words, they would have to show that liberal
institutions and values somehow inhibit devotional progress
towards God and truth, thus motivating him to refrain from

44

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

supporting them, despite his friendliness towards social and
political egalitarianism.
Perhaps Gray and Hughes simply assume that Gandhi sees
liberalism and materialism as tied together so that the former
necessarily falls victim of his general critique of Western
civilization as undermining spiritual values and the pursuit of
metaphysical truth. However, this ignores the extent to which
liberalism has historically defined itself in relation to this pursuit
by separating the domains of church and state as, respectively,
saving souls and keeping the peace. In this respect, the liberal
project is not motivated by hostility to spiritual values and truth
per se. Instead, it began as a response to the seventeenth
century European wars of religion. During this tumultuous
period, the adherents of conflicting faiths sought to claim the
coercive powers of the state to directly promote the spiritual
goal of transcendence by imposing their truth onto everyone
else. Hence, liberals base their project of religious tolerance on
the insight that state power deployed in the service of
promoting any one or other conception of truth results only in
social disharmony and violence.
Adopting a standpoint of neutrality on questions of religious
faith and metaphysical truth, one might say the liberal state
supports Gandhi’s devotional politics. It does so because
Rawlsian avoidance helps to establish a civil condition of peace,
or nonviolence, whereby citizens engaged in different
devotional practices may pursue their various experiments in
truth. Not only does this mean Gandhi’s metaphysics is
consistent with the method of avoidance by default, as I have
already argued above. It also means, absent the threat of
coercion and persecution by the state, citizens are likelier to
make progress concerning their insights into truth and their
spiritual capacities for transcendence. Consequently, neutrality
and avoidance promote swaraj and its associated spiritual and
existential condition of Ramarajya. As Gray and Hughes

MICHAEL ALLEN

45

themselves stress, Gandhi sees this latter condition as being
realized independently of central state power and authority.
Nevertheless, supposing I am right to say liberalism and
Gandhi’s devotional politics could be mutually supportive, this
still leaves open the question of whether the liberal state should
take the extra ‘revolutionary’ step advocated by Lal. That is,
should it relax its own historical commitments to neutrality and
avoidance by supporting multicultural religious education to
address a crisis of value conflicts and political deadlock that it
cannot resolve on its own terms?

Why Gandhi does not revolutionize the Liberal Project
I want to argue now that Lal’s proposal does not revolutionize
the liberal project at all. I first consider some objections to the
proposal. For example, Grier might object that it is selfdefeating. Public school multicultural religious instruction strips
the tenets of the world’s great religious traditions from their
devotional contexts of church, temple, mosque, etc.
Nevertheless, participation in community devotional practice is
how young people learn the general virtues of discipline and
moderation. Moreover, Gandhians might object that Lal simply
loses sight of the relationship between the method of passing
over and self-purification. Again, devotional practice and
discipline is a condition for detachment from the distortions of
bodily existence limiting our progress in truth and
transcendence. By Lal’s own account of Gandhi’s metaphysics,
passing over and self-purification are inextricably linked.
Stripped from the institutional and community contexts of
devotion in church, temple, and mosque, public school
multicultural religious instruction is likely to reduce passing over
to a merely formal exercise of comparing and contrasting
religious tenets, thus defeating Lal’s intended purpose for it.
However, I think the most compelling objection to Lal’s
revolutionary proposal is that it simply reproduces established
familiar liberal multiculturalist positions. To this extent, it does

46

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

not “challenge liberals to improve their societies,”68 or offer
anything new. Hence, Lal insists that “it would seemingly follow
for … Gandhi that in liberal societies public support should be
granted for only those religious communities that themselves
affirm liberal values.”69 I find this latter remark quite stunning.
Indeed, by restricting public funding for religious instruction to
only those religions affirming liberal values, Lal commits Gandhi
to Rawls’s controversial distinction between comprehensive
doctrines of truth – religious or otherwise – as either reasonable
or unreasonable.70 Contrary to the adherents of reasonable
doctrines, the adherents of unreasonable ones are unwilling the
affirm liberal values and, as such, they should be excluded from
the liberal public domain.71
With Lal’s proposal, however, Gandhi would be in exactly the
same position as multicultural liberals concerning unreasonable
religious viewpoints. In their Democracy and Disagreement,72
Amy Gutmann and Dennis Thompson discuss the case of
fundamentalist Christian parents of public schoolchildren in
Hawkins County, TN. The parents objected to their children
being required to read a textbook including the Hindu story of
the Blind Man and the Elephant. Fearing this would lead their
children astray from the ‘true path,’ they insisted on
withdrawing them from that part of the school curriculum.
Gutmann and Thompson found this unreasonable, arguing that
the state had an obligation to cultivate in their children the
values of a pluralistic democracy. Further, in an ongoing
controversy in the UK, fundamentalist Muslim parents argue
they have a right to protect their children from exposure to a
storybook including ‘LGBT lessons.”73
Again, the liberal response would be to regard that as
unreasonable and appeal to the legitimate coercive power of the
state to ensure compliance with the multicultural curriculum.

MICHAEL ALLEN

47

Suffering Unreasonable Viewpoints
As relying on state enforced compliance of the unreasonable,
such a response can hardly be reconciled with Gandhi’s method
of passing over if – as noted above – its efficacy depends on its
relation to self-suffering. Resort to coercion by the liberalmulticulturalist state spares young people from ever having to
suffer or bear any illiberal, unreasonable religious viewpoints.
However, we cannot then expect state enforced compliance
with the multicultural religious curriculum to cultivate a truly
Gandhian civil virtue of nonviolence. Lal quotes Gandhi’s remark
that “the definition of truth is deposited in every human
heart.”74 State coercion fails to engage with the truth in the
hearts of the unreasonable. Whatever truth resides there ought
to be the basis on which satyagrahis proceed to ‘melt their
hearts’ through their willingness to endure self-suffering. Hence,
allied to self-suffering, the method of passing over should not
distinguish between viewpoints as either reasonable or
unreasonable. Instead, philosophically consistent Gandhians
should see those viewpoints counting as unreasonable, in Rawls’
sense, as pathways to truth for those who believe them to be
“true at this moment.”75
However, self-suffering in encountering even unreasonable
viewpoints proves inconsistent with Lal’s ‘revolutionary’
interpretation of Gandhi concerning my above two cases of
Christian and the Muslim fundamentalist parents.
Consequently, I turn now to the prospects for contemporary
Gandhians – living in religiously and culturally pluralistic liberaldemocracies – providing an alternative approach to value
conflicts.

An Alternative Approach: The Comedy Satyagrahi
To this extent, I return to Gandhi’s notion of the satyagrahi
demonstrating exemplary virtue, courage, and self-suffering – or
soul-force -- from a standpoint external to the coercive power

48

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

and authority of the state. I contend the satyagrahi’s
enlightened anarchist standpoint on truth and transcendence
offers a properly Gandhian alternative to Lal’s proposal for
appropriating state power to advance a liberal multiculturalist
agenda of nonviolent conflict resolution. Consistent with my
argument above, the satyagrahi should demonstrate exemplary
virtue, courage, and self-suffering in passing over the viewpoints
of Rawlsian unreasonables, disavowing liberal institutions and
values. Hence, rather than calling upon the liberal state to use
its coercive powers to contain and marginalize them, the
satyagrahi ought to engage with their illiberal viewpoints,
courageously facing down and disarming any potential for
violence in such encounters.
To illustrate this alternative approach to seemingly
intractable value conflicts, I appeal to a contemporary example
of what I consider soul-force and self-suffering in the
contemporary United States. In conjunction with a CNN camera
crew, the Black American comedian Kamau Bell demonstrated
considerable moral courage by inviting himself to a gathering of
the Ku Klux Klan. He proceeded to talk reasonably to purportedly
unreasonable white supremacists dressed in white sheets and
hoods. The ‘unreasonable’ supremacists responded to him in
kind, disarmed by his courage and soul-force, one even
remarking ‘I think we’re having a great dialogue here.’76 Of
course, one might object that the KKK members responded to
Bell reasonably only because the CNN cameras were present.
However, Gandhi himself did not shy away from media publicity,
for example, inviting US newspaper reporters to the salt
marches. Indeed, through newspaper reports, the oppressive
British Raj could be judged in the ‘eyes of the world.’ One might
also object that Bell – a rather corpulent fellow who obviously
likes to indulge in life’s sensuous pleasures – is no saint.
However, I would consider that irrelevant. Gandhi deliberately
cultivated the figure of the satyagrahi as other-worldly saint to
resonate with the cultural predispositions of early twentieth-

MICHAEL ALLEN

49

century Indians. Bell, as corpulent comedian-satyagrahi,
resonates with the cultural predispositions of twenty-first
century Americans in a way that a loincloth-wearing saint does
not.
As for Bell’s metaphysics, I would have to say it is entirely
unclear that he as any. Certainly, he does not explicitly talk
about transcendence and an undifferentiated one, instead
favoring jokes. To this extent, he is perhaps closer to the liberal
model of sidelining, or avoiding, metaphysics. However, in my
estimation that, again, is irrelevant. Bell effectively
demonstrates Gandhian nonviolence. The overall effect of his
comedy is to pass over and join otherwise conflicting viewpoints
in the interest of facilitating greater insights into our shared
human condition. Hence, I would say he promotes a Gandhian
metaphysics of truth regardless of whether that is his intention.
One might further object that my appeal to Bell as contemporary
US comedian-satyagrahi is a trivialization of Gandhi’s devotional
political thought. However, I suggest that we might see it instead
as a cultural adaptation of the satyagrahi role to a contemporary
liberal democracy. Indeed, such an adaptation challenges Parel’s
creedal/civil distinction concerning nonviolence. Facing down
the KKK, Bell clearly goes beyond our expectations for ordinary
citizens. However, his motivations do not easily fit into the
category of ‘creedal.’ Likelier than not, they originate in a hodgepodge of spiritual and secular influences ranging from the US
civil rights movement to an indigenous US comedy tradition of
engagement with contentious social issues.
Nevertheless, maintaining Parel’s distinction between the
extraordinary nonviolence of saints and our expectations of
nonviolence for ordinary citizens, I suggest we might understand
the former not as creedal but plural and eclectic. Creedal
nonviolence implies devotion to some singular devotional
perspective. However, that is perhaps the weakness in the
analysis of Grier. He overemphasizes spiritual traditions as
contexts for learning virtue and discipline, failing to grasp fully

50

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

the experimental character of Gandhi’s metaphysics and
politics. As for Lal, he grasps the importance of experimentation
and passing over multiple perspectives for Gandhi’s metaphysics
and politics. Nevertheless, he overemphasizes the tenets, if not
the practices, of the great religious traditions. By contrast, from
my perspective, adapting Gandhi to liberal democracies entails
recognizing such societies include secular moral traditions,
including liberal toleration, as well as a mass culture of popular
entertainment.
In this cultural context, moral learning is as likely to take place
through spectating and consuming movies and TV as
participating in community traditions and religious devotional
practices. This observation might cause some discomfort for
contemporary Gandhians deeply influenced by Gandhi’s critique
of modernity and its excessive materialism. Indeed, all of the
writers I have considered – Gray and Hughes, Grier, Lal – follow
Gandhi in looking to the great traditions of spiritual
enlightenment and metaphysical truth as antidote to the
spiritual poverty of modernity. However, Gandhi’s critique of
materialism overlooks the potential for modernity to provide
novel sources of spiritual growth. Contemporary Gandhians (as
opposed to Gandhi himself in his own historical/cultural milieu)
display a failure of critical and empathetic imagination by
ignoring such novel sources of enlightenment and growth in
liberal democracies.

Conclusion
In this article, I have argued that Gandhi’s devotional political
thought is potentially more supportive of liberal democracy than
Gray and Hughes think. However, I also argued that his
metaphysics commit him to prioritizing the self-suffering of
courageous individuals over state power and authority. To this
extent, I rejected Lal’s revolutionary proposal for harnessing the
liberal state to promote nonviolence. Instead, I argued that a
properly Gandhian approach should emphasize the role of the

MICHAEL ALLEN

51

satyagrahi – as enlightened anarchist – facilitating conflict
resolutions and greater insights into truth. Above all, this
approach calls for courageous self-suffering from satyagrahis
passing over and joining the viewpoints of those marginalized by
the liberal state as ‘unreasonables.’ I further argued
contemporary Gandhians should explore cultural adaptations to
the role of satyagrahi. My appeal to Kamau Bell, as comedian
satyagrahi, is one, but only one, example of such adaptation.
Challenging Gandhi’s insistence upon the spiritual poverty of
modern civilization, I contend further research into the ongoing
relevance of his political thought must look to ‘alternative
satyagrahis’ embracing some materialist values and cultural
motifs, as appropriate sources of spirituality and soul-force.
East Tennessee State University

52

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

NOTES
1.

2.

3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.

See, for example, Bhikhu Parekh, Gandhi’s Political Philosophy: A
Critical Examination, (Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame
Press, 1989). Also see Vinit Haksar, Gandhi and Liberalism:
Satyagraha and the Conquest of Evil, (London and New York:
Routledge, 2018).
Stuart Gray and Thomas M. Hughes, “Gandhi’s Devotional
Political Thought.” Philosophy East and West 65:2 (2015), 375400.
Ibid, 391.
Ibid, my italics.
Sanjay Lal, Gandhi’s Thought and Liberal Democracy, (Lanham,
Boulder, New York, London: Lexington Books, 2018)
Ibid, 10, my italics.
Ibid, 18.
See John Rawls, Political Liberalism (New York: Columbia
University Press, 2005).
Gray and Hughes, “Gandhi’s Devotional,” 391.
Ibid, 392.
Ibid, 385,
Ibid.
Ibid, 386.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Rawls, Political.
Gray and Hughes, “Gandhi’s Devotional,” 386.
Ibid, 387.
Ibid.

MICHAEL ALLEN

24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.

45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.

53

Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Barun Mitra, “Was Gandhi a Liberal?’ in How Liberal is India? ed.
Ronald Meinardus (New Delhi: Academic Foundation, 2019)
Gray and Hughes, “Gandhi’s Devotional,” 387.
Ibid.
Mitra, “Was Gandhi?’ 48,
Gray and Hughes, “Gandhi’s Devotional,” 388.
Ibid.
Ibid, 389.
Ibid, 387.
Ibid, 388.
Anthony Parel, “Gandhi and the Emergence of the Modern Indian
Political Canon.” The Review of Politics 70 (2008), 40-63.
Gray and Hughes, “Gandhi’s Devotional,” 390.
Ibid.
Parel, “Gandhi and the Emergence,’ 122.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Gray and Hughes, “Gandhi’s Devotional,” 391.
Ibid 390.
Michael Allen, “Working toward the Devotional Ideal: Gandhi on
the Non-Ideal Status of Liberal Institutions and Values,” Journal
of East-West Thought 2:9 (2019)
Lal, “Gandhi’s Thought.”
Ibid, 10.
Ibid, 2
Ibid.
Ibid, 4.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.

54

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

54. Ibid.
55. Ibid, 20.
56. Nicholas Grier, “Nonviolence as a Civic Virtue: Gandhi and
Reformed Liberalism.” International Journal of Hindu Studies 7
(2003), 75-97.
57. Ibid, 89.
58. Ibid, 93, my italics
59. Grier, “Nonviolence as Civic Virtue,” 72.
60. See Farah Godrej, Nonviolence and Gandhi’s Truth: A Method for
Moral and Political Arbitration, The Review of Politics 68 (2006),
287-317.
61. Lal, Gandhi’s Thought, 20, my italics.
62. Ibid.
63. Ibid.
64. Ibid.
65. Ibid, 54.
66. Ibid.
67. Ibid, 73.
68. Lal, Gandhi’s Thought, 18
69. Ibid, 79.
70. Rawls, Political
71. Ibid.
72. Amy Gutmann and Dennis Thompson, Democracy and
Disagreement (Cambridge: Belknap Press, 1998)
73. https://www.theguardian.com/education/2019/mar/19
Accessed 11/3/19.
74. Mohandas Gandhi, All Men are Brothers (New York: Columbia
University Press, 1958), my italics.
75. Lal, Gandhi’s Thought, 3.
76. https://www.cnn.com/videos/tv/2016/04/19/
Accessed
11/3/19.

RANA P. B. SINGH

55

Environmental Ethics and Sustainability in
Indian Thought: Vision of Mahatma Gandhi
Rana P.B. Singh
Abstract
Religion (dharma) plays a vital role in the Hindu (Sanātana)
quest for understanding and practicing harmony between
nature and humanity that result into the formation of a global
understanding, i.e., ‘transcending the universe.’ The importance
and applicability of such new consciousness is a sign in
promoting global humanism in the 21st century, where
environmental ethics and sustainability are the wheels of
making the future more humane and peaceful. Arne Naess, who
coined the term ‘deep ecology’ conceiving humankind as an
integral part of its environment, gives credit to Gandhi. Gandhi’s
contributions help to re-awaken the human spirit to Selfrealisation, finally leading to revelation promoting human
coexistence with nature sustainably, mostly through reinterpretation of Vedantic thought. Under the SDGs (Sustainable
Development Goals) the ideas of Gandhi are recognised as a
path that makes human coexistence stronger, feasible and cosharedness, sustainable in peace and harmony with nature. This
essay presents ecospiritual contextuality and its vitality
concerning a sustainable perspective in line with Gandhi’s vision
and way of life.

56

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

Keywords: Hindu tradition, Sanātana dharma, Gandhi,
environmental ethics, ecospirituality, sustainable development,
SDGs.

1. Framing Sustainability and Cultural enveloping
The ethics of “sustainable development,” to which almost
everyone subscribes today, requires this generation to use the
world’s environmental resources in ways that do not jeopardize
the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. To be
successful, this principle requires another dimension –
reverence, revelation, and ethical concerns. Development
should preserve, not destroy, those assets of the natural and
spiritual power of one’s own cultural heritage which future
generations would also wish to enjoy and cherish1. The spirit of
sustainability can be explained as the ethic to behave in ways
that help others and to realize the deeper nature of things – the
cosmic integrity that is ultimately the sanctity of life. This
involves a way of life and action determined by the deeper
principle of realizing the intrinsic value of one’s services. This is
a call of the time: ‘When we care for the Earth, we are caring for
ourselves’ – “Despite our scientific and cultural taming of wild
nature we still wander, confused over how to value it”2.
Obviously, “since the roots of our (ecological) trouble are so
largely religious, the remedy must also be essentially religious,
whether we call it that or not. We must rethink and refeel our
nature and destiny”3. Ethical values are the moral force in the
sustainable existence, progress, maintenance, and continuance
of human beings.
The Gandhian view of non-violence (ahimsa), vegetarianism,
and su-karma (right action) is based on the idea of total spiritual
interconnectedness of all life, of the divine within all life. One
has to realize that “the living Earth has a right to life, and that
right is the primary moral argument for sustainable life”4.
Gandhian thought is more relevant today and well suited to the
soul and society of India. Gandhi gathered strength and

57

RANA P. B. SINGH

inspiration to promote the sense of Self-realization from the
Bhāgavad Gītā (6.29), “He whose self is harmonized by yoga
seeth the Self abiding in all beings and all being in the Self;
everywhere he sees the same”5. We need to make development
sustainable, both environmentally and culturally.
The classical model of Sustainable Development6 (Gro
Herlem Brundtland Report 1987; Fig. 1) has been critically
examined after the passage of time and comprehended under
the umbrella of Universal Forum of Cultures 2007, where
emphasis is laid on developing Civility – referring to culture,
language, and religions for inter-faith dialogue. Three modesmodel for culture and sustainable development has been
structured engulfing sustainability (Fig. 2): So, Social; En,
Environment; Ec, Economic; where the three roles of Culture in
Sustainable Development (the three circles representing the
three pillars, So, En, and Ec), are envisaged. In this model Culture
is added as the fourth pillar (a), Culture mediating between the
three pillars (b), and Culture as the foundation for sustainable
development (c). The arrows in the model indicate the everchanging dynamics of culture and sustainable development7.

Fig. 1. Basic frame of Sustainability (after Brundtland Report 1987).

58

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

Fig. 2. Culture and Sustainable Development: Three Models (a) Culture in sustainable development, (b) Culture for sustainable
development, (c) Culture as sustainable development; So, Social;
En, Environment; Ec, Economic8.

The Gandhian idea of development is based on the
foundational ethics of ahimsa (non-violence, which he
interpreted as ‘firmness in the truth’). Obviously, ‘ecological
thinking in Hinduism has received a fresh vitality through the
thought of Gandhi, particularly his emphasis on non-violence
with respect to all forms of life, and simple living in harmony
with the environment’9. Ethical value is the moral force in the
sustainable coexistence, development, maintenance, and
continuance of human beings. Gandhi’s life and work do hold
possible implications for postmodern approaches to the
environment, mostly based on his principles of ahimsa (nonviolence) and aparigraha (non-possession). He said, “I must
confess that I do not draw a sharp or any distinction between
economics and ethics. Economics that hurt the moral well being
of an individual or a nation are immoral and, therefore, sinful”10.
Rethinking development involves a shift from the present-day
development crisis to the ethical march for coexistence. A new
ethic ― value and faith systems ― is required for humankind to

59

RANA P. B. SINGH

live in harmony with the natural world on which we depend for
survival and well-being. The rethinking should be based on the
foundational value ― the reasoning that underlies the ethical
sense of deeper understanding of Man-Nature Interrelatedness,
which is the basic philosophy of coexistence. ― referred in
different cultures in their own ways, like coexistence (kyosei) in
Japan, harmonious society (xiaokang) in China, African
humanism (ubuntu) in South Africa, and global family
(vasudhaiva kutuṁbakam) in Indian thought. All such important
ethical systems are based essentially on a foundational value,
which for Gandhi was ahimsa (non-violence, which he
interpreted as frame of ‘firmness in the truth’), for Schweitzer
‘reverence for life,’ and for Aldo Leopold the ‘sacredness of
land’11.
In the cosmic-moral organisation, faith is the path of
spirituality, and spirituality in its true sense is the motive force
behind development. This sense has a direct relationship with
society and social life. Those who believe that their way of life
and spirituality are different are ignorant of cosmic
interconnectivity and its harmonic functioning. The idea of
global humanism in a sense the global family (vasudhaiva
kutuṁbakam, ref. Mahāupanishad, 6.71), is not new. It has full
narration in the Vedic literature (ca. 15th century BCE). This has
now become a special idea to our times as a pre-condition for
survival and peace. How many of our politicians realise this!
Generally, they use the tool of “emotional blackmailing” to win
the elections. Law is never used as a tool, rather as a process
through which institutions and ethics go hand in hand with
human thought and always keeping pace with the changes in
time and international perspective of exchange and bilateral
relationships. However, those who have power, whether
political or economic, interpret and practice it in their own way
for their personal benefit, satisfaction, or vested interest. Naess
(1965) has explicitly clarified that Gandhi has rightly emphasised
that ‘morality rests on metaphysical assumptions, not plastic

60

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

ethics. The spiritual source of the utility of life and of loving
concern for all human being is the focus of Gandhi’s basic
ideas’12.
Whenever the ethical code of a society is lost, civilisation will
end. In such a situation, a cultural tradition is unable to find a
balance between the needs and expectations of society, and
that is how it fails to illuminate a path of revolution. In this way,
the road to growth and development comes to a dead-end.
Gandhi proposed a life-philosophy of revival and peace; he
called it Sarvodaya (“well-being for all”), and explained it in
terms of Human-Nature interrelatedness: ‘save Mother Nature
to save yourself’. Enhancing personal welfare (sva-) to the level
of community well-being (sarva- ) is the cultural code of
Sarvodaya. History has proved that the alternative to war and
conflict is ahimsa (“non-violence”, but in the present sense ‘nonharming’), i.e., peaceful agitation, creating mass awareness of
cultural unity13.
Gandhi advocated for three notable shifts into the very frame
of capitalism, encouraging sustainable development. Firstly, he
replaced the idea of “mass production” to “production by the
masses”14, as a viable strategy for solving the problem of
unemployment that was so endemic to industrial economy, in
the era of cybernetics one can hardly think this way! Secondly,
he introduced an ethical and justifiable level of consumption for
humans by criticizing the idea of industrial doctrine that stresses
upon the viewpoint of unlimited needs of humans. Thirdly, he
broadened the concept of alienation in a most feasible and
ecological way. Parajuli (2002) remarks that “While Karl Marx
brilliantly showed how the labour was alienated from the
material benefits of mass production, Gandhi [1934] showed
that the whole process of mass production was alienating,
irrespective of who controlled it”15. This realisation may
promote awakening that lead to pave the path of harmonious
coexistence.

61

RANA P. B. SINGH

2. Ahimsa, a Lifeway of Self Development
Gandhi’s view of non-violence, ahimsa, vegetarianism, and sukarma (right action) is based on the idea of the total spiritual
interconnectedness with nature and the divinity of life as a
whole. All-natural phenomena are, therefore, divine, sacred and
of equal value. As human beings, we have to take the main
responsibilities towards nature through a moral-ethical-religious
approach. His understanding of ahimsa was not strict like a
sectarian rule; he said: ‘whoever believes in ahimsa will engage
himself in occupations that involve the least possible violence’16.
Gandhi grasped the root of ahimsa from the ancient school
of Indian thought, especially the Jaina tradition and Yoga. Jaina
attitudes had a direct influence on the development of the Yoga
School; the basic rules to be followed as mentioned by Patanjali
(circa 100 CE) are identical to the five vows of Mahavira’s
Jainism: nonviolence (ahimsa), truthfulness (satya), not stealing
(asteya), sexual restraint (brahmacharya), and non-possession
(aparigraha). Patanjali, the author of the Yoga Sutra, codified
the rules that the yogic practice of ahimsa in its broadest sense
(mahavratam), unrestricted by caste (jati), place (desha), time
(kala), or circumstance (samaya). Ahimsa here is required as the
foremost spiritual discipline, to be strictly adhered to by aspiring
yogis17.
Committed to non-violence (ahimsa) and Self-realisation
(svachetanā), Gandhi wanted to solve India’s problems from the
perspective of individual conversion and with the ideology that
‘every man has an equal right for the necessities of life even as
birds and beasts there’: a deep message of coexistence. In
pre-partition India, his vision was represented by ‘religionization
of the political’ directly related to the ultimate meaning and
significance of human coexistence. However, in independent
India his successor, Nehru, transformed it into a ‘politicisation of
the religious’ referring to the tasks of political mobilisation and
acquisition of power. Gandhi advocated doing the right thing at
the right time through participation. According to him, the ‘right

62

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

thing’ is a moral order (dharma) operated by right action (sukarma). Gandhi’s emphasis on Self-realisation and rules of
conduct and virtues is essential for spiritual life and also for the
maintenance of the social order. Haigh (2006) has elucidated the
Gandhian idea that “Traditionally, there are three paths to Selfrealization: knowledge (jñāna), involving renunciation of
materiality; devotion (bhakti), involving complete surrender to
Godhead; and action (karma), where selfless, dutiful action in
the world, coupled with complete detachment from its
outcome, becomes a sacrifice that purifies the soul”.18 In fact,
“Gandhi, Tagore, and indeed most Vedanta educational
theorists commend the path of karma. Gandhi developed this
discipline through handicrafts and learning productive skills, and
Gandhi’s disciples, notably Vinoba Bhave, developed it through
community service”19.
Gandhi said, ‘every human being has a right to live and,
therefore, to find the wherewithal to feed himself and where
necessary to clothe and house himself’.20 He said, ‘there’s
enough in the world to meet the needs of everyone but there’s
not enough to meet the greed of everyone.’ This is the essence
of his life-philosophy that needs to change and adjust according
to the transformed era that experienced and firmly practised by
Gandhi in his life. His legacy of love of enemies and forgiveness
offers a basis for nonviolent theological and practical
approaches to our situatedness within the community of life,
comparable to Jesus. These are also Gaian responses that
include foregoing a perception of ourselves as belonging to an
elect group given power by God over earth’s life-support
systems and over all those dependent on them, whether human
or more-than-human. The degree to which we change this selfperception will determine how we affect, good or ill, not only
the givenness of the climate in future but the givenness of all
future life on the earth.21
In his celebrated book Hind Swaraj, or ‘Indian Self-Rule’,
Gandhi (1910) writes: ‘Real home-rule is self-rule or self-control.

63

RANA P. B. SINGH

The way to it is passive resistance: that is soul-force or loveforce. In order to exert this force, Swadeshi (self-reliance) in
every sense is necessary.’22 This is how he came to conclude that
only a non-violent and self-sufficient village economy would
liberate the Indian masses from the impact of colonial rule in its
many facets: political, cultural and economic. Gandhi has
envisioned ‘village’ as an ecological model of ‘swarāj’,
metaphorically symbolising an interdependent cosmos,
asserting a homologous relationship between humans and all
other animate and inanimate aspects of creation23.
Gandhi practiced what he preached. If he was concerned
about the ‘poorest of the poor’ he adopted a lifestyle which
reflected his constituency. And if he preached ‘cleanliness’ and
the upliftment of Harijans (‘untouchables’), he himself
undertook the scavengers work, and emphasised the
importance of inner and outer cleanliness. To follow Gandhi is
difficult and yet millions followed him. He emphasised
throughout that we must change ourselves before we can
change others and that our real enemies are within. If we wish
to achieve the SDGs, and ignite the people of the world into
action we will find ourselves at Gandhi’s door.
And “cleanliness is not only next to Godliness, but it also
promotes health”24. The essence of natural cures is that we learn
the principles of hygiene and sanitation and abide by those laws
as well as the laws relating to proper nutrition. If rural
reconstruction does not include rural sanitation, our villages will
remain the dung-heaps that they are today. Gandhi’s twentyone years of experience in South Africa transformed his views on
life and human coexistence, which he again experimented with
in India. He started to look at the world from a poverty-trapped
peasant’s perspective, rather than from a middle-class
bourgeois perspective. This led him to the creation of three
principles of ‘sustainably co-existential development’:
Sarvodaya, Swadeshi and Satyagraha.

64

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

Another very important feature of sustainable development
which Gandhi propagated was the whole question of local
economy where everybody in the area would be self-sufficient.
They would be employed and could sustain themselves and their
families with dignity and work. Gandhi believed that there is
divinity in all life, and that there is thus a fundamental unity in
diversity. His faith in non-violence and vegetarianism made him
a votary of conservation of all diversity including all forms of life,
societies, cultures, religions, traditions, etc. His argument for
conservation of biodiversity was indeed simple: since a “human
being has no power to create life, he has, therefore, no right to
destroy life”. Further, Gandhi felt that there cannot be any
ecological movement designed to prevent violence against
nature unless the principle of non-violence becomes central to
the ethos of human culture25. Khoshoo describes him as “a
practicing ecological yogi”, who strictly followed the ethical rule
in his life that completely be in harmony with nature, that is how
he succeeded to enhance his own view of moral and ecologically
development, later called as “sustainable development”.26
Gandhi has shown that Spirituality and sustainability go
hand in hand, reciprocally, co-existentially and harmoniously.
Similarly living in a sustainable manner helps in spiritual growth.
Spirituality is the state of mind that envisions and awakens man
to realise that the Truth is beyond the barriers of worldliness,
caste, creed, race or geographical boundaries. It connects us to
the universal Consciousness and gives a certain perspective in
life. Spirituality helps in keeping our greed for materials and
resources in check and sustainable development can only take
place by such Self-realisation.

65

RANA P. B. SINGH

Fig. 3. Gandhi’s frame of ‘Self-realisation’.

Said Gandhi, “I do not believe… that an individual may gain
spiritually and those who surround him suffer. I believe in
advaita (non-dualism), I believe in the essential unity of man
and, for that matter, of all that lives. Therefore, I believe that if
one man gains spiritually, the whole world gains with him and, if
one man falls, the whole world falls to that extent”.27 Spirituality
also helps us have a compassionate view of nature. Gandhi’s
idea of ‘Self-realisation’ is an issue of human values that govern
the actions of human being, which should make a balanced
interconnection between society, economy and the
environment. If this will be misbalanced, man has to suffer by
natural curses (Fig. 3). Knowing this the development becomes
a moral imperative.

66

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

3. Sarvodaya (‘upliftment of all’)
Gandhi was highly impressed by Ruskin’s (1985) writings;
testimony to it is Gandhi’s paraphrased notion of sarvodaya that
he published in 1908 as translation and extension of Ruskin’s
Unto This Last.28 Sarvodaya was a philosophical position that
Gandhi maintained. Society must strive for the economic, social,
spiritual, and physical well-being of all, not just the majority. He
favoured a holistic approach to well-being, and a total approach
to the community. For him, the well-being of every individual
was an important concern. The removal of untouchability, an
end to Hindu-Muslim enmity, economic self-sufficiency, and
making non-violence effective were fundamental elements of
his vision. Unlike the proponents of Hindutva, who at a
fundamental level appeared to be reacting to and fashioning
their own traditions in the manner of those they rejected or are
wanted out of India, Gandhi offered a viable alternative for selfrule and self-government. He focused on the welfare of all –
sarvodaya – and the method he followed was that of
satyagraha.29 India mattered, but truth mattered even more to
Gandhi.30
By thought, action, and practice Gandhi was committed to
sarvodaya: that is, to the development or improvement of all
human beings rather than a ruling class or favoured few (it must
be remembered that he faced the tragic impact of a deeply
entrenched caste system in India – that was still rooted in
different spheres of life, society, and culture). So far as private
property involves exploitation, inequality, and accords primacy
to material desire, Gandhi disapproves of such private
property.31 Sarvodaya was a philosophical position that Gandhi
maintained. He believed that morality must underpin all human
actions. Society must strive for the economic, social, spiritual,
and physical well-being of all, not just the majority. He favoured
a holistic approach to well-being, and a total approach to the
community. For him, the well-being of every individual was an
important concern.

67

RANA P. B. SINGH

4. Swadeshi
For Gandhi, the swadeshi spirit extended to all the elements
composing the desh [community] and implied a love of not only
the traditional way of life but also the natural environment and
especially the people sharing it. Gandhi used the term swarāj to
describe a society run in the swadeshi spirit. It meant self-rule or
autonomy and implied not only formal independence but also
cultural and moral autonomy.
He advocated that the locus of power must be situated in the
village or neighbourhood unit. He believed that there should be
an equitable distribution of resources and those communities
must become self-sustaining through reliance on local products
instead of large-scale imports from outside. Gandhi was
opposed to large-scale industrialisation, and favoured small
local industries that promote local self-sufficiency, which he
called Swadeshi. In current terms, it means buy local goods,
support local goods, uphold, and live local. Economic equality
should never mean possession of an equal amount of worldly
goods by everyone. It does mean, however, that everyone
should have a proper house, an adequate and balanced diet, and
sufficient cloth. It also means that the cruel inequality of today
will be removed by purely non-violent means.

5. Satyāgraha, Manifesting ‘truth’ and
practice in life
Expressing his method of manifestation, Gandhi coined the word
satyāgraha ― literally, “holding on to truth” or, as he variously
describes it, ‘truth-force’ (satya-shakti), ‘love-force’ (premshakti), or ‘soul-force’ (ātma-shakti). He disliked the English
term “passive resistance,” because satyāgraha required
activism, not passivity.32 If you believed in Truth and cared
enough to obtain it, Gandhi felt, you could not afford to be
passive: you had to be prepared actively to suffer for Truth.33
Because human beings all participate in satya (‘manifestation of

68

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

truth in nature’), all are parts of a single whole. External
differences ― race, caste, class, religion, regional loyalties ― are
irrelevant. The only appropriate relation between human beings
is love. Love, Gandhi says, is the law of our being, and by love he
means what we might more usually call compassion:
unconditional practical concern for the welfare and happiness of
others. Such love implies ahimsa, non-violence, as a principle of
social and political action. The achievement of political and
moral ends through ahimsa is what Gandhi calls satyāgraha,
‘truth force’ or non-violent action. But satyāgraha is not merely
passive or sullen; it is a theory of action. It calls for courage,
strength of character and positive commitment to a righteous
cause. In some circumstances, e.g., inhuman acts like
molestation or killing, it might be better to choose violence than
craven submission to injustice. Said Gandhi, “Truth (satya)
implies love, and firmness (āgraha) engenders and therefore
serves as a synonym for force. I thus began to care the Indian
movement Satyāgraha, that is to say, the Force, which is born of
Truth and Love or nonviolence, and gave up the use of the
phrase passive resistance’, in connection with it, so much so that
even in English writing we often avoided it and used instead the
word ‘satyāgraha’....”.34 Referring to his notion of ahimsa, he
said: ‘whoever believes in ahimsa will engage himself in
occupations that involve the least possible violence’35. Gandhi
thought that ‘total non-violence’ might be feasible only when
mankind has acquired superhuman qualities, the roots of which
lies within the realisation of ‘oneness of self’ and ‘love’ as the
binding force.
Mass awakening, what Gandhi exemplified by his satyāgraha
movement, is ‘the perfect example of how one could confront
an unjust and uncaring, though extremely superior power’.36 In
contemporary India, the Bishnois, a small community in
Rajasthan, western India, who practise a religion of
environmental conservation, Chipko – the movement to hug
trees to keep them from being cut down for industrial uses,

69

RANA P. B. SINGH

started in 1974 by Sundar Lal Bahuguna, and Appiko, the Chipko
movement in Karnataka, south India, begun in 1983, people are
engaged in a kind of ‘forest satyāgraha’ today. Of course, it is a
hard task for those from that society, but not impossible.
The close connection referring to organic philosophy by
Whitehead and Gandhi in terms of “ecotheology might be
relevant to the larger context of the many world religions and to
the better hopes of the world as a whole”.37 Gandhi further
adds that the five challenges relative to our social locations
and historical situations needs serious concerns for
interconnectedness and ecological cosmology – all together
calling and promoting divine love as it beckons human beings to
live compassionately and creatively, are: the Compassion―
reverential/moral concerns, the Repentance― cultural
reconstruction/ self-critical, the Simplicity― frugality/Geltung,
the Ecological outlook― eternal vision/ sustainability, and the
Diversity― befriending/pluralistic.38
Ethical value is the moral force in the sustainable coexistence,
progress, maintenance, and continuance of human beings.
Gandhi’s life and work hold possible implications for
postmodern approaches to the environment, mostly based on
his principles of ahimsa and aparigraha (non-possession).
Gandhi said, “I must confess that I do not draw a sharp or any
distinction between economics and ethics. Economics that hurt
the moral well-being of an individual or a nation are immoral
and, therefore, sinful”.39
The roots of morality and ethics lie in the ‘Law of Love’, says
Gandhi. He adds:
“Scientists tell us that without the presence of the
cohesive force amongst the atoms that comprise this
globe of ours, it would crumble to pieces and we
would cease to exist. And even as there is a cohesive
force in blind matter so must there be in all things
animate; and the name for that cohesive force among
the animate is Love. We notice it between father and

70

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

son, between brother and sister, friend and friend. But
we have to learn to use that force among all that lives
and in the use of it consists our knowledge of God.
Where there is Love there is Life; hatred leads to
destruction”.40

6. Environmental Concerns and Ethical Terrain
The spectres of global warming, lack of water through
deforestation, and continued depletion of natural resources and
diversity on Earth, are some of the results of ‘unsustainable
development’ and economic growth. Should we not follow the
path of Gandhi? He corrected himself over and over in his
striving for moral-spiritual perfection while doing his best to
reform existing institutions and social practices. He wrote in
1932, ‘I do not accept defeat but hope, with God’s grace, to melt
the stoniest heart and, therefore, continually strive to perfect
myself’.41
So, firstly, identification with the poor, taking up issues of the
poor, beginning to realise that consumerism and people who try
to enrich themselves are not a good thing. Gandhi
empathetically said – “The world has enough for everyone’s
need; but not enough for everyone’s greed”.42 Gandhi’s second
statement remains totally valid, even more today! Another
version of it is: “let us learn to live simply, so that others may
simply live”43; and to be fair, indigenous religion and traditional
Hinduism are prominent in that provoking. But if Gandhi were
alive today and spoke with environmental scientists, he would
agree that in the passage of ecological degradation and
transformation, the first statement is fast becoming ‘untrue’.
Why? Because there will soon be altogether too many
everyone’s [estimated ca. 9.90 billion people by CE 2050 and
11.20 billion by 2100 (the stagnant position), which was 7.82
billion in March 2020, as per 2020 World Population Data Sheet],
for all to live a halfway decent life: as we face the greatest
environmental crises yet! One may crucially note that we will

71

RANA P. B. SINGH

never meet human needs without stabilisation of human
numbers ― what Gandhi never realised in his times.
His view was that at the local level this was possible. If every
little village became self-sufficient then one would have an ideal
set of life. Therefore, he did not advocate macro economic
policy. He said we must work from the bottom up. All villages
have to become self-sufficient. If they have their own power,
then they can bargain with the cities and the rest of them. It
must work from the bottom upwards and not the top down.
Bilimoria rightly opines that, “Gandhi’s importance as an
environmental thinker may be marked in terms of the strategies
and vistas opened up by his pursuits, both public and private,
towards a sustained animal and environmental liberation
struggle. Looked at another way, Gandhi’s environmental
thinking is rooted in his larger philosophical and moral
thinking”.44
Perhaps the moral principle for which Gandhi is best known
is that of active non-violence (ahimsa), derived from the
traditional moral restraint of not injuring another being. The
most refined expression of this value is in the great epic of the
Mahābhārata (ca. 100 BCE to CE 200), where moral
development proceeds through placing constraints on the
liberties, desires, and acquisitiveness endemic to human life.
One’s action is judged in terms of consequences and the impact
it is likely to have on another. Jaina’s had generalized this
principle to include all sentient creatures and bio-communities
alike. Advanced Jaina monks and nuns will sweep their path to
avoid harming insects and even bacteria. Non-injury is a nonnegotiable universal prescription. Gandhi relates this principle
to the value that the Bhāgavad Gītā (6. 29) places on the welfare
of all beings:
Sarva-bhūta-stham-ātmānaṁ sarva-bhūtāni cātmani |
Īkṣate yoga-yuktātmā sarvatra sama-darśanaḥ ||

72

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

“The man equipped with yoga, looks on all with impartial
eyes, seeing Atman in all beings & all beings in Atman.
He who sees Me everywhere & everything in Me,
never vanishes from Me nor I from him”.45
The transcendence of the self from constricting human
conditions of desire and attachment and the prudential ethic of
not causing injury to other beings for fear of attracting more
karma into one’s soul is turned by Gandhi into a categorical
value: one does X because X is right, and it is also just from the
position of the other.
This principle, more than anything else, becomes the
foundation-stone for Gandhi’s approach to environmental
ethics. Much that can be gleaned from Gandhi’s own practices,
as noted earlier, is of anecdotal value. His obsession with the
hygiene of man and animals alike – safer waste disposal systems
and cleanliness of both the body and the surrounding environs
– have been meticulously noted in the Gandhian literature and
his own writings.46
Gandhi was also adamant about the need for a rigorous ethic
of non-injury in our treatment of animals.47 On active
environmental renewal projects, in a letter to Kaka Kaleklar in
1926 Gandhi wrote that for India the next step should not be
destructive agriculture but the planting of fruit trees and other
vegetation as these provide nourishment, stability in the soil,
and attract rainfall as well as provide fodder for the insect and
animal world.48 The implications of such simple ecological
wisdom have only just begun to dawn on a tech-fest agricultural
economics. Likewise, Gandhi’s symbolic insistence on khādī
spinning was instructive for avoidance of factory-emitted
pollution, desalination of soil through over-cultivation and
dependence on raw materials produced through suffering
caused on animals (e.g., silk and wool). Gandhi’s advocacy of
simple living through the principles of non-violence and holding
steadfastly to truth challenge modern-day Hindus to reconsider
their lifestyle engendered by pressures of contemporary

73

RANA P. B. SINGH

consumerism. They have had to consider whether social duty
can be expanded to include ecological community and whether
the Hindu tradition can develop new modalities of caring for the
earth.49 Can dharma be re-interpreted in earth-friendly terms
to meet the challenges of modern post-industrial ‘civilization’?50
A luminary European philosopher of the 20th century Albert
Schweitzer (1875-1965), a Nobel laureate for peace in 1952,
inspired by Gandhi said, “The deeper we look into nature, the
more we recognize that it is full of life, and the more profoundly
we know that all life is a secret and that we are united with all
life that is in nature. Man can no longer live for himself alone.
We realize that all life is valuable, and that we are united to all
life. From this knowledge comes our spiritual relationship to the
universe”.51 Writing shortly after World War I, Schweitzer
argued that humanity was living in a time of the collapse of
civilization, and war was not a cause but a manifestation of it.
He related the rise or fall of civilization to the particular
“worldview” (Weltanschauung) prevailing in human society52. If
we do not want to be part of evil and suffering in the world, we
are faced with two options: Either we renounce the world and
life, as some ascetics do, for example, in India; or We play an
active role in life and in the world, doing our best to make a
better society and a happier life, and to rejoice in the beauty and
mystery of nature by realising the deep interconnectedness. The
path has already been shown and guided by Gandhi. As is
evident from his book, Indian Thought and Its Development
(1936), Schweitzer was fascinated by the idea of non-violence
(ahimsa) in Indian religions, according to which all God’s
creatures are sacred and should not be killed.
The new environmentalism in the form of deep ecology, the
discipline of peace research and what has become known as
‘Buddhist economics’ very closely mirrors Gandhi’s philosophy.
Gandhi’s contribution to the intellectual development of three
leading figures in these fields: Arne Naess, Johan Galtung and
E.F. Schumacher are well known53; therefore, one should go back

74

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

to Gandhi for a fuller picture of ‘new environmentalism’ where
Self-realisation of human being is the central issue. As
recognized, ‘Gandhi, with his advocacy of sarvodaya and radical
empowerment of localized or microecono-culture, was a
forerunner of the avant-garde movements nowadays associated
with ‘deep ecology’ and the Greens. But Gandhi went further in
some respects with his emphasis on the absoluteness of nonviolence and dharma’.54
The link between Self-realisation and Arne Naess’
environmental philosophy can be clearly seen in his discussion
of the connection between non-violence (ahimsa) and Selfrealisation (svachetnā) in his analysis of the context of Gandhian
political ethics. Starting with the ‘one basic proposition of a
normative kind’ when investigating Gandhi’s teachings on group
conflict – ‘Seek complete Self-realisation’ (the manifestation of
one’s potential to the greatest possible degree’) – Naess
summarizes this connection under the five notions55:
§ Self-realization presupposes a search for truth.
§ In the last analysis, all living beings are one.
§ Himsa (violence) against oneself makes complete Selfrealisation impossible.
§ Himsa against a living being is himsa against oneself.
§ Himsa against a living being makes complete Selfrealisation impossible.
The linkages and interconnections among these can be
schematically represented with the help of a diagram (Fig. 4).

75

RANA P. B. SINGH

Fig. 4. Arne Naess’ Systematization of Gandhian Ethics.
Many environmental activists who claim that ‘deep ecology’
is their guiding philosophy have barely heard the name of Arne
Naess, who coined the term conceiving humankind as an
integral part of its environment. While Naess readily admits his
debt to Gandhi, works about him tend to gloss over this
connection or ignore it.56 Weber has rightly remarked that,
“Recently, we have seen the rise of eco-feminism, Lovelock’s
Gaia hypothesis and aggressively radical movements and
philosophies such as Earth First! While Gandhi certainly would
not have welcomed some of these later developments (for
example, the employment of ‘ecotage’ techniques such as treespiking and the disabling of logging equipment), and Naess does
not too, the Mahatma’s influence is clearly discernible through
the writings of Arne Naess”.57 The Ecosophy of Naess (1989)
draws most on the close connection between nonviolence

76

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

(ahimsa), philosophy of oneness (advaita) and the goal of Selfrealisation (sva-chetnā) in spiritual thought of Gandhi, who was
inspired from the Bhāgavad Gītā.58
The important elements of the Gandhian vision of
environmentalism can be set under the ten nature-ethical
codes59:

•
•
•

•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Human beings should act in a manner that it is a part of
Nature rather than apart from Nature.
Materials available on the earth are not used with an
element of greed.
Human being practices non-violence not only towards
fellow humans but also towards other living organisms
and inanimate materials because over-use of such
materials also amounts to violence.
Women are respected and are made partners in and
given their rightful place in all spheres of human
endeavour.
Bottom-up shared view is preferred over the top-down
totalitarian overview.
Conservationist and sustainable life-saving approach
prevails over the unsustainable consumerist selfdestructive approach.
Human care for and share with the poor and the
destitute in the society as a moral obligation towards
them.
The human race thinks about how much is enough for
a simple need-based, austere and comfortable lifestyle.
All development as far as is possible leads to local selfreliance and equity with social justice; and
Ethics and self-discipline in resource use is an overriding criterion of development.

77

RANA P. B. SINGH

Mahatma Gandhi’s entire life and work is an environmental
legacy for the mankind. This was not because he wrote a big
treatise on the environment or led a movement to stall a dam or
some industry, or clean a river, or whatever. This was because
he was a practitioner of sustainable development in the real
sense of the word that he developed and constantly reenergised through his intimate and harmonious relationship
with nature ― what he calls the path of ‘spirituality-ahimsatruth.’ These are critical elements for the success of sustainable
development – that Gandhi practiced and gave a framework too.
Gandhi’s environmentalism amounts to being pro-nature, propoor, pro-women, and pro-labour. He rationally and ethically
combined social, economic, environmental, equity and ethical
imperatives for obtaining political independence and economic
salvation through rural development for the teeming millions of
India. Shinn has rightly concluded that “A Gandhian ecology
offers an alternative journey of truth-seeking through
experiments with such a sustainable simple life”.60 Of course,
Gandhi is considered as forerunner of new environmentalism; in
fact, Gandhi is more than any other, the father of deep
ecology.61

7. End Remarks
We are slowly realising that reducing poverty or moving towards
sustainable development is not just an economic or a technical
problem, or of acquiring greater financial inputs – all these are
important but achieving these goals also needs an inner
awakening, an inner transformation of a path already paved by
Gandhi. He was influenced by the Bhāgavad Gītā, the Sermon
on the Mount, Buddhist scriptures and the writings of Emerson,
Ruskin, Thoreau and Tolstoy. He was a product of a particular
and distinctive period of Indian history and human
consciousness. His lofty morality, despite a tincture of ‘selfrighteousness’ (sva-satya anubhūti) and ‘Self-realisation’ (svachetnā) have found annoying, has commanded universal

78

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

respect, though sometimes rather less emulation.62 Perhaps
Gandhi’s most important influence has been on the black civil
rights movement led by Martin Luther King, Jr., who said, “If
humanity is to progress, Gandhi is inescapable. He lived,
thought, and acted, inspired by the vision of humanity evolving
toward a world of peace and harmony. We may ignore him at
our own risk”.63
In the words of Tharoor, let us think over the agony
afterwards: “While the world was disintegrating into fascism,
violence, and war, Gandhi taught the virtues of truth, nonviolence, and peace. He destroyed the credibility of colonialism
by opposing principle to force. And he set and attained personal
standards of conviction and courage that few will ever match.
He was that rare kind of leader who was not confined by the
inadequacies of his followers. Yet Gandhi’s Truth was essentially
his own. He formulated its unique content and determined its
application in a specific historical context. Inevitably, few in
today’s world can measure up to his greatness or aspire to his
credo. No, Gandhi’s “triumph” did not change the world forever.
It is, sadly, a matter of doubt whether he triumphed at all”.64 At
least, we Indians have no courage and ethical values to give
affirmative answer! Let us share our view together with Parel
“keeping in mind that Gandhi was a reformer through and
through. He corrected himself over – and over in his striving for
moral – spiritual perfection while doing his best to reform
existing institutions and social practices.65
At the end of the essay one can share the passionate idea
envisioned by Bilimoria: “The challenges of industrialization,
modernity, globalisation and a rapidly expanding liberal
economy present Gandhians with a very different set of
circumstances and contexts from those that Gandhi could have
foreseen. These call for quite different sorts of responses on the
environmental front, and they can only be forthcoming case by
case. Still, there are a number of Gandhian followers who are
prepared to ‘risk their all’ in order to meet these challenges for

79

RANA P. B. SINGH

the sake of non-violent truth and to bring greater welfare to all
beings on the planet Earth”.66 The issue of Millennium
Development Goals (MDG) has been debated at the beginning
of the 21st century, especially in the World Summit on
Sustainable Development (WSSD) 2002 in Johannesburg – that
was held as a sequel to the Earth Summit (Rio in 1992), and
extended in the agenda for Sustainable Development Goals (25
September 2015) that focuses on “The Future we Want”, where
there should be bridging between nature and humans. In one of
the MDG addresses, a Gandhian activist, Kamla Chowdhry,
strongly advocated for the relevance of Gandhi, emphasizing
inclusion of institutions and strategies that are consistent with
the deeper spiritual traditions of the people ― where the
humanisation of Nature meets with divinisation of Man that
result in the formation of integral human harmony and
coexistence in global ordering. ‘If we can develop such an
approach, such an inclusive paradigm of development and
lifeways, we will be able to reach our SDGs. Without such an
approach we will flounder and fail as we have done in the last
[over] seventy years’.67
Banaras Hindu University

80

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

References
Primary sources
Gandhi, Mohandas Karamchand 1927. An Autobiography or the Story
of My Experiments with Truth. Ahmadabad: Navajivan Publishing
House.
Gandhi, M.K. 1926. M. K. Gandhi interprets the Bhāgavad Gītā. New
Delhi: Orient-Vision.
Gandhi, M.K. 1928. Satyāgraha in South Africa.
Navajivan Publishing House.

Ahmadabad:

Gandhi, M.K. 1946. The Gospel or Selfless Action or The Gītā According
to Gandhi; (editor and co-translator Mahadev Desai).
Ahmadabad: Navajivan Publishing House.
Gandhi, M.K. 1958-1994. The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,
100 vols. New Delhi: Publication Division, Ministry of Information
and Broadcasting, Govt. of India. Referred in the essay as: WMG,
vol., p.
Gandhi, M.K. 1959. My Socialism. (Compiled by R.K. Prabhu).
Ahmadabad: Navajivan Publishing House.
Gandhi, M.K. 1990 [1909]. Hind Swaraj and Other Writings. ed. A.J.
Parel. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Secondary sources
Adams, Ian and Dyson, R.W. (eds.) 2003. Mohandas Gandhi. In, Fifty
Major Political Thinkers, pp. 196-199. Routledge Key Guides
Series. London & New York: Routledge.
Bilimoria, Purushottama 2004. Mahatma Gandhi 1869-1948. In, Joy A.
Palmer, ed. Fifty Key Thinkers on the Environment, pp. 160-167.
London: Routledge.
Brundtland, Gro Herlem, ed. 1987. Our Common Future: UN World
Commission on Environment and Development. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

81

RANA P. B. SINGH

Chapple, Christopher Key 1998. Hinduism, Jainism and Ecology. Earth
Ethics, Fall: pp. 16-18.
Dessein, J., K. Soini, G. Fairclough and L. G. Horlings, eds. 2015 (May 8).
Culture in, for and as Sustainable Development: Conclusions from
the COST Action IS1007 Investigating Cultural Sustainability.
Jyväskylä:
University
of
Jyväskylä.
http://www.culturalsustainability.eu/conclusions.pdf ; accessed
01 May 2017.
Dwivedi, O.P. 1990. Satyagraha for conservation: awakening the spirit
of Hinduism. In, J.R. Engel and J.G. Engel (eds.) Ethics of
Environment and Development, pp. 201-212. Tucson: University
of Arizona Press.
Haigh, Martin J. 2006. Deep Ecology Education: Learning from its
Vaisnava Roots. CJEE, Canadian Journal of Environmental
Education, 11, pp. 41-54.
Harris, Ian 1998. Gandhians in Contemporary India: The Vision and the
Visionaries. Lewiston, NY: Edward Mellon.
Jacobsen, Knut A. 2005. Arne Naess. In, Bron Taylor (ed.) The
Encyclopedia of Religion and Nature, pp. 1149-1150. New York:
Continuum Press.
Khoshoo, Triloki Nath 1995. Mahatma Gandhi: An Apostle of Applied
Human Ecology. New Delhi: TERI - Tata Energy Research Institute.
Khoshoo, Triloki Nath 1997. Gandhian Environmentalism: An
Unfinished Task. IASSI Quarterly, 16 (1), July-Sept. Web:
http://www.mkgandhi.org/articles/unfinish_task.htm
Kothari, Rajni 1990. Environment, technology and ethics. In, J.R. Engel
and J.G. Engel (eds.) Ethics of Environment and Development, pp.
27-35. Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
Kumar, Satish 1986. Introduction. In, Bhave, Vinoba (ed.) The intimate
and the Ultimate, 1-10. Devon, UK: Green Books.
Lal, Vinay 2000. Too deep for Deep Ecology: Gandhi and the ecological
vision of life. In, Chapple, Christopher K. and Tucker, Mary E.
(eds.) Hinduism and Ecology: The Intersection of Earth, Sky and
Water, pp. 183–212. CSWR Harvard Divinity School. Cambridge
MA: Harvard University Press.

82

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

Mathur, J.S. and Mathur, A.S. (eds.) 1962. Economic Thought of
Mahatma Gandhi. Allahabad: Chaitanya Publishing House.
McDaniel, Jay 2005. Gandhi’s Hope: Learning from Other Religions as
a Path to Peace. Maryknoll NY: Orbis Books.
McDaniel, Jay 2007. Ecotheology and World Religions. In, Laurel
Kearns and Catherine Keller (eds.) Ecospirit: Religions and
Philosophies for the Earth, pp. 21-44 and notes pp. 546-547. New
York: Fordham University Press
Meyer, Marvin and Bergel, Kurt (eds.) 2002. Reverence for Life: The
Ethics of Albert Schweitzer for the Twenty-First Century. Syracuse:
Syracuse University Press.
Naess, Arne 1965. Gandhi and the Nuclear Age. Totowa NJ:
Bedminister Press.
Naess, Arne 1989. Ecology, Community and Lifestyle: Outline of an
Ecosophy. (trans. David Rothenberg). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Parajuli, Pramod 2002. Towards an environmentalism of the global
south: a playful conversation around Mahatma Gandhi.
Encounter (special Gandhi issue), 15 (2): pp. 56–70.
Parel, Anthony J. 2000. Gandhi, Freedom, and Self-Rule. Lanham, MR:
Lexington Books, Indian edition - New Delhi: Vistaar Pubs., 2002.
Pedersen, Kusumita 1998. Environmental Ethics in Interreligious
Perspective. In, Twiss, Sumner B. and Grelle, Bruce (eds.)
Explorations in Global Ethics: Comparative Religious Ethics and
Interreligious Dialogue, pp. 269-292. Boulder CO: Westview
Publishing.
Primavesi, Anne 2008. Gaia and Climate Change. A Theology of Gift
Events. London: Routledge.
Ruskin, John 1985. Unto This Last and Other Writings, ed. Clive Wilmer.
London: Penguin Books.
Schweitzer, Albert 1947. The Spiritual Life: Selected Writings. Ed.
Charles R. Joy. New York: The Beacon Press.
Schweitzer, Albert 1936. Indian Thought and Its Development.
Translated by Charles E.B. Russell. New York: The Beacon Press.

83

RANA P. B. SINGH

Shinn, Larry D. 2000. The inner logic of Gandhian Ecology. In, Chapple,
Christopher K. and Tucker, Mary E. (eds.) Hinduism and Ecology:
The Intersection of Earth, Sky and Water, pp. 213-241. CSWR
Harvard Divinity School. Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.
Singh, Rana P.B. 1996. The Ganga River and the spirit of sustainability
in Hinduism. In, James Swan and Roberta Swan, eds. Dialogues
with the Living Earth, 86-107. Wheaton, IL: Quest Books,
Theosophical Publ. House.
Singh, Rana P.B. 2007. Culture and Civilisation for Human
Development: Perspectives in India on the Gandhian Path. In,
Maiti, Prasenjit (ed.) Development Studies (vol. 1), pp. 105-152.
New Delhi: Atlantic Publishers & Distributors.
Singh, Rana P.B. 2009. Mahatma Gandhi’s Vision of Sustainable
Development: A Lesson for Indian Geography. In, his: Uprooting
Geographic Thoughts in India: Toward Ethics, Ecology and Culture
in 21st Century, pp. 192-223. Planet Earth & Cultural
Understanding Series, Pub. 1. Newcastle upon Tyne U.K.:
Cambridge Scholars Publishing.
Singh, Rana P.B. 2011. Mahatma Gandhi’s Vision of Sustainable
Development: the pathway for Kyosei.” In, his: Indo-Kyosei Global
Ordering: Gandhi’s Vision, Harmonious Coexistence, &
Ecospirituality, pp. 17-52. Tokyo: Research Center for Kyosei
Philosophy, Toyo University and Meitoka Publishing.
Singh, Rana P.B. 2013. Ecological Cosmology in Hindu Tradition for the
21st Century. In, Sharma, Arvind and Khanna, Madhu (eds.) Asian
Perspectives on the World's Religions after September 11, pp.
233-250. Santa Barbara CA: Praeger, an imprint of ABC-CLIO, Inc.
Singh, Rana P.B. 2019. Mohandas (Mahatma) Gandhi (1869-1948). In,
David Simon (ed.) Key Thinkers on Development. Routledge Key
Guides Series. London and New York: Routledge, Taylor & Francis
Group; 2nd edition: pp. 168-174.
Skolimowski, Henryk 1990. Reverence for life. In, Engel, J.R. and Engel,
J.G. (eds.) Ethics of Environment and Development, pp. 97-103.
Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
Tharoor, Shashi 2000 [1997] India. From Midnight to the Millennium.
Millennium Edition. New Delhi: Penguin Books, India.

84

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

Weber, Thomas 1999. Gandhi, Deep Ecology, Peace Research and
Buddhist Economics. Journal of Peace Research (IPRI Oslo), 36
(3), May: pp. 349-361.
White, Lynn Jr. 1967. The historical roots of our ecologic crisis.
Science, New Series, vol. 155, No. 3767 (10 March): pp. 1203-1207.

85

RANA P. B. SINGH

NOTES
1.

Singh 1996: 86-87.

2.

Rolston 1983: 181.

3.

White 1967: 1207.

4.

Kothari 1990: 32.

5.

see Gandhi 1926: 23; also, Singh 2013: 243.

6.

see Brundtland Gro Herlem, ed. Report 1987.

7.

Dessein, et al. 2015: 29.

8.

modified after Dessein et al. 2015: 29.

9.

Pedersen 1998: 274.

10. see Gandhi 1959: 33-34.
11. cf. Skolimowski 1990: 98.
12. cf. Singh 2019.
13. Singh 2011: 22.
14. see Harijan 2 Nov. 1934, 301; also, Mathur and Mathur 1962:
490.
15. Parajuli 2002: 64.
16. Singh 2007:136.
17. Chapple 1998: 17-18.
18. Haigh 2006: 47.
19. Kumar 1986: 7.
20. see WMG, 38: 197.
21. cf. Primavesi 2008.
22. Gandhi 1910: 73.
23. Shinn 2000: 223.
24. WMG, 41: 3.

86

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

25. cf. Khoshoo 1995.
26. Khoshoo 1997: 1-2.
27. Young India, 4-12-1924: 398.
28. see Ruskin 1985.
29. WMG, 8: 239-42.
30. Parel 2000: 127-128.
31. Adams and Dyson 2003: 198.
32. see Gandhi 1910: 52-55.
33. Tharoor 2000: 18, see Gandhi 1927.
34. Gandhi 1928: 73.
35. Gandhi 1959: 35.
36. Dwivedi 1990: 211.
37. McDaniel 2007: 37.
38. McDaniel 2005: 125-126.
39. Gandhi 1959: 33-34.
40. Gandhi in Young India, 5 May 1920: 7.
41. WMG, vol. 50: 451.
42. WMG, 1: 150.
43. as in Gandhi 2017: 210.
44. Bilimoria 2004: 162.
45. Gandhi 1926: 23.
46. Bilimoria 2004: 164.
47. Gandhi 1959: 34-35.
48. cf. Harris 1998: 274.
49. cf. Chapple 1998: 16-18.
50. Bilimoria 2004: 165.
51. Schweitzer 1947: 215.
52. cf. Meyer and Bergel 2002.

87

RANA P. B. SINGH

53. cf. Weber 1999.
54. Bilimoria 2004: 164.
55. Naess 1965: 28-33.
56. cf. Lal 2000: 183-193.
57. Weber 1999: 361.
58. Jacobsen 2005: 1149.
59. cf. Khoshoo 1997.
60. Shinn 2000: 238.
61. Jacobsen 2005: 1150.
62. cf. Adams and Dyson 2003: 199.
63. Martin Luthar King, Jr. 1983: 71.
64. Tharoor 2000: 22.
65. Parel 2000: 150.
66. Bilimoria 2004: 166.
67. cf. Singh 2009: 221.

88

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

TAGORE: GLOBAL AUTHOR THROUGH
A PEPPEREAN LENS
John Harold
Shakespeare is the English Tagore; Goethe the German Tagore.
Strange sounding as these inversions are, they are accurate enough
but do not really identify a vision much fuller than fits within a single
nation, language, or culture. Writing in Bengali and sometimes
translating his own works into English, Rabindranath Tagore worked
in all the major genres available to the creative writer from song
lyrics to essay to poetry to prose fiction to drama. Add to that
mastery of painting, music, and dance drama, and you have a
Leonardo of the Arts. And as Amartya Sen argued, as a thinker two
of Tagore’s “strongest commitments were his uncompromising
belief in the importance of ‘freedom of mind’ and his conviction that
the expansion of basic education is central to social progress.”1 He
was also a doer. In his Visva-Bharati University he would create a
realization of the rural community development he saw as
necessary. After a century has passed, his fame no longer rests on
being Noble prize winner and a spiritual inspiration but a true global
writer in several senses: what he created is today widely accessible
through fresh translations, film, and recorded music; his bringing
into harmony the best values and traditions of East and West has
never been more relevant as a counterweight to this age of rampant

JOHN HAROLD

89

nationalism; what Tagore contributes to our understanding of
human purposive activity is important to ethics and aesthetics.
The American philosopher Stephen C. Pepper gives us an
interesting window from which to observe and appreciate the
achievement of the Bengali master. The thought of both, read
critically back and forth, can fertilize our perception. In particular,
one key theory that the American was developing during the last
twenty five years of his productive career, and which has been quite
neglected, will illuminate for us Tagore’s vision of the human.
Pepper’s later work after his well- received World Hypotheses 2 was
to begin to explore a more eclectic world view that accounted for
new biological understanding of affect and human behavior and
would attempt to reconcile the disparities between competing
“relatively adequate” metaphysical theories. He would call his
variation on empiricism, Selectivism.3 This new “world hypothesis”
points toward a fresh way of looking at literary texts and clarifies
the roles and critical study of authors, texts, and readers. Of interest
to this Tagore study is that Pepper outlined three “natural norms”
or values in human purposive behavior: conation (desire/aversion),
achievement (success/frustration), and affection (pleasure/pain).4
These three broad categories of personal drives make up the active
or voluntary, personal “selective system,” under study here, which
then gets tested by the passive selective systems he identifies as
personal situation, social situation, institution, cultural integration,
and evolutionary nature, subjects for a subsequent study. Pepper
argues new to Western ethical thought is separating pleasure
activity from activity prompted by desire, usually conflated, and to
place both alongside the equally important purposive activity of
seeking achievement.5
Tagore has his own way of expressing this in his book Creative
Unity (1922): “This one in me not only seeks unity in knowledge of
its understanding {achievement} and creates images of unity for its

90

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

delight {pleasure}; it also seeks union in love for its fulfillment
{desire}.”6 All human striving, Tagore would caution, must be
sought in moderation. As Raghunath Ghosh summarizes the
Tagorean view: “The fundamental thing for the performance of high
austerity in the whole world is to curb the enjoyment and to curtail
the desire of happiness. We should proceed in such a manner that
we do not lean towards a particular side in which there is too much
burden without adhering to harmony. In other words the
minimization or limitation of enjoyment helps us to maintain
harmony so that we do not lean towards a particular side being
over-burdened.”7
In his important early poem ‘barsa yapan” {“Passing Time the
Rain”} (1894), Tagore through the speaker describes the pleasure
and fulfilment he feels working alone on the roof of the family
compound; here all of the main drives are operative and in
alignment:
“How happy such days have been/As I sit here on my own,/…
gaze and wonder how/I shall pass the time till evening./but then I
buckle down,/Write to a new plan,/All day carefully--/Why should I
not, if I want,/Following my own bent,/Write story after story—“8
Later in a letter to his wife quoted in Sen, Tagore laments that
their separate spheres of activity had limited their intimacy: “If you
and I could be comrades in all our work and in all our thoughts it
would be splendid, but we cannot attain all that we desire.”9
Desire, success, and pleasure are out of alignment, similarly the
themes in his longer prose fictions.
Often the drives even seem in mortal combat. In a very early
song from 1880 “Shokhi bhabona kahare baule,” Tagore marvels at
the marked distinction between the pain of love desire and the
pleasures of sensuous appreciation of the natural world: “Friend,
what is love?/Is it only about misery?/Is it only about tears and sighs
of sorrow?/Then why do people in the pursuit of happiness/Crave

JOHN HAROLD

91

for such unhappiness?/In my eyes all is beautiful/All is new, all is
pure, the blue skies, the green meadows…….If each day you choose
only to cry, let there be one day spent laughing/One day when we
can forget grief, gather round and sing together.” 10 The balancing
of desire and pleasure and activity would be a life-long exploration.
A look at Tagore novels with their entrapped lovers reveals they
desire love, meaningful working lives, and personal pleasure,
legitimate needs that get so knotted that the characters find much
frustration, failure, and pain as they try to lead their lives during the
late years of British rule in India where traditional and modern
values, as well as foreign and domestic influences, were rubbing in
friction. One of Tagore’s contributions to prose fiction is to combine
all three of Pepper’s categories into complex personal and social
situations that pose obstacles for his characters to the spiritual
harmony he envisions as the ultimate goal.
Typically in his lengthier prose fictions, Tagore will present three
or four relatively affluent people in a love-pleasure-success knot,
which opens up for his examination multiple relationships and
purposive conflicts within a group small enough to highlight the
ethical implications of human behavior and the difficulties of
achieving any life harmony. In his late novel Dui Bon (1934) Tagore
continues working out possible scenarios within a joint family
structure such as Tagore’s own in childhood where one hundred
people shared the Thakur mansion, and he established a close bond
with his sister-in-law. While wittily purporting that the novel will be
about the universal male desire for both mother and mistress,11 the
narrator upends this cliché by dramatizing a childless wife fussing
over a husband, who escapes from her excessive ministrations to
the business world. When the wife contracts a serious disease, her
playful adolescent sister is called in to care for her but mostly to see
to the husband’s daily needs, only to bring out the spontaneous
sense of fun in him so that he neglects his business, and the family

92

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

loses their wealth and means of livelihood. It ends with all sobered
and only partially re-balanced as the wife recovers, the sister goes
off for medical training, and the married couple may have to seek
their fortunes elsewhere. Tagore’s well known compassion for the
plight of women, well in evidence here, further negates the opening
premise that male desire is the novel’s thesis.
A very interesting film adaptation of Dui Bon by Anurag Basu
(2015) explores the darker implications of the action. The film has
the sister enter into an adulterous affair with the husband; the wife
does not recover from her illness; and the husband refuses to leave
where they live. The sister’s guilt ridden departure adds to the total
frustration of the characters’ wishes and purposive behavior.12
Pepper’s threefold analysis helps us to see that in the novel and its
film adaptation desire does not always dovetail with pleasure, and
that achievement drives may lead away from fulfilling marriage,
especially in the absence of any children. The wife wants her
husband’s domestic needs taken care of by her sister but quietly
wishes he would not lose his interest in her. In Dui Bon putting
excessive demands on one’s spouse or fiancée leads to disaster; in
a parallel plot, the sister’s absent fiancée keeps pressuring her to
continue her studies then demands more family money even as he
has goes and marries an English bride. In Tagore’s high comic
treatment the consequences are less dire, but happiness does not
seem in the offing for anyone. Again implicit is the interesting insight
that each individual must find a balance between moderated desire,
achievement, and pleasure in order to achieve personal harmony
that will inevitably affect the larger social world. For Tagore, this is
a foundation stone of his ethics.
That pleasure seeking and fulfilment of desire in love relations
are seldom channeling together in a smooth stream is a primary
conflict from the earliest of Tagore’s novels and novellas. Maumita
Chaudhuri quotes from the author’s original preface to Chokher Bali

JOHN HAROLD

93

(1902): “The Literature of the new age seeks not to narrate a
sequence of events, but to reveal the secrets of the heart.”13 In that
brilliant early novel, tragedy is the result of an educated, highly
competent, beautiful young widow Binodini unable to secure any
kind of fulfilling life because she cannot remarry. Binodini is perhaps
Tagore’s greatest, or at least most memorable, creation of a female
character. Despite her envy of marital sexuality and scheming to
undermine the marriage of her naïve, untutored friend Ashalata
with the superficial Mahendra (Mohin) and her latent, unrequited
desire for the noble doctor Bihari, the reader’s sympathies are
largely with this widow, deprived of fulfilment merely because of
her outsider’s status block life’s opportunities.
Anurag Basu leads off his richly colored series of filmed Tagore
Stories (2015) with a successful dramatic adaptation of Tagore’s
Chokher Bali. The lead actress, Radhika Apte, along with the five
splendid supporting players, brilliantly brings to life the dramatic
implications. That the series received positive reviews and is
available on the world wide Netflix, a 200 billion dollar company,
will play its part to globalize one aspect of Tagore’s achievement.
The whole of the series is a triumph. Recurring, subtle musical
motifs bind the separate stories and elicit appropriate audience
emotions such as suspense, joy, and tenderness. Tagore songs are
also pleasantly interlaced. For example, the famous “Amar praner
paure chole” (1883) with its seductive rhythm directly
communicates the incipient pain that accompanies desire as Mohin
and Binodini are drawn closer together in Asha’s absence.
Pointedly, Tagore refrains from judging his characters. The very
predicaments they find themselves in are often overwhelming
because of circumstance, a particular weakness of character in the
individuals, or the very conflicting nature of human purposive goals.
In a very poignant opening framing scene of the adaptation and not
present in the original novel, Bihari and Binodini, unacknowledged

94

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

in their love for each other, meet after six years on a dark rainy night
at a rail station. Only with the succeeding tale after the three
episode Chokher Bali --Basu’s clever device is to include a coda to
the previous tale-- do we learn or can we infer that their lives will
now flow together in tending to the sick.14 While this is perhaps
overly optimistic solution for the social problem of the young Indian
widow, it is often reported that Tagore himself was not satisfied
with the ending of his novel, which has Binodini going off into
relative seclusion.
Pepper would place Tagore squarely within the Organicist world
hypothesis with its value placed upon hierarchical and complex
integration of materials. When in Sadhana (1915) Tagore posits,
“Pleasure is for one’s self, but goodness is concerned with the
happiness of all humanity and for all time,”15 he is encapsulating so
much of what in the West was the Transcendental Romantic world
view into a broad Upanishad based ethical goal. For our author, out
of tension and conflict comes a higher order resolution, a harmony
much to be sought. Tagore’s aphorism also suggests that everything
in life is connected, thus the “root metaphor” of the organic whole
which underlies the Organicist position. Note how Mohin’s
excessive sexual interest in his bride has repercussions throughout
his family circle. He neglects his studies, displaces too abruptly his
adoring mother, alienates his serious friend Bihari, and most
disastrously, he arouses the envy and unrequited desire of Binodini.
Yet Tagore will be temperate with moralizing. Indeed, he stakes a
claim midway between what Kundera identifies as lightness (what
one does has no effect on outcomes) and heaviness (every action is
fated to bring serious consequences).16
Throughout his fiction as promised in his artistic credo from
“Passing Time in the Rain,” the author is careful not to provide much
commentary: “Plain steady narration,/No theory or philosophy.”17
Maumita Chaudhuri puts the effect of the results so well: this

JOHN HAROLD

95

reticence “makes the turn of events and the whims and decisions of
the characters as natural as the fluttering of leaves on a sweltering
summer noon or the flow of a gushing river.” 18 Tagore’s is a direct
touch that lets the story unfold and reveal its own truths. Some
readers of serious fiction of the 18th and 19th centuries may lament
that modern authors have retreated from moral commentary to
achieve a more “objective” presentation. As a transitional writer
poised between two epochs, the traditional and the modern, in his
own land, Tagore is very deliberate with authorial judgments, so
when he does comment, the reader should take special note. In
Chokher Bali these comments form a pattern for the reader to aid
in interpretation without closing off ambiguities and a
compassionate response to the human predicament. (And may the
reader also initially abstain from judgment.) We need to remember
that Asha is very young (somewhere between twelve and fourteen,
even the narrator claims not to know); Binodini is probably around
twenty; both Mohin’s mother and aunt are widows with little power
except in their own dwellings; Mohin is too immature to be a serious
college student; and overly serious Bihari is quietly resentful being
treated as a younger “brother” by his honorary aunts. Further
complicating matters is a social system in which even slightly older
relatives are to be treated with special respect, and everyone has
his or her fixed place in the extended family enterprise. As a more
distant, widowed relation, Binodini’s place in the household is
continually under tension.
Commenting on the marital ardor of Mohin and Asha, the
narrator aphoristically offers, “Love needed to be rooted in life’s
labour, otherwise ecstasy would never be profound and
enduring.”19 Their infatuation gets in the way of his school work
and her learning household management. Signaling a possible
future harmony for a young married couple, the narrator then
poses, “Ecstasy, alas, seldom endures, but a bond, which has

96

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

become a second nature, is too formidable to break.”20 Pleasure
and desire in moderation, coupled with shared work, is marriage’s
potential. Tagore believed that a very young bride could learn love
and loyalty before the onset of intense pubescent desire and thus
prevent the kind of excess we see in Mohin and Asha. And the
extended family need not be shunned by the happy young couple:
“Celebration of love lacks repletion when confined to two partners
only. Happiness needs to be shared.”21 Tagore also gives insight
into what foils the rhythms of a successful purposeful action: “The
symphony of their love had started on a high note instead of
gradually building it to a crescendo, and unknown to them their
marriage was eroding at its root. A sense of fatigue follows a
hangover, and that fatigue then needs a new intoxicant.”22 These
few comments do not spoil the objectivity of the presentation but
gently steer the reader away from false readings.
The narrator offers fewer kernels of wisdom in the latter half of
the novel, but has Aunt Annapurna give some good advice to Asha
about not expecting reciprocated good service from someone:
“What I had not realized then that all my dealings were really with
one and one person only, and that person was none other than my
God. Had I clearly known this then, I would not have been so
frustrated but I know better now.”23 This is a pious woman’s
religious rewording of the universe’s essential connectedness and
why we must do good deeds and act ethically. Sadly in actuality,
these characters are mired in narrow sightedness and lack of
awareness of their often conflicting purposive drives. Here are
examples of the actions that the shallow husband Mohin is trying to
put into motion without connecting to a higher purpose.
1)

Mohin wants to be considered head of his fatherless
family. However, he puts little effort into this goal,
ignoring his mother’s serious illness.

JOHN HAROLD

2)
3)
4)

5)

97

He has tired of his initial interest in Asha so is directing
his desire in Binodini’s direction.
He expects his creature comforts to continue whatever
his actions.
He wants to be considered high minded but feels envy for
any achievement of his brotherly friend, even to stealing
away his promised fiancée.
Mohin wants to be a doctor, but rarely attends to his
studies and is easily distracted.

Ego, yearning, study, and comfort are in constant turmoil for this
man. Here is one of many examples of his purposive confusion: “As
he relaxed he had the sensation of being caressed by the delicate
fingers that she {Binodini} so skillfully embroidered the cushion
covers.”24 Simple pleasure elides rather too easily into forbidden
desire. A bantering dialogue between Mohin and Binodini, which
prefigures one discussed later from “The Laboratory,” (1940) is a
flirtatious playing at desire, but then Binodini recalls her position as
dependent widow and glorified servant and feels the pain of her
status:
“’Aha, I see. So, Mr. Banker, how much interest do I owe
you?’
Mahendra said, ‘As a starter, you were not present when I
ate. Your presence thereafter has not fully compensated me.
There are still dues outstanding.’
Binodini laughed. ‘I had no idea that you are such a severe
calculating person. Once in your grip, there is hardly any hope
to redeem oneself.’
‘Whatever be my dues, I do not appear to have recouped
them, have I?’ Mahendra ragged her.
Binodini answered, sounding a little desolate, ‘Anyway,
what have I got with which to pay you back. At any rate, I am

98

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

still a captive in your home.’ She sighed deeply after neatly
turning her jocular statement into a serious observation.”25
That she is manipulating him is evident as she re-directs his
flirting into more serious desire by emphasizing his social
dominance over her. He will cruelly grab her hand to restrain her,
which she escapes from but knows she is stimulating him further.
The whole novel can be read as a series of behaviors that go astray
with people not able to understand their needs, much less direct
their own action.
The more serious adult is Bihari, an important counterweight to
Mohin but one who is often not even mentioned in capsule
summaries of the novel. Bihari accomplishes much, attends to
relatives’ needs, seeks to do good, and yet is capable of deep desire
for Binodini and earlier Asha, while more concerned with their longterm welfare than his own pleasure. Is it not a key ethical principle,
that one should be aware of other’s needs as well as one’s own?
Bihari is clearly one of the most admirable of Tagore’s male
characters.
Tagore reinforces ethical conflict through the imagery of
“misreading.” Playfully using actual letters as part of the metaphor,
Tagore shows Mohin wrongly imagine what was in a missive he
didn’t read, and then later misread the intent of a letter he did read.
Asha learns to read only to waste time with cheap romances,
forgetting them the next minute. Binodini falsely assumes that
seeing her opened letter to seek help from Bihari without any return
answer means he has shunned her; in actuality, he was never
allowed to see the letter. At the metaphorical level, the purposive
individual misreads the communication of others when unaware of
a personal desire or mistaking it for something else, the prime case
being Mohin in his narrow self-involved life.

JOHN HAROLD

99

The novel genre is the ideal aesthetic vehicle for exploring how
humans pursue multiple purposive aims and can muddle them
horribly. The human consequences can be very mixed as in Dui Bon
or tragic as in Chokher Bali and Nashtairir (1901). We witness
Tagore’s largely sympathetic portrayal in his longer fictions of the
emerging Indian professional, upper middle class, influenced by
British occupation but also attempting to maintain traditional family
values. The plight of the women in these families has been his
special and long admired interest, but the males too, with their
divided loyalties between work outside the home and domestic life,
are under their own important stresses. Readers familiar with
Tagore’s prose fiction would expect to find in his final completed
piece of fiction “The Laboratory” 26 a continuation of such authorial
empathy. With what puzzlement early readers must have
experienced reading this story. First, it is longer than a short story
but not as long as a novella. We can summarily dismiss that
problem; call it then a “long story,” an ideal length for film
treatment. However, it is the content which may slap the reader in
the face. Cigar smoking women! The prostitute Sohini “sidling” up
to Nanda Mallik she has picked out as her future husband and
demanding money from him! After her marriage, Sohini seduces his
students and is impregnated by one! Previously there had never
occurred actual adultery in a Tagore novel, even when it appeared
apparent there might be. However, there are echoes of the early
heroine Binodini in the altogether darker figure of Sohini. (Now
imagine further exclamation marks for the following salacious
details.) Sohini boldly kisses Professor Choudhuri as part of an
implicit deal linking sexual favors with luring in an unsuspecting
young scientist to head up her late husband’s lab. For her part,
daughter Nilima despises the weak Dr. Rebati being groomed by the
mother but seduces him in order to capture the wealth under her
mother’s control and which her father pointedly did not leave as a

100

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

dowry for her. Nilima vows to continue her assignations with male
admirers after her marriage. Sohini pulls a knife on her daughter
when it appears the daughter will pull Rebati away from his
scientific focus designed to increase profits and status from Nanda’s
laboratory. These two women are hardly mere victims of traditional
patriarchal society. Yet readers, critics, and two film-makers believe
they are “courageous.” Perhaps seriously led astray by the
misconceived Raja Sen film of Laboratory (2010)27 and forgetting
the story, recent commentaries have suggested a heroic vision of
women because of the film’s concluding tableau of a painting begun
by the mother and completed by the daughter of a naked woman in
the flames of hell; meanwhile, the two “artists,’ who despised each
other earlier, cling together melodramatically. Of course, film
treatments do not need to be true to the original, yet in their
divergences they may give a sense of how present cultural attitudes
make it difficult to take in fully the work of an old master.
It is easy then for readers and film audiences in an era sensitive
to the rights of women to be confused on how to interpret Tagore’s
“Laboratory.” In the prestigious Oxford editions (2000), Tapobrata
Ghosh in her introduction to Chaudhuri’s selection of Tagore stories
writes that this is a “story of the triumph of marital faith.” And then
this piously delivered summation:
“How humane was the impersonal cosmos opened up by
modern science? In this story, Rabindranath seems to offer a
forward-looking answer to this question. The love of woman,
freed of the confines of convention, can touch the impersonal
world of science with human life and warmth. The entire
universe will then be infused with humanity.”28
Ignoring sexual bartering and knife wielding behavior, Ghosh
misses in her fervor to locate a positive message about women what

JOHN HAROLD

101

is Tagore’s distinctive, arch tone of voice, which is admirably
captured in Madhuchchhanda Karlekar’s translation:
“He {Nanda} had once spent some time in the Punjab on
business. He came upon a female companion there. He was
sitting on his verandah one morning, drinking tea, when a
young woman of twenty years came up to him boldly, her
ghagra swinging—bright eyes, smiling lips, sharp as a whetted
knife. She sidled up to his feet and said, ‘Babujii, I’ve been
watching you morning and evening over the last few days. I’m
quite amazed.’”29
What alert reader can miss the tone of “came upon a female
companion,” “came up to him boldly,” “smiling lips, sharp as a
whetted knife.” Tagore is presenting us with a late, very great
literary surprise: a rollicking satire on India’s emerging professional
class. Sohini and Nila literally prostitute themselves out of greed
and power, not courageous womanhood. While purporting to
honor her husband’s memory--he, by the way, was not duped by
her but was careful to leave his wealth in laboratory instruments-Sohini is trying to maintain control the wealth, even to the extent of
selling her daughter Nila in this pursuit. The final twist in Tagore’s
satire is that the two females schemers, as well as their masculine
hangers-on in Professor Choudhuri and the effete young men at the
Awakeners’ Club, are defeated by the hapless Rebati’s very
traditional aunt, who has ultimate control over him and
ignominiously drives him home at the conclusion of the tale.
Is the story an anti-feminist tract, undercutting Tagore’s long
standing habit and deeply felt insight of portraying his female
characters as victims? What the reader may need reminding of is
that satire is a form of comedy in which situations are just the
opposite of what they should be if humans were to act ethically.
Tagore is in effect rewriting Chokher Bali as a cautionary tale. In a

102

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

more recent film adaptation of Laboratory (2018)30 director
Chattopadhyey realizes some of the comic potential of the tale with
two able actresses as protagonists but not the film is not
consistently satirical so the audience will be able to perceive the
overall intent. In the film’s coda Sohini’s worship of Nanda’s
memory is dramatized as a serious devotion and not a ruse to
maintain her control, and for his role, genuine scientist Nanda
seems unaware of her machinations. However, the original Tagore
text shows Nanda knew exactly what he was getting into with
Sohini. He married her to keep his creditors at bay; he never lost his
focus on his scientific work, letting her free to make erotic
assignations but withholding any dowry for his illegitimate
offspring. Sohini did not lead him astray, emotionally or from his
devotion to science. Thus explained is Sohini’s surprise when her
choice to head the lab, the milk-fed Rebati, neglects his work in the
lab when enticed by her daughter, and Sohini is forced to alter her
plans and forbid the marriage to save her wealth. Unsure of itself,
though much better realized than Sen’s earlier adaptation,
Chattopadhyey’s Laboratory is often comic but only hints at the
satirical edge of the text. Tagore emphasized through the obscene
conversations between Sohini and the professor that their behavior
was the opposite of ideal ethical relations between a widow and an
unrelated male: “Sohini stopped him short by putting her arms
round his neck, kissing him on both cheeks, and quickly moving
away. ‘Under which account does that go down, Sohini?’ ‘I can
never repay the debt I owe you, so here’s the interest.’ ‘I got just
one the first day: today it’s two. Will it keep increasing like this?’
‘Of course it will, with compound interest.’”31 Recall the flirtatious
dialogue between Mohin and Binodini, but here the tone is lighter
but even more heavy as an ethical lapsing.
In the text is the tyranny of the reactionary aunt provides no
ethical alternative. The hapless Rebati deserves his comic

JOHN HAROLD

103

punishment, led by the nose by the three women and his old
teacher. The satire is directed at the greed and power drive of the
Mallick family and the naivety of the young scientist who has so
enmeshed himself in work that he is susceptible to the crudest
sexual temptation. The film’s slow motion entrance of the lovely
Nila is beautifully rendered in high comic tone and gives us some
inkling of the original’s wicked sense of the ridiculous. And lest he
be misunderstood, Tagore punctuates his text with disclaimers of
what a character has just said or felt, such as “This was an absolute
lie,” and “Needless to say, Nandakishore had held no such belief”
and “This was a blatant lie.”
Yet critics, readers, and audiences are still being fooled. Those
familiar with the guru-like visage and demeanor of the aged Tagore
may be shocked that he penned such thorough going send-up of the
very segment of society that would be called upon to govern after
the colonial period. So what about the professional upper middle
class so disturbed the author?
1)
2)
3)
4)
5)
6)
7)

Gross materialism and thievery masked as interest in
scientific, home-grown progress.
Occupation absorbing a man’s whole consciousness,
replacing religion and family.
Sexual license instead of liberation of feeling to foster
long term happiness.
Money values couched as devotion to a dead husband.
Traditional family attitudes about marital choice
vulgarized as a money grab.
That one who has been taken advantage of financially is
an excuse to cheat others in turn.
Human values, particularly tender love expression,
devolve into a business for profit.

104

8)

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

Offering sexual favors in exchange for legal help or
scientific expertise.

In an English language essay on marriage, Tagore has also
extended his critique of an unrestricted success drive supplanting
the sanctity of marriage and the parents’ duty to find new loving
homes for their children. He details what a “good giving power” a
wife should have: not mere charm but “patience, self-abnegation,
sensitive intelligence, grace in thought, word and behavior,--the
reticent expression of rhythmic life, the tenderness and terribleness
of love; at its core, moreover is that self-radiant Spirit of Delight
which ever gives itself up.”32 Contrast the machinations of Sohini.
Moreover, the pathetic social skills and sexual naivety of Rebati is a
satirical nod to the primacy of human needs for moderated pleasure
and desire fulfilled. It is most telling that the author writes such a
story as a capstone to his fifty year career as a writer of prose fiction.
Only his songs and poetry would occupy him for longer periods.
More used as readers are to Tagore’s pathos, there is no better
example of his empathy with the poor and downtrodden woman
than “The Postmaster” (1892),33 which also provides a cosmic
resolution to conflicting needs. Western critics today, so focused on
gender, class, and race, may miss the particular Tagorean take on a
particular living situation. Some ethical questions raised by the
story: how does one compensate for the devoted service of
another? What is the human value of the sick cared for by a tender
servant over a health care bureaucracy? How do we acknowledge
the effort of a mentor who liberates a pupil from the mental prison
of illiteracy? Are pity, sympathy, empathy, and compassion the
same emotion? What is the responsibility of the individual to
alleviate human suffering? Can rural and urban life be reconciled?
What is the relationship between grief and the eternal cycles of

JOHN HAROLD

105

natural life and separation? Tagore explores these matters in this
succinct tale.
The story tells of an educated, single gentleman from Calcutta
who
relocates to a remote rural station where he has little to do
running a post office and no one to talk to from his own urban
background. Yearning for the city and his family, he writes nature
poems and as a stop gap converses with his unpaid servant Ratan,
an orphan village girl, but no budding social schemer like Sohini. Out
of boredom, he teaches her to read, and each speaks of family
memories. When he gets very ill, she tends to him as a mother or
sister; he seems hardly conscious of the bond between master and
servant. When he announces his immanent return to Calcutta, she
begs him to take her with him, but he just laughs. In her grief, she
refuses his generous parting gift of most of his monthly salary. Only
on the boat does he feel any anguish and questions if he should
rescue the girl before philosophically concluding life is full of such
partings. She is disconsolate and hopes irrationally he will return.
Now a modern Western critic “knows” just how to respond to
this tale. Immediately side with the servant girl as an oppressed
woman who suffers because of her gender, her caste, her humble
work and orphan status pitted against the paternalistic arrogance of
her male employer. This critic might then go on to see the tale as a
microcosm for the whole of India where the poverty of the many
rests upon the neglect of the privileged few. If only Western ideals
of equality, democratic choice, human rights, and market economy
to promote rural development were put in place, this Westerner
cheerfully comforts himself that thank goodness for a more
enlightened culture.
Of course, what this explanation lacks is any attempt to read the
story for what Tagore might want to communicate. The narrator’s
voice is one means to provide us with comments, gaps, and

106

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

contrasts that help shape our responses. It is as if Tagore sends us
a post card with an unfamiliar picture on the one side and a coded
message on the other. First, his objectivity is noteworthy. The
narrator does not ironically undercut the postmaster in the likeliest
places, nor does he privilege the emotional reactions of the
orphaned servant. Indeed, the narrator seems to go to great lengths
to underscore the irrationality of the girl’s hope. And the gaps! We
are not told why the postmaster tries to leave Ratan such a large
severance pay, why he writes poems about the rain or is so homesick. The narrator does not contradict the philosophical musings of
the postmaster or dwell on the girl’s unhappiness; instead, the
perspectives of the two characters are poignantly contrasted: one
from a poor rural village, the other from a major city; one illiterate,
the other educated; one an orphan, the other has a loving mother
and sister; one destitute, the other employed; one a child, the other
an adult male; one a servant, the other a master. Yet both share
isolation and a wish to lead a richer existence. The subtle power of
the story is the surprising intimacy of the two that each is only
partially aware of. Tagore’s vision of the interconnectedness of all
life in a cosmic weave is temporarily revealed to the postmaster:
“When he got in and the boat was under way, and the rain-swollen
river, like a stream of tears welling up from the earth, swirled and
sobbed at her bows, then he felt a sort of pain at heart; the griefstricken face of a village girl seemed to represent for him the great
unspoken pervading grief of Mother Earth herself.”34 The fused
imagery of the postmaster’s anguish, the yearly flood, the girl’s
grief, and the cosmos points towards harmony between the
ephemeral and immediate human world and the timeless and
eternal. This passage should strike the reader as a transcendence
of the sentimental. The postmaster has the possibility of moving
from pity to sympathy to compassion; however, the man does not
act on this poetic insight, despite having an ”impulse” (or “sharp

JOHN HAROLD

107

desire” in Radice’s recent translation),35 but after a strong current
pushes the boat farther away, he retreats into easier philosophical
musing about the universality of partings. In the language of
purposive action, the desire is short-lived and leads to no further
attempted action. Instead, the postmaster experiences the
melancholic feeling of this is fate. The narrator points out to us that
the girl does not have the consolation of philosophy. She continues
to weep and hope for his return.
Viewers of Satyajit Ray’s exquisite film adaptation, part of his
memorable trilogy Teen Kanya (1961), will remember its subtly
different ending. Ratan angrily rejects the coins, not sorrowfully
admonishing the postmaster to forget about her, and the
postmaster is surprised by her anger. This ending is a searing
indictment of his detachment, and by extension of the neglect of
the downtrodden.36 Tagore’s own story mutes the social outrage in
preference for what might call a spiritual resignation. Particularly
to note, the narrator’s rueful comment on Ratan’s grief: “Alas for
the foolish human heart!”37 Reputedly inspired by the author’s
temporary leave-taking from his daughter, Tagore throws up his
hands and says such is life, while encouraging the reader to feel for
Ratan.
We may usefully recall at this point Wordsworth’s great poem
“The Ruined Cottage” (1803) in which the speaker hears a similarly
sad tale from an old peddler who used to visit a lonely widow vainly
hoping for the return of her husband. After the peddler finds her
gone and the property returning to a natural state, he hears the
“secret spirit of humanity” surviving and after reflection is able to
“walk along my road in happiness.”38 What may initially seem a
heartless response to suffering is the peddler’s purposive selection
of a path that re-aligns his pleasure and desire drives about a
permanent grief that he cannot assuage, but it unites humanity, and
he can gain a certain melancholy pleasure from recognizing this as

108

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

a very human situation. Or to put in other terms, it does not blunt
the human desire to alleviate the sufferings of others; rather, it
provides a necessary detachment to keep living in the face of our
inability to right all pain.
Of course, using our Pepperean lens, we could argue the
postmaster could have had more successful, pleasurable, and
fulfilling experiences had he come back, rescued the girl, and
provided for her in Calcutta. The story’s power lies in provoking our
imaginations to consider alternatives to the postmaster’s inaction.
Tagore expressed more of these matters in that great poem
already cited, “Passing Time in the Rain,” which serves in many eyes
as his credo as a writer of prose fiction:
Small lives, humble distress,
Tales of humdrum grief and pain,
Simple, clear straightforwardness;
Of the thousands of tears streaming daily
A few saved from oblivion;
No elaborate description,
Plain steady narration,
No theory or philosophy,
No story quite resolved,
Not ending at the end,
But leaving the heart uneasy
All the world’s unnumbered
Stories never completed:
Buds unripely torn—
Dust of fame unsung,
The love, the terror, the wrong
Of thousands of lives unknown. (italics in the translation)
From all the world around me
Like floods of monsoon rain:

JOHN HAROLD

109

Momentary smiles and tears
Pouring through the years,
The sound goes on and on.
Each lost and forgotten moment
Whirls in a dancing torrent:
Oh may I from it gather
The clouds of life’s monsoon,
And make them rain down
What else would be gone for ever.39
Tagore makes it clear the writer’s job is to be a witness and
record human stories as part of “life’s monsoon.” This is his way of
viewing from an ethical plane the “mundane” pleasure and pain,
success and failure, desire and frustration of ordinary experience.
He gives these strivings his reverential recognition.
Human experiential activity is given much of its significance,
Pepper continually argues, through the emotion or feeling tone
accompanying each situation. Composing both the lyrics and music
in his songs, the music adapted from traditional raga melodies and
tal meters, Tagore’s famous Rabindra Sangeet are an ideal vehicle
to convey subtle shades of feeling that accompany life’s pursuits.
Unlike prose fiction, songs present moods when purposive actions
are in alignment, as well as in conflict. The sensual “Krishnokoli ami
tareyi boli” (1900) finds desire and pleasure in confluence as the
speaker exchanges glances with a dark eyed peasant girl; the
hypnotic rhythm and repetitive sounds of the words convey the
speaker’s feelings, especially successful in Suchitra Mitra’s
rendition.40 (The recorded songs are most successful with a
minimum of instrumental accompaniment. Tagore played no
instrument himself but was heard to sing in a light, unaccompanied
tenor.) The exuberance of the active human bodies in unison
pursuing a goal is metaphorically presented as the choric call for a

110

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

ship to set sail in “Ebar tore mora gange” (1905).41 The painful loss
of his beloved sister-in-law is assuaged in “Noyono tomare paye na
dekhite” (1886) by imagining pleasure in a kind of ultimate harmony
“finding you at all times/Among people and across the ages/In time
and thereafter/Until there remains no one, no earthly barrier
between us.”42
*****
One of the glories of reading a great writer is the promise of an
overarching vision of the restless individual human, a society in
transition, and the natural world. Especially in the novels, Tagore’s
characters desire love and joy in nature; they seek pleasure in daily
life; they wish to be active and lead productive lives, but none of
these purposive drives will be smoothly satisfied in India, in his time
the largest colonial subject nation, undergoing industrialization with
an unstable emerging class of professional males, while female
relatives are largely forced to stay at home with little to do.
Western and Eastern traditions clash; past and present customs
seek alignment, especially with external work sending males far
outside the home. Tagore was certainly progressive in trying to find
values to assimilate from both East and West, eschewing simple
nationalism, avoiding a materialist conception, focusing on daily life
as it is lived, and famously revealing the plight of women in all social
classes.
Pepper as a philosopher relies on clear, simple illustrations
instead of fuller, more problematic cases of sustained intellectual
interest. Literature can fill a real gap in philosophy by presenting
extended “as if” cases for us to test the explanatory power of a
theory. Pepper’s intriguing idea has been his separating conation
from affect and achievement. Tagore’s texts bear out that humans
often get themselves in binds when they pursue desires that bring

JOHN HAROLD

111

more pain than pleasure, or when even simple pleasures are
thwarted by overpowering desire or striving for achievement.
Further research should be done to analyze the effects a selective
choice has on a Tagore character achieving a goal and how to
“legislate” between the passive dispositional social, institutional,
and cultural selective systems of the Indian milieu.
Happily, like English writers Jane Austen and Evelyn Waugh,
Tagore has been reclaimed globally, partly through the medium of
film which brings in new audiences. His vision of human suffering,
striving, and attainment seeks to bind Eastern and Western thought.
He has proven himself the master dramatizer, now seen as having a
late satirical edge of social situations in which pleasure, work and
desire needs collide and resolve in ways that continue to delight,
chasten, and enlighten.
Independent Scholar

112

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

NOTES
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

8.

9.
10.

11.
12.
13.

14.

Amartya Sen, “Tagore and His India,” The New York Review of Books
(June 26, 1997): 62.
Stephen C. Pepper, World Hypotheses: A Study in Evidence (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1942), passim.
Stephen C. Pepper, Concept and Quality: A World Hypothesis (Lasalle
Illinois: Open Court, 1966) 18.
Stephen C. Pepper , The Sources of Value (Berkeley: University of
California Press,1958), 305.
Pepper, Value, 343.
Rabindranath Tagore, “Introduction,” Creative Unity (New Delhi:
Rupa and Co, 2003), 89.
Raghunath Ghosh, “Positivity of the Negative: In the light of
Rabindranath,” in Rethinking of Tagore’s Views on Society,
Development, and Environment, ed. S. Dasgupta, S. Chatterjee, and
A. Chatterjee (Kolkata: Rachayita, 2012), 230.
Rabindranath Tagore, “Passing Time in the Rain,” “Appendix A” in
Rabindranath Tagore: Selected Short Stories, trans. William Radice
(London: Penguin, 1994) 270.
Sen, 8
Rabindranath Tagore, “Shokhi bhabona kahare baule,” Rabindranath
Tagore: The Singer and His Song, trans. and ed. by Reba Som (New
Delhi: Viking, 209), 232-3.
Rabindranath Tagore, Dui Bon, in Three Novellas: Nashtanir, Dui Bon,
Malancha, trans. Sukhendu Ray (New Delhi: Oxford, 2010), 61.
Anurag Basu, “Two Sisters,” Episodes 17-18, Stories by Rabindranath
Tagore (Mumbai: Ishana Movies, 2015), Netflix.
Maumita Chaudhuri, “Reflection of Tagore and Rituparno in chokher
Bali,” Rabindranather Anubad O Anubade Rabindranath (Kolkata:
Rupali, 2012), ed. A.B.R. Chowdhuri, M. Bhaumik, S. Mondal, 176.
Basu, “Chokher Bali” Episodes 1-3, Stories.

JOHN HAROLD

113

15. Rabindranath Tagore, Sadhana, in Rabindranath Tagore Omnibus IV
(New Delhi: Rupa, 2005), 110.
16. Milan Kundera, The Unbearable Lightness of Being, trans. Michael
Henry Heim (New York: Harper and Row, 1984), 5.
17. Tagore, Passing, 271.
18. Chaudhuri, 175.
19. Tagore, Chokher, 39.
20. Ibid., 46.
21. Ibid., 48.
22. Ibid., 65.
23. Ibid., 166.
24. Ibid., 135.
25. Ibid., 136.
26. Rabindranath Tagore, “The Laboratory,” in Tagore; Selected Short
Stories, ed. Sukanta Chaudhuri (New Delhi: Oxford, 2000), 262-298.
27. Raja Sen, Laboratory (Kolkata: Pitrashish, 2010) DVD.
28. Tapobrata Ghosh, “Introduction,” in Sukanta Chaudhuri’s Tagore
Selected, 26.
29. Ibid., 262.
30. Soumik Chattopadhyay, Laboratory, (Kolkata: Hoichov, 2018).
Amazon streaming.
31. Tagore,”The Laboratory,” 262.
32. Rabindranath Tagore, “The Indian Ideal of Marriage,” in The English
Writings of Rabindranath Tagore (New Delhi: Sahitya Akademi, 2004)
reprinted in Tagore and the Feminine: A Journey in Translations, ed
Malashri Lal (New Delhi: Sage, 2015), 300.
33. Rabindranath Tagore, “The Postmaster,” in Mashi and Other Stories
(New York: Macmillan, 2018), 159-169.
34. Ibid., 168.
35. Rabindranath Tagore, “The Postmaster,” in Tagore Selected, trans.
William Radice, 46.

114

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

36. Satyajit Ray, Teen Kanya (Kolkata: Raga, 1961) DVD.
37. Tagore, “Postmaster,” 169.
38. William Wordsworth, “The Ruined Cottage,” in The Norton Anthology
of English Literature, ed. M.H.Abrams (New York: Norton, 1993) Sixth
Edition, Volume II, 171.
39. Tagore, “Appendix A”, 270-1.
40. Tagore, “Krishnokoli ami tareyi boli” in Som, 257-8; Suchitra Mitra,
Krishnokoli, Saregama, CD MP3.
41. Som, 253.
42. Ibid., 242.

115

STHANESHWAR TIMALSINA

Rasāsvāda: A Comparative Approach to
Emotion and the Self
Sthaneshwar Timalsina
Abstract
This paper explores the philosophy of emotion in classical India.
Although some scholars have endeavored to develop a
systematic philosophy of emotion based on rasa theory, no
serious effort has been made to read the relationship between
emotion and the self in light of rasa theory. This exclusion, I
argue, is an outcome of a broader presupposition that the ‘self’
in classical Indian philosophies is outside the scope of emotion.
A fresh reading of classical Sanskrit texts finds this premise
baseless. With an underlying assumption that emotion and self
are inherently linked, this paper explores similarities between
the Indian and Chinese approaches.

Situating the Discourse
The project of studying rasa in light of emotion theories is not a
new one, as scholars such as Chaudhury (1965), Patankar (1980),
Schechner (2001), Gerow (2002), Higgins (2007), or Bilimoria
and Wenta (2015) have already ventured in this direction. Some
scholars, such as Frijda and Sundararajan, have also attempted
to extend this discourse and involve classical Chinese theories.
Unfortunately these efforts have not developed further. In
particular, the relationship of emotion and the self in light of the

116

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

rasa theory has never been explored. Accordingly, scholars in
the area studies of India or China are not as enthusiastic about
engaging these two cultures as they are in relating their field to
the West. The main objective of this paper is to explore this very
relation, while also making a broader appeal for a global
discourse on emotion theories. Some of the contemporary
debates regarding the scope and nature of emotion and its
relation to self, particularly between cognitive and psychological
theories, mirror the classical debates on rasa. My own exposure
to Chinese literature is limited and I am only referring to select
nuances for a future scholarship in this direction.
It is well known that contemporary scholarship on India and
China has not been able to free itself from colonial scaffoldings.
Studies on emotion are no exception, and we can start this
conversation with Tuske (2011). The Cartesian development of
Western philosophy, and the Cartesian frame adopted by
scholars in the West attempting to read the non-West has, for
the last hundred years or so, produced a vast amount of
literature in diaspora “philosophy” that broadly resembles
Western parameters. Following this reading, an enlightened
being, a sage, does not have emotions (bhāva, wuqing). 1
However, if we engage the aesthetic traditions from these
cultures and their relation to self-cultivation, emotions appear
crucial in refining self-awareness and cultivating the self, parallel
to ‘savoring’ the refined emotions, expressed in terms of rasa in
India and he/ho (translated as ‘harmony’) in China. 2 Engaging
aesthetic traditions from these cultures not only brings
emotions to the center of discourse, it also allows us to make
broader arguments relevant to contemporary studies on
emotions by giving alternative perspectives on issues such as the
relation of emotion with feelings, emotion and intentionality,
emotion and the cultivation of personality, and so on. Reading
these traditions in light of contemporary theories on emotion is
not to reduce the observations grounded on these cultures to
contemporary psychology or cognitive science. On the contrary,

STHANESHWAR TIMALSINA

117

this is to demonstrate how the contemporary understanding of
emotion and its relation to the self are limited, and how the
insights gleaned from these cultures can broaden our horizon.
This paper focuses on the Indian classical perspectives on
emotion and the self. Just so that we can initiate a broader
dialogue involving the Chinese counterparts, I would like to
include a few more examples. Arguing from the Chinese cultural
perspective, Shih-p'in consists of Shih or poetry and ‘p’in’ which
can be used either as a noun, referring to category, or as a verb,
referring to the act of savoring. When used as a noun, this refers
to “emotional response categorization” that involves emotion
embedded with meaning that in turn relies on the reader’s
response. These categories are understood as “constructed”
and not innate, and refer to nuanced moods and emotions that
are recognizable only by astute subjects. When understood as a
verb, it involves an emotional response to encountering
something aesthetically pleasing, developing the ability to
expand the duration of such an experience along with reflexivity
so that the experience is identified as aesthetically pleasing. In
addition to the pervasion of experience over a period of time,
‘p’in’ also consists of retrieving memory. An experience, after all,
is considered ‘aesthetic’ when it is retrieved and evaluated as
pleasing. This makes reflexivity essential to experience, as no
verification of such experience would otherwise be possible.
Speaking comparatively, the Sanskrit term rasa is derived
from the root √ras, to savor, and the suffix in bhāva affirms
action, the verbal meaning.3 Accordingly, the term is similar to
‘p’in’ or ‘p’in-wei’ in the Chinese context, as it describes both the
emotional response categorization and the very act of savoring.
Just like ‘p’in,’ rasa experience relies on sahṛdaya, or the
empathic person who can transcend subjectivity and enter the
heart of the poet. Additionally, rasa experience is reflexive, has
the recollective property, and can be extended in its duration,
particularly when rasa experience parallels yogic absorption. In
order to reformulate the classical conversation on emotion in

118

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

classical Hindu philosophical traditions, the project here is to
analyze rasa and similar categories. Broader comparisons are
made in order not just to explain categories across culture but
also to demarcate the boundaries for future analysis of the
constructive roles cultures play in accessing emotions. What are
emotions? Are emotions like feelings? Do they have an
intentional object? Are emotions propositional? Can they be
distinguished from each other based on somatic symptoms?
What is the relation between emotion and the self? These are
some of those questions that are addressed by the classical
aesthetes, particularly in India, although in different cultural and
philosophical contexts. While coming in a particular culture in a
particular historical context, philosophers such as Abhinava
address universal issues, and it is not appropriate to constrain
their philosophies in a narrow socio-historical context. While the
examples that they give may be unique and the framework in
which their contemplations emerge different, their arguments
deserve the same attention as do those of the contemporary
writers. Reading classical philosophers in today’s context does
not mean that their original concepts are dislocated. On the
contrary, this approach only buttresses the case for the
expanded study of their philosophies.4

The Mechanism of Experiencing Rasa
As an introduction, the term rasa, used primarily in an aesthetic
sense, identifies a synthetic experience derived of the
commixture of different emotions wherein one is dominant,
(sthāyī bhāva) and the others at play are secondary
(vyabhicārin). The four main rasa experiences (śṛṅgāra, vīra,
bībhatsa, and bhayānaka) are derived from four emotions,
eroticism, heroism, disgust, and horror, where the mind has four
different functions of blossoming (vikāsa), expansion (vistāra),
agitation (vikṣobha), and scattered (vikṣepa). The comic (hāsya)
is derived from the erotic sentiment, tragic (karuṇa) and
fearsome (bhayānaka) are derived from the horrific, and

STHANESHWAR TIMALSINA

119

wondrous is derived of the heroic emotional state. In essence,
there are eight central emotions considered dormant that
correlate with the experience of the eight different rasas. Rasa
experience, however, is not the surge of pure emotion. Indian
aesthetes argue that the very dormant emotion when manifest
with the aid of vibhāva and so on transforms into rasa
experience.5 When one of these emotions is accompanied with
secondary emotions (vyabhicārin), and if the stage of experience
is accompanied with subjective state and objective conditions
identified in terms of ālaṃbana and uddīpana, that experience
of emotion transforms into rasa. There are multiple theories to
describe this transformation of pure emotion to aesthetic relish.
Rasa doctrine also analyzes 33 secondary emotions such as
distress, envy, sorrow, or doubt that accompany the central
emotion. In addition to this, Abhinava expands upon a seminal
concept, considering ‘tranquil’ (śānta) as a distinct rasa that has
the very experience of the self (svātmarūpa) or the absence of
all other emotions (nirveda) as the dormant emotion. 6 The
question, whether this absence of emotions can itself be an
emotional state, is at the center in later classical debates on
aesthetics. Many of the arguments found in this discussion are
pertinent to the broader discourse on emotion and its
modalities.
One of the controversial issues in classical India is the causal
relation between emotion and rasa: the issue is, how can rasa
that is transcendent and also identical to the self be also equated
with somatic emotions? There are some instances where rasa
has been equated with the self. The application of the
philosophy of recognition (pratyabhijñā) is cited in the postAbhinavaguptian description of the transformation of emotion
into rasa. In this depiction, rasa is itself the very dormant
emotion, the perfuming (vāsanā) inherent with the self,
manifest (abhivyakta) when accompanied with vibhāva and so
on. In this depiction, there is no distinction between rasa and

120

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

the self, giving further clues that describe the emotional aspect
of the self.7

Experiencing Emotions
In order to ground the relation of the self and emotions in Indian
aesthetic traditions, it is essential that we explore the texts that
address the mechanism of emotion, particularly the causes
attributed to the emergence of emotions. What is noteworthy
in the above description of the dormant mood (sthāyī bhāva) is
that the central emotions are dormant in the self, or are situated
there. These dormant moods are considered by some to be
innate properties of the self. The self, in this depiction, is not
dissociated from emotions. Accordingly, emotions that did not
exist before are not produced at the moment of experience. In
contrast to Śaṅkuka’s theory that rasa is inferred, the
Abhivyaktivādins –– those who maintained that rasa is an
expression or manifestation of something dormant, or that
nothing non-existent comes into being when one experiences
rasa –– maintain that emotions are dormant to the self. In this
non-dual paradigm, the self and rasa are not two opposites, as
the very consciousness is manifest when experiencing rasa,
through the commixture of different stimulants and secondary
emotions with the primary or dormant emotion.8 What is meant
by ‘experience’ when addressing rasa can be gleaned from a
paragraph from Caṇḍīdāsa’s KP commentary:
Due to the subduing of rajas and tamas and the
surge of sattva or its manifestation, when the
illuminating [aspect of consciousness] is vivid and
resting in self-awareness, that is of the character of
bliss alone. There is an absence of association with
the external entities of cognition where the
connection is made between what has been
cognized in the past and what is being cognized at
the present moment.9

STHANESHWAR TIMALSINA

121

In order to relate the self with emotions, the other pertinent
issue is the mechanism of experiencing emotions. When the
classical texts are engaged upon this issue, further insights can
be gleaned upon the status of emotion within the aesthetic
traditions being examined. One stanza from the masterpiece of
Mammaṭa directly addresses this issue:
Rasa is the [experience of aesthetic] beauty etc.,
that gives rise to transcendent relish while
generating the experience similar to that of
experiencing the Brahman, as if everything else has
been covered [from the spotlight of experience],
touching [or embracing] the entire body as if
entering the heart, throbbing [or manifesting] as if
immediate [to the senses], being experienced
similar to a cocktail drink, sustained by [the
experience of] vibhāva etc., of the character of
being experienced [as the self] alone. Although it is
identical to one’s [self] nature but is nonetheless
experienced through the senses by the subject of
experience in the universal form by establishing the
link with the entire heart, [when the self is]
unbound, having no contact with any other entities
of cognition. This is manifest due to the sudden
dissolution of the finite subjective experience
instigated by the force of universalization, although
localized in experiencing subjects, [by giving
expression to] the permanent moods such as sexual
bliss that are abiding in the heart of the ordinary
people as instinct or habit pattern (vāsanā).10
This is not all that Mammaṭa has to offer upon this issue.
While confirming the transcendental nature of rasa experience,
he compares and contrasts this experience with yogic
absorption, and while doing so, invokes Abhinava for this
affirmation:

122

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

This [rasa] is experienced by the transcendent
means of self-awareness distinct from the
experience of the other yogins whose experience is
limited [due to its isolation from objects]. This is the
experience that does not touch anything other and
that results in the self alone, and this can be known
by means of yogic cognition, being that such
cognition is distinct from those arising from the
sensory modalities, and so on. This rasa experience
is not grasped by the transcendent awareness that
is devoid of mental constructs (nirvikalpaka), as it
has the primacy of the cognition of vibhāva etc. It is
not conceptual cognition (savikalpaka) either,
because the transcendent bliss that is being
experienced is established by self-awareness alone.
That which is neither is of the character of both, and
this only establishes the transcendent nature of
rasa experience and there is no contradiction.
Abhinavagupta maintains this.11
This is the time we make some observations. Aesthetic
savoring, whether explained in the Chinese context with the
term of ‘p’in’ or as rasa following Sanskrit terminology, has a
constructed element and is different from emotions that are
directly experienced. This refinement of emotion, in the Chinese
context, is grounded on ‘harmony’ (in Chinese, ‘he’ or ‘ho’),
which rests on holistic perception and is intuitive. The fusion of
emotions is also central to rasa experience, as in absence of this
fusion (saṃyoga) of the pertinent emotions and moods
described in terms of vibhāva, anubhāva, and the sañcārī
bhāvas, there is no exalted experience of rasa. Furthermore,
harmony among emotions is essential to both aesthetic
traditions. This is why savoring and the rasa experience are both
compared with the flavor that arises with the combination of
different ingredients. The relation of both ‘p’in’ and rasa with
the culinary practice and the link of these concepts with the

STHANESHWAR TIMALSINA

123

cultivation of the self also help us ground the embodied nature
of self-experience.
The parallels between Chinese and Indian aesthetic traditions
suggest further comparison. Ssu-K’ung T’u (837-903) is credited
for saying that aesthetic experience comes from “flavor beyond
flavor” and “image beyond image.” Kashmiri aesthetes describe
the rasa experience as lokottara, or transcendent to
commonsense experience. This experience of aesthetic savoring
builds over time and does not necessarily occur in a single flash.
Chinese aesthetes call this savoring pai-huai, which means
“slowly packing back and forth.” In India, aesthetic savoring is
described by the term “carvaṇa” or chewing. These metaphors
help us ground the embodied nature of rasa experience, as the
aesthetic bliss is compared in these examples to the corporeal
experience of relishing flavor or taste. What is intriguing here is,
while the rasa itself is identified as transcendent, the
mechanism in which this is experienced is identified as
embodied. This categorization fits well in the philosophical
platform of Trika where the absolute is described in terms both
of transcendent and immanent. This, however, is problematic to
other traditions where the self-experience is dissociated from
blissful mode of experience and transcendentality of selfexperience is maintained. Corporeality is at the center of
describing this savoring which can involve even the negative
experiences such as cringing in fear or disgust, spitting and
vomiting, or the burning sensation felt in the skin. Inching closer
to the discourse on rasa, ‘savoring’ in the Chinese context does
not preclude negative emotions, such as pain, sorrow, or loss.
What transforms negative emotions into rasa or savoring is the
meaning embedded within coarse experiences. Being aroused is
not experiencing śṛṅgāra, nor is trembling with fear the
experience of bhayānaka. It is due to meaning that even horror
or disgust become aesthetically pleasing and this meaning
aspect is associated with the refinement of emotion.

124

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

Fridja and Sundararajan (2007, 230-31) argue that this
savoring in the Chinese literary context is identified as selfreflexive, analyzed in terms of a second-order consciousness
that objectifies the first-order consciousness. The concept of
pratibhā or intuitive awareness in Indian aesthetics identifies
the same phenomenon. Another crucial aspect of savoring is the
appraisal of emotions. Appraisal does not simply mean a
consciousness of experience in this context. When applied in the
discourse on emotions, it relates to the emotional response
triggered by the conscious experience. Pleasure and pain are
two of the basic processes that lead to the appraisal of
emotions. And due to this review process and the ways
emotions are handled, even negative emotions can elicit
aesthetic pleasure.
Experience is multi-layered and its appraisal involves both
basic sensations and the meaning embedded within such
experiences. In reliving our experiences, each response varies,
and our ability to transcend the basic sensation and find a higher
purpose and meaning can transform even a painful experience
to bliss as an outcome of the aesthetic experience, and this
processing requires reflexivity. Both Indian and Chinese
aesthetic theories presuppose this cognitive approach. The
distinction, following Fridja and Sundararajan (2007, 278), is that
the rasa experience has a different structure for the detachment
of emotion from the initial experience, where the fusion of the
subject with the transcendent reality is stressed. In samadhi, a
subject is lost in the Brahman, and in aesthetic savoring, in rasa
experience. One needs to keep in mind here that the way
samādhi is understood here is Advaitic, while the Patañjalian
interpretation of samādhi or the Buddhist interpretation of
samāpatti may differ. Nevertheless, in all accounts the
distinguishing factor of subjectivity disappears and something is
directly encountered in the collapse of the dichotomy of subject
and object in the samādhi state. Aesthetes, when making
parallels with samādhi experience, have identified the

STHANESHWAR TIMALSINA

125

refinement of experience in the yogic practice with the
refinement of emotion in aesthetic experience. The mechanism
of detachment distinguishes coarse emotions from refined
aesthetic emotions. Subjects, while experiencing aesthetic
pleasure, are capable of dissociating the sensation, its appraisal,
and the savoring that arises due to aesthetic judgment.
Is rasa experience intentional? If contemporary feeling
theories are followed, all emotions are non-intentional, in the
sense that intentionality maintains an external object separate
from the cognizing self and the cognitive process. However, if
reflexivity and a second-order consciousness occur in the
emergence of rasa experience, intentionality is presupposed. A
closer analysis of rasa experience in the Indian domain and
‘emotion refinement’ in the Chinese tradition helps us to create
a hierarchy of emotions, from coarse emotions to the refined
ones. Accordingly, some emotions are intentional, as well as
some pre-reflective feelings. From the rasa perspective, the
enduring emotions are not identical to the sensation of pain and
pleasure, although there is an underpinning of pain or pleasure
in all emotions. Rasa is the much higher and exalted state of
experience that rests on a complex cognitive process that
includes the transcendence of primary sensation, second-order
consciousness that gives reflexivity, and a dissociation of the
emotional experience from the subject so that the self can turn
even the painful sensations to blissful rasa states. These
attributes suggest that the rasa experience is complex and
cannot be captured in the simple terms of emotions. The
Chinese perspective of emotion refinement reinforces the same
argument.
Both the experience of rasa and the refinement of emotion
are linked with cultivation of the self. In relishing rasa, Abhinava
maintains that there is no distinction among what is being
experienced, the dormant emotion that stimulates the
experience of rasa, and the self or the subject of experience.
Experiencing rasa, along these lines, is allowing the self to rest

126

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

in itself. Praśama or ‘peace,’ the consequence of rasa
experience, is an absence of any other emotion. When the texts
describe this as a state not having emotions, they only meant
the absence of karmically binding emotions. This argument
supports the conclusion that, for Abhinava and the aesthete that
accepts nine rasas, the self is not removed from emotion, but
rather, what we consider as the self is the very emotion in its
most exalted state. In the Chinese context, it is imperative that
the creative energy of artists is channeled to cultivate the self.
Creativity that lacks self-cultivation, along these lines, also lacks
aesthetic value (Sundararajan 2004, 204-14).

Emotional and Cognitive Domains of Rasa
As addressed above, rasas are not primary emotions and all of
them are not independent but are derived from other rasas. It
has also been mentioned that there are four central emotions
considered irreducible by the classical Indian philosophers. The
discourse on rasa reveals that the ālambana or the substrate
that supports emotions, can be equated with the ‘formal object’
of emotion in contemporary discourse. 12 The uddīpanas or
stimulants in the rise of particular emotions allow us to explore
the intentionality of emotions, as the classical aesthetes
maintain that these are required for having a rasa experience.
Mammaṭa, however, does not stop there. He further
elaborates that this rasa is experienced by the transcendent
means of self-awareness when the experience does not touch
anything but the very self. Also noteworthy is the use of the
terminology of touch to describe this experience, as ‘touch’ is
the most basic of all sensations. Mammaṭa clarifies that this is
not the yogic experience of the self nor is it the construct-free
experience (nirvikalpaka). In his stated opinion, it is therefore
distinct in category to both the transcendent and immanent
experience and not in degree alone. He further states that the
real transcendence of rasa experience is distinct from both
these types. This state describes the subject seized by a

STHANESHWAR TIMALSINA

127

particular emotion, so immersed within it that he does not find
himself distinct from the euphoric sensation that he is
undergoing.
If emotions were dormant to the self, and not extrinsic so
that it can be objectively analyzed as the concept of sthāyībhāva
seems to suggest, they would be similar to ‘hallucinations’
rather than ‘perception’ (Solomon 1984). However, if this were
the understanding of Bharata and other classical aesthetes,
there would be no point to drama, as the blissful experience of
the viewer would be independent of what the perceiver is
viewing. While classical drama theories offer a negotiated
platform where the subject has the dormant emotions and is
free to experience particular emotions of his liking, this
experience is nevertheless ‘revealed’ (abhivyakta) through
external means.
Another question pertinent to this discussion is, what is the
most basic of all emotions? Rasa experience, although a product
of the cocktail of emotions, is in itself the most basic structure
for structuring experience. Since this is equated with the self, of
the character of bliss (ānanda), it is fundamental to all
experience. Rasa, therefore, is not a product. It is just revealed
when the perfect somatic and psychological conditions present
themselves. The abhivyakti theory of rasa relies on the same
argument that rasa is foundational and that they are only
expressed out when the required conditions are met. That a
particular emotion can be related to specific somatic conditions
is universally accepted by the Indian aesthetes, and this
discussion is explicit in the discourse on the sāttvika bhāvas.
For a broader cross-cultural study of emotions, five emotions
–– sadness, fear, anger, surprise, and disgust (the last two of
which, however, some researchers consider too simple to be
called emotions) (Panksepp 1998) –– are translatable across
cultures (Ekman and Friesen 1989). Other emotions are not so
easily recognizable cross-culturally. Classical Indian aesthetes
considered erotism (rati), laughter (hāsya), heroism, and disgust

128

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

as the most basic of all emotions, although not identical to rasa.
These and other dormant or habitual emotions, nevertheless,
become the rasas when in commixture with other emotions. Of
the listed five emotions, grief and sadness can be linked, based
on these being the emotions experienced in reaction to sensing
something undesirable (pratikūlavedanīya). Fear, anger, and
wonder constitute three additional dormant emotions in the
rasa paradigm. The list of emotions discussed in classical
aesthetics also provides us with materials for a cross-cultural
study of emotions, as not all emotions can be translated across
cultures.
As addressed above, rasa experience is transcendent
(lokottara), or extra-sensory. While rasa is experienced, sense
organs are not the instruments for the emergence of this
experience. While bhāvas or emotions are considered
intentional, rasa is similar to euphoria, lacking an intentional
object. This is where the experiencing self is immersed within its
own blissful nature. The stimulants do not shine as intentional
objects any more, since this experience is removed from the
outside world. Mind, in this experience, is as if frozen, and the
only medium to grasp this experience is the very body. Due to
its transcendence to conceptuality, this experience is equated
with yogic absorption where there is no duality of subject and
object, and only the distilled experience exists relishing itself.
At the emotional or non-rasa level, all experiences are
intentional. The process wherein grief can translate into karuṇa
rasa that gives rise to a blissful experience in feeling compassion,
as long as it is in the bhāva state, is not described as
transcendental. While the studies of Kraut (1986) and Rorty
(1988) have highlighted both the intentional and nonintentional domains of emotion, this categorization is not
acceptable to the Indian aesthetes because it has overlooked
the vibhāvas that stimulate these emotions. It is not necessary
that the stimulants have to be physically present at the moment
of experiencing such emotions though. This calls into question,

STHANESHWAR TIMALSINA

129

is depression or love intentional then? A better question to ask
from Indian perspective would be, are they emotions as such?
While rasa experience cannot by definition be propositional,
even the emotions listed as dormant and subsidiary do not
depend upon language for their experience. Similar to
perception where there are propositional contents that still
cannot be assimilated into belief, so is the case with emotions,
even when emotions are found to be propositional. Language
cannot be a necessary factor for experiencing emotions. On the
other hand, a subtle language, or the bio-syntax of analyzing a
particular emotion as pleasant or painful, is present at the very
basis of emotional experience.
Can there be the self devoid of emotions? This question is
crucial to understanding Abhinava’s śānta rasa. The dormant
emotion for experiencing śānta, in Abhinava’s opinion, is the
very self. The absence of emotions that drive the self outside, in
Abhinava’s depiction, is in itself an emotional state, albeit a
transitory one. Rasa experience and yogic experience are
distinguished from each other only in the sense that rasa is
transitory while yogic experience can be permanent.
The concept of śānta rasa brings a number of other issues
regarding emotion to the fore. In relishing this rasa, Abhinava
maintains that there is no distinction among what is being
experienced; the dormant emotion that stimulates the various
experiences of rasa, and the self or the subject of experience, all
are identical. This is when the self rests within itself. Praśama or
‘peace’ is an absence of any other emotion. To not have an
emotion, accordingly, is to have the self-manifest in its true
form, unhindered by the emotions that move it out to the
domain of the perfuming (vāsanā) of emotions.
In the Abhinavaguptian paradigm, śānta is the mahārasa,
supreme among the rasas, as all feelings of aesthetic experience
emerge from śānta rasa and eventually return to it.13 The rasa
experience manifests due to the dissolution of the ego and the
extroverted tendency of the mind. When experiencing rasa, all

130

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

emotions and concepts submerge into pure consciousness
(samvidviśranti), and thus do not strive for an outlet. While one
chews on rasa as if it were betel leaves (paan), it is also
described as the state of resting in the self. Rather than
dissociating self-experience from the sensory experience, this
approach makes a case for a non-dual experience that binds selfexperience with common-sense experience. The description of
rasa-experience, often in contradictory terms, helps us
understand why rasa is not a simple emotion felt in everyday
experience, how rasa experience does not constitute binding
saṃskāras, how it can be equated with the enlightening
experience of samādhi, and how rasa is transcendent to other
emotions or cognitions. This also explains how the basic
tendency of appraisal is overcome in rasa experience, as the
bodily response is transformed into the sāttvika bhāvas when
the experience turns into rasa. In congruence with the Chinese
concept of refinement, not all the mixtures of emotion turn to
rasa, as they do not necessarily lead to the required
transcendence, nor does the dissolution of the corporeal
emotions inevitably lead to the all-tranquil self-awareness.
We can have different readings of rasa, and even besides
rasa, there are different models for addressing emotions. It will
be wrong to equate the Nyāya philosophical understanding of
emotion with that of Abhinavagupta. It will be equally misplaced
to grasp the Advaita understanding of emotion and universalize
it to make broader cultural claims. Nevertheless, as far as
Abhinavagupta’s works and the works of the aesthetes under his
inspiration are concerned, they make no attempts to separate
the self from emotions. Actually, Abhinavagupta’s analysis of
śānta rasa goes one step further and affirms the very self as
emotion, because for him, the essential self-nature is the very
ground, the dormant emotion in the manifestation of śānta
rasa. Even though several other aesthetes reject
Abhinavagupta’s theory with regard to śānta rasa, the very
notion of enduring or dormant emotions (sthāyī bhāva) evokes

STHANESHWAR TIMALSINA

131

the idea that the self is intrinsically emotional, or even better,
that emotion is one of the constituents of the self. When rasa is
manifest, Caṇḍīdāsa makes it explicit that the illuminating
aspect (sattva) is dominant. Aesthetic relish has been identified
with the revelation of the very self of the character of bliss. From
Mammaṭa’s presentation, we learn that experiencing rasa
parallels experiencing the Brahman. To the question how this
self qua rasa is experienced, Mammata explains that this is
known by the body, as it is transcendent to the mind. The
language of ‘touching the entire body, as if entering the heart,
throbbing as if immediate to the senses’ describes the state of
the self experiencing itself in the non-dual mode of bliss and
awareness. The scope of self-reflexivity in the process of
savoring, found in Chinese aesthetics, helps us come to the same
conclusion that the exalted experience, cultivated through
poetry for instance, results in self-cultivation and so the refined
self is not devoid of emotions.

Conclusions
Contemporary studies of emotion have two central tendencies:
the ‘cognitive theory’ maintains that some kind of evaluative
judgment or appraisal is required for emotion, while the
‘perceptual theory’ views emotion as not requiring judgment,
thus relating emotion to feeling. The aesthetic theories of rasa
and the refinement of emotion offer an intermediate paradigm.
Following these theories, although basic emotions are not
judgmental, refined aesthetic emotions rest on judgment.
Otherwise, no negative emotion could generate an experience
that is aesthetically pleasing. Identifying bodily response with
emotions becomes problematic at the rasa level, because all the
painful gestures do not end with the experience of pain. It would
also be inaccurate to identify rasa with a pleasant sensation,
because it is by definition transcendent to commonsense
experience (lokottara). While pain and pleasure are
foundational to experiencing the enduring emotion

132

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

(sthāyībhāva), they are not about experiencing rasa.
Furthermore, not all emotions arise with the same intensity and
not even the same emotion always has the same intensity.
I have mentioned above that rasa experience is karmically
neutral, as it does not constitute a karmic complex. This is not
the case with emotions and feelings, as they constitute
saṃskāras. This thesis is possible only when the rasa experience
is viewed as identical to the exposure to the self, and that being
in rasa experience is equated with being within the self.
Following Abhinava, there are no cognitive activities that
accompany the rasa state, as it is lokottara, of the state of
praśama, and identical to consciousness or the self. For
Abhinava, rasa is based on śānta or tranquility, and tranquility is
in itself an emotive state. To feel peace is not to have an absence
of all other emotions, but instead is itself a positive experience
of being in peace. This, to Abhinava, is when the self returns to
the self and when all conflicts end and the self is not fragmented
into pieces of emotions. And since rasa experience is karmically
neutral, all experiences, when they evoke rasa, transcend their
intentional and emotive nature and manifest in their true selfnature, and are therefore the experiences of empathy,
compassion, or other altruistic experiences that are ingrained
with emotion. However, this does not mean that these
experiences are karmically binding.
The above discussion on rasa and relishing from Indian and
Chinese cultures is meant only for provoking discussion. Degrees
of emotion, the relation of emotion and feeling, intentionality of
emotion, emotion and the self, higher-order consciousness, the
appraisal of emotions, and the scope of empathy or mirror
emotions, are some of the issues explicit even in this basic
reading. Whether there are there some emotions that are
ontologically negative is another issue of broader interest. A
highly nuanced theory of emotion can be developed if we allow
a dialogue among three partners: the Daoist philosophers,
Indian aesthetes, and contemporary psychologists and cognitive

STHANESHWAR TIMALSINA

133

scientists. This is a project that is possible to carry out in our
generation.
San Diego State University

134

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

Bibliography
Primary Sources
Bhagavadbhaktirasāyana of Madhusūdana Sarasvatī. (1991, 1976).
[Ed.] Janardana Sastri Pandeya. Varanasi: Parvatiya Mudranalaya.
Dhvanyāloka of Ānandavardhana with the Locana of Abhinavagupta
(1940). [Ed.] Pt. Paṭṭābhirāma Śāstrī. Kashi Sanskrit Series 135.
Benaras City (Varanasi): Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Office.
Kāvyādarśa of Daṇḍin (1938). [Ed.] Pt. Rangacharya Raddi Śāstrī.
Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute.
Kāvyamīmāṃsā of Rājaśekhara (1934). [Ed.] C. D. Dalal and Pandit R.
A. Shastry. Gaekwad Oriental Series. Baroda: Oriental Institute.
Kāvyaprakāśa of Mammaṭa (1965). [Ed.] Vamanacharya Jhalkikar.
Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute.
NŚ Nāṭyaśāstra. The Nāṭyaśāstra of Bharatamuni. (1987). Delhi: Sri
Satguru Publications.
SD Sāhityadarpaṇa. With the commentary ‘Lakṣmī’ by Kṛṣṇamohana
Śāstrī. (2007). Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit Sansthan.
Dhvanyāloka of Ānandavardhana with the Locana of Abhinavagupta
(1940). [Ed.] Pt. Paṭṭābhirāma Śāstrī. Kashi Sanskrit Series 135.
Benaras City (Varanasi): Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Office.
Sāhityadarpaṇa. With the commentary ‘Lakṣmī’ by Kṛṣṇamohana
Śāstrī. (2007). Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit Sansthan.

Secondary Literature
Bilimoria, Purushottama, and Aleksandra Wenta (Eds.). 2015.
Emotions in Indian Thought-Systems. Delhi: Routledge India.
Chari, V. K. 1976. “Poetic Emotions and Poetic Semantics,” The Journal
of Aesthetics and Art Criticism. 34:3, 287-299.
Chaudhury, Pravas Jivan. 1965a. “The Theory of Rasa,” The Journal of
Aesthetics and Art Criticism. 24:1, 145-149.
––––––––.1965b. “Catharsis in the Light of Indian Aesthetics,” The
Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism. 24:1, 151-163.
De Sousa, R. 2007. “Truth, Authenticity, and Rationality,” Dialectica.
61:3, 323-45.

STHANESHWAR TIMALSINA

135

Ekman, Paul and W. V. Friesen, 1989. “The Argument and Evidence
About Universals in Facial Expressions of Emotion,” in Handbook
of Social Psychophysiology, New York: John Wiley and Sons, Ltd.
Frijda, Nico H. and Sundararajan, Louise. 2007. “Emotion Refinement:
A Theory Inspired by Chinese Poetics,” Perspectives on
Psychological Science. 2:3, 227-41.
Gerow, Edwin. 2002. “Rasa and Katharsis: A Comparative Study, Aided
by Several Films,” Journal of the American Oriental Society. 122:2,
264-277.
–––––––– and Ashok Aklujkar. 1972. “On Śānta Rasa in Sanskrit
Poetics,” Journal of American Oriental Society. 92:1, 80-87.
–––––––– and Reed College. 1994. “Abhinavagupta's Aesthetics as a
Speculative Paradigm,” Journal of the American Oriental Society.
114:2, 186- 208.
Goldie, Peter. 2010. The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Emotion.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Higgins, Kathleen Marie. 2007. “An Alchemy of Emotion: Rasa and
Aesthetic Breakthroughs,” The Journal of Aesthetics and Art
Criticism. 65:1, 43-54.
Hogan, Patrick Colm. 1996. “Toward a Cognitive Science of Poetics:
Ānandavardhana, Abhinavagupta, and the Theory of Literature,”
College Literature. 23:1, 164-178.
Ingalls, Daniel H. H., Jeffrey Moussaieff Masson, and M. V.
Patwardhan. 1990. The Dhvanyāloka of Āmamdavardhana with
the Locana of Abhinavagupta. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press.
Kolnai, A. 2008. “The Standard Modes of Aversion: Fear, Disgust, and
Hatred,” Mind. 107: 427, 581-94.
Kraut, Robert, 1986. “Love De Re,” Midwest Studies in Philosophy. 10:
413–30.
Larson, Gerald James. 1976. “The Aesthetic (Rasāsvāda) and the
Religious (Brahmāsvāda) in Abhinavagupta's Kashmir Śaivism,”
Philosophy East and West. 26:4, 371-387.
Masson, J. L. and M. V. Patwardhan. 1969. Śāntarasa and
Abhinavagupta’s Philosophy of Aesthetics. Poona: Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute.

136

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

Olivelle, Patrick. 1997. “Orgasmic Rapture and Divine Ecstasy: The
Semantic History of Ānanda,” Journal of Indian Philosophy. 25:
153-80.
Pandey, K. C. 1959. Indian Aesthetics. Varanasi: Chowkhamba Sanskrit
Series.
––––––––. 1963. Abhinavagupta: An Historical and Philosophical
Study. Varanasi: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series.
Panksepp, Jaak, 1998. Affective neuroscience: the foundations of
human and animal emotions, New York, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Patankar, R. B. 1980. “Does the "Rasa" Theory Have Any Modern
Relevance?” Philosophy East and West. 30:3, 293-303.
Raghavan, V. 1940. The Number of Rasas. Madras: Adyar Library and
Research Center.
Rorty, Amélie. 1988. “The Historicity of Psychological Attitudes: Love
is Not Love Which Alters Not When it Alteration Finds,” in Mind
in Action. Boston: Beacon Press. 121–134.
Schechner, Richard. 2001. “Rasaesthetics,” The Drama Review. 45:3,
27-50.
Solomon, Robert. 1984. The Passions: The Myth and Nature of Human
Emotions, New York: Doubleday.
Sundararajan, Louse. 2004. “Twenty-Four Poetic Moods: Poetry and
Personality in Chinese Aesthetics.” Creativity Research Journal.
16:2-3, 201-14.
Thapi, G. B. Mohan. 1965. “ ‘Rasa’ as Aesthetic Experience,” The
Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism. 24:1, 75-80.
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2007. “Metaphors, Rasa, and Dhvani:
Suggested Meaning in Tantric Esotericism,” Method and Theory
in the Study of Religion. 19:1-2, 134-162.
Timm, Jeffrey R. 1991. “The Celebration of Emotion: Vallabha's
Ontology of Affective Experience,” Philosophy East and West.
41:1, 59-75.
Tuske, Joerg. 2011. “The Concept of Emotion in Classical Indian
Philosophy,” The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring
2011
Edition),
Edward
N.
Zalta (ed.),
URL
=
<http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2011/entries/conceptemotion-india/>.

STHANESHWAR TIMALSINA

137

NOTES
1.

2.
3.

4.

Although I have borrowed some concepts from the Chinese
aesthetic traditions, my primary focus in this paper is the Indian
concept of rasa and its application for the studies of emotions.
These two cultures not only apply similar metaphors for
addressing the aesthetic savoring, their approach to cultivate
aesthetic emotion is also similar. The brief parallel is only to invite
further scholarship in this area. I am mainly focused upon reading
some aspects of rasa in light of theories on emotion, and so this
paper does not engage all aspects of rasa, neither does it reduce
rasa theory to the contemporary cognitive theories.
In this essay, I restrict myself to the analysis of Kāvyaprakāśa
of Mammaṭa, although I briefly utilize Abhinava’s analysis of
‘tranquility’ (śānta) for making some metaphysical claims. This
reading nonetheless rests on the contribution of
Ānandavardhana and Abhinavagupta for their works,
Dhvanyāloka and Locana. For the contribution of Abhinava on
śānta, see Ingalls, Massion, Patwardhan 1990, and the Gerow and
Aklujkar (1972) review of this text. I have also borrowed some
concepts from the Kāvyādarśa of Daṇḍin, and Kāvyamīmāṃsā of
Rājasekhara. For the basic rasas and emotions, Bharata’s
Nāṭyaśāstra is the source. On some occasions, I have also read
Sāhityadarpaṇa of Viśvanātha. Noteworthy in the late medieval
India is the development of bhakti as rasa, and the
Bhagavadbhaktirasāyana of Madhusūdana is exemplary for that.
For discussion, see Sundararajan 2004 and Fridja and
Sundararajan 2007.
For an introduction to rasa and emotions, see Pandey 1959 and
1963; Chari 1976; Chaudhuri 1965a and 1965b; Gerow 2002;
Gerow and Reed 1994; and Higgins 2007.
In this essay, I will restrict myself to the analysis of Kāvyādarśa of
Mammaṭa, although I will briefly utilize Abhinava’s analysis of
‘tranquility’ (śānta) for making some metaphysical claims. For

138

5.

6.
7.

8.

9.

10

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

contributing Abhinava on Śānta, see Ingalls, Massion,
Patwardhan 1990.
vyaktaḥ sa tair vibhāvādyaiḥ sthāyībhāvo rasaḥ smṛtaḥ ||
Kāvyaprakāśa, verse 28 cd. The commentary of Caṇḍīdāsa upon
this passage is noteworthy.
For discussion on śānta rasa, see Masson and Patwardhan 1969;
and Raghavan 1940.
taiḥ karaṇādibhir vibhāvādyair vibhāvādivyapadeśānuguṇām
avasthām
āpannair
vyaktaḥ
prāduṣkṛtaḥ
sthāyī
pratyabhijñāyamānapūrvarūpānugamo ratyādir bhāvo bhāvyate
vāsyata iti vāsanātmatayā sahṛdayahṛdayalīno rasaḥ smṛto
dhvanikāramatābhisāribhir āmnātaḥ| vyakto vyaktīkṛta eva raso
na tu rasaḥ san vyajyata iti vadatā rasasya
vyaktirūpatvābhimatapratītiśarīrānanyatvaṃ
sūcitam
|
Caṇḍīdāsa’s commentary upon verse 28.
tad uktaṃ śrīmallocanakāraiḥ rasāḥ pratīyanta iti tv odanaṃ
pacatītivad vyavahāraḥ | Caṇḍīdāsa’s commentary upon the
verse 28.
Śaṅkukamete ’pi ratyādī rasaḥ (p. 101, in the commentary of
Caṇḍīdāsa.)
For cognitive and emotional aspects of the rasa theory, see
Hogan 1996; Larson 1976; Olivelle 1997; Patankar 1980;
Schechner 2001; Thampi 1965; Timalsina 2007; and Timm 1991.
ko ’yaṃ bhoga ity āha sattveti | sattvasyodreko rajastamasī
abhibhūyāvirbhāvas tasmāt prakāśaḥ spaṣṭataro ya ānandamayī
tadekarūpā
yā
saṃvit
tatra
viśrāntiḥ
pūrvāparānusandhānādibāhya-prameyavyāsaṅgābhāvaḥ|
Kāvyaprakāśa, the commentary of Caṇḍīdāsa, page 104.
. . . . sādhāraṇyena pratītair abhivyaktaḥ sāmājikānāṃ
vāsanātmatayā sthitaḥ sthāyī ratyādiko niyatapramātṛgatatvena
sthito
’pi
sādhāraṇopāyabalāt
tatkālavigalitaparimitapramātṛbhāvavaśonmiṣitavedyāntarasaṃparkaśūnyāpa
rimitabhāvena
pramātrā
sakalasahṛdayasaṃvādabhājā
sādhāraṇyena
svākāra
ivābhinno
’pi
gocarīkṛtaś
carvyamāṇataikaprāṇo
vibhāvādijīvitāvadhiḥ

STHANESHWAR TIMALSINA

139

pānakarasanyāyena carvyamāṇaḥ pura iva parisphuran hṛdayam
iva praviśan sarvāṅgīṇam ivāliṅgan anyat sarvam iva tirodadhat
brahmāsvādam
ivānubhāvayan
alaukikacamatkārakārī
śṛṅgārādiko rasaḥ | Kāvyaprakāśa, pages 107- 112.
11. laukikapratyakṣādipramāṇatāṭasthyāvabodhaśāliparimitayogijñānavedyātasaṃsparśarahitasvātmamātraparyavasitaparimitetarayogivedanavil
akṣaṇalokottarasvasaṃ-vedanagocara
iti
pratyeyo
’py
abhidhīyatām|
tadgrāhakaṃ
ca
na
nirvikalpakaṃ
vibhāvādiparāmarśanapradhānatvāt | nāpi savikalpakaṃ
carvyamāṇasyālaukikā-nandamayasya
svasaṃvedanamātrasiddhatvāt|ubhayābhāvasvarūpasya
cobhayātmakatvam api pūrvavallokottaratām eva gamayati na
tu virodham iti śrīmad ācāryābhinavaguptapādāḥ | Mammaṭa
114-116.
12. See De Sousa 2007, Kolnai 2008, and Mulligan in Goldie 2010.
13. Nāṭyaśāstra, pp. 334-35. See also Thampi 1965.

140

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

Yoga, Ethics, and Philosophy
Leigh Duffy
While yoga has come to be seen as more of an exercise than
anything else in the West, the roots of yoga are similar to those
of philosophy and religion. There is a philosophically rich view
on the nature of the world, the nature of objects in the world,
the nature of humanity, and our place in the world. That part of
yoga might not be widely understood in popular culture in the
West, but those who immerse themselves in this tradition
recognize that the physical part of the practice is because of
these theoretical roots. Indeed, these views share a source with
other Indian Philosophical schools of thought. The theoretical
part of yoga has been called a religion as well as a philosophy
and it is my purpose in this paper to argue that it should be
treated as a philosophy. Yoga does not ask us to have faith in
what doesn’t make sense or in what we cannot be sure of, but
rather it gives reasons for the views, reasons for the practice,
and encourages practitioners to continuously study, reflect, and
search for knowledge of these “eternal truths”. In this paper, I
focus on the ethical restraints of yoga – the yamas – in order to
show the connections to the metaphysical component and to
argue that the theory should be treated as philosophy. However,
in treating it as such, we also have an obligation to be critical of
it and to question it.
The ethical components of the yoga practice are not separate
from the metaphysical views or epistemological goals expressed
in the main yoga texts, The Yoga Sutras. They are unlike the

141

LEIGH DUFFY

guidelines that come from a sacred text of a religion in the sense
that the ethical components are what they are because of the
metaphysical components of the view. For this reason, yoga can
be studied as a philosophy rather than as a religion when it
comes to its ethics. To understand the connections between the
ethics of yoga and the metaphysics and epistemology of yoga, it
is necessary to first, of course, understand the metaphysics and
epistemology.

The Basics of Yoga
Unlike some other Eastern Philosophies to which yoga is often
compared, yoga takes a dualistic view of the world, and, unlike
the dualism of contemporary analytic philosophy popular in the
West, this dualism is not of mind and body or the mental world
and the physical world, rather it is of prakriti and purusha.
Prakriti is, in part, the physical world as distinguished in
Cartesian Dualism of Western philosophy. It includes the
physical world – the body and the physical things in the world,
as well as the world itself and the substratum that makes these
things up – but it also includes the mental world as understood
in Cartesian Dualism1. Prakriti also includes mental activity (citta
vritti), the “organ” responsible for thought (not just the brain,
but the mind as we normally understand it, or manas),
intelligence (buddhi), and a sense of “self” or ego that comes
along with identifying one’s thoughts as part of the nature of the
self.
Purusha is how yogis understand Self. This is the nature of a
living being, the essence of a human. It is hard to say what it is,
but we can say that it is. It is what is left when we strip away all
the non-permanent, changeable parts of prakriti. When you
remove the common ways of identifying the Self, the aspects
that are temporary and ever in flux, such as the body, thoughts,
memories, etc., purusha is what remains as eternal and
unchanging. Purusha exists as the animating life force energy
that allows prakriti to exist as a living being. It does not do or act

142

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

in the world, but it is there as witness or observer. In this sense,
it helps to think of purusha as pure consciousness, but we must
use that term the way yogis intend it, which is to say that it is
not an actor or a do-er – purusha does not question or
hypothesize – rather, it is purely witness to the fluctuations of
prakriti.
This is the fundamental belief in yoga that drives all the other
aspects of the theory and the practice. Purusha is the real Self,
the real nature of what it means to be human, and the other
ways we normally come to identify the “self” are all false.
Identifying oneself as body, as mind, or as a collection of
thoughts, beliefs, desires, principles, are all false ways of
identifying the Self. All of these characteristics fluctuate, come
in and out of existence, and aren’t a permanent part of the Self.
To be able to identify oneself, or individuate a Self, we must look
for that part that is lasting, eternal, and unchanging. This is
purusha. The essence of purusha is the same in all of us, but
purusha is not one, but many2.
Like with Buddhism and other Eastern schools of thought,
yoga recognizes that to exist in and as prakriti is to suffer. The
turnings of prakriti involve pain by necessity. Because prakriti
and its expressions are temporary, even the pleasures
experienced in this physical world involve pain. The pain doesn’t
exist in the physical objects of the world, however, but in the
mental attachments to them. Falsely seeing permanence where
there is impermanence and seeing a Self where there isn’t a Self
lead to attachments to things that will change and will cease to
exist. Those attachments cause suffering, even when (or
perhaps especially when) the attachments are to things we
value.
One of the goals of the yoga practice is to cultivate a sense of
non-attachment. That will not only lead to less suffering, but it
aids in gaining knowledge of the reality of the world. When we
come to see the impermanent, transient, fluctuating nature of
the world, we can let go of our attachments to those things in it

143

LEIGH DUFFY

and experience the reality of the world without that kind of
suffering. Yoga is defined in the Yoga Sutras as “citta vritti
nirodha” 3 , which means the cessations of the turnings of
thought. The practice is to come to a place of such quiet in the
mind that we are able to sit as purusha, as witness, without the
distractions of the mind or body or prakriti, in order to realize
the freedom of purusha. It isn’t a matter of becoming purusha
since purusha is eternal and always present, but it’s a matter of
coming to experience it, to realize it, and because of that, to see
the truth 4 . This allows us the discriminatory wisdom (viveka)
that differentiates between the temporary prakriti world and
the eternal and unchanging purusha5.

Eight Limbs of Ashtanga Yoga
While Yoga offers many ideas about the nature of the world, it
is also a practical philosophy that is to serve as a guide to living
life. The practice actually has eight limbs6, two of which make up
the ethical components of the practice: yama and niyama. The
next limb of yoga is asana or the physical posture practice
familiar to those of us in the West. Pranayama is another familiar
limb of yoga: the practice of controlling the breath. The next
limb of yoga, pratayahara, is the practice of tuning out the
sensory information of prakriti and bringing the attention
inward. We practice this by starting to turn the sensory seeking
parts of manas off and bring the attention inward, to the breath,
to a mantra, or in some other way. Asana, pranayama, and
pratyahara prepare the practitioner for meditation. They are
methods to develop the habit of sitting in stillness without the
distractions of the body.
The final three limbs of the yoga practice are often referred
to as the “internal three” and are the only limbs that come in a
progression. They are the three that are most obviously
connected to the goals of the practice. Dharana is focused
attention or concentration. This might be a moment of onepointed attention found during meditation for someone new to

144

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

the practice or during the asana practice. Dhyana is a more
sustained meditation, during which the mind becomes focused
on the breath or on nothing at all in a purposeful way. Samadhi
is the state of enlightenment or of pure contemplation, pure
consciousness, the final point of that sustained meditation7.
The first two limbs of yoga, the yamas and niyamas. are
translated to mean “right living”, “ethical code”,
“commandments,” or “moral imperatives”. The yamas 8 are
restraints or areas of control, while the niyamas 9 are
observances or regulations. Briefly, the yamas include the
principles of non-harm, non-lying, non-stealing, non-coveting or
non-hoarding, and celibacy (all restraints) while the niyamas
include the principles of cleanliness, discipline, contentment,
self-study, and surrender to God (all observances or
regulations). In what follows, I shall explain each of the yamas in
more detail and the reasons they are included in the yoga
practice.

The Five Yamas
Ahimsa is the first principle and, arguably, the most important
one. It has been said that all the other ethical principles are there
to assist in attaining ahimsa. Ahimsa is the most likely yama to
come up in an asana class in the West. A yoga teacher might ask
students to reflect on whether or not they are pushing beyond
an edge to a point where there might be injury. We of course
want to challenge ourselves in the physical practice, but we
don’t want to let our practice cause injury. Still, ahimsa is most
certainly an ethical ideal that extends to how we treat others.
Non-harm is the underlying principle to guide all our actions as
beings in prakriti, a world in which we have no choice but to be
actors, but a world in which every action is in some way
connected to suffering10.
We exist in this world with an infinite number of ways to
suffer. Our first duty then is to try to alleviate the suffering of
others11. We do that actively, but we can also start by simply

145

LEIGH DUFFY

restraining from taking part in that suffering and making a point
to not cause harm to others. While the Self or purusha is a nondo-er, a non-actor, purusha exists in prakriti metaphorically12,
and that part of the self – the body and mind – by definition,
must act. Even in deciding to not act, one is acting. There is no
action or change in prakriti that is an isolated event. Every
movement in prakriti has effects and all will, in some way, cause
suffering. For that reason, we have an obligation to act in such a
way that we are always trying to not cause harm.
Interestingly, while these principles are supposed to be
universal, it is also argued that they have a “restricted” sense in
that only the practitioner ready to become an ideal yogi,
dedicated to Self-realization through meditation, is expected to
commit to these principles without exception. While the young
fisherman should be practicing non-harm to others, it is
expected that he harm the fish as part of his dharma, or his
duty13. However, in the classical view presented in the Bhasya
of Vyasa, it is never permissible to do harm, not even in acts of
self-preservation through something such as fishing.14
The second yama is satya or non-lying. While the idea of
seeking the truth is pivotal to any philosophy – and indeed it
plays a central role in the path of Jnana yoga, the path of wisdom
– this principle is a restraint, and to not lie is an important part
of the practice because of what lying involves. The goal of the
yoga practice is to be able to realize purusha and to
discriminately see the reality of purusha as distinct from prakriti
and the reality of the true nature of the Self as distinct from the
false ideas of self. Lying about the nature of the world and of the
nature of the Self is a direct contradiction to that goal. Lying to
oneself is as wrong as is lying to another since this is hindering
the goals of yoga, but lying to others is wrong and not just
because this is a way to cause harm, but also because this is
keeping the other from that discriminatory wisdom.
Consider satya as similar to ahimsa. We must be actors in
prakriti and just as those physical and mental acts will, by

146

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

necessity, involve suffering, as thinking beings, our thoughts and
our words will involve misunderstanding. Ahimsa is the
underlying principle to avoid causing harm as we can, and satya
is the underlying principle to avoid lying, as we can. In yoga,
there is a commitment to wisdom, to what is, rather than how
we perceive them to be15. Though we might not have wisdom
yet or not know the truth yet, yoga is a path toward that and it
begins with getting rid of false beliefs about the self16.
When an individual clings to a “truth” that he or she has made
into his or her reality about the Self (as a morning person versus
a night person, as type-A or type-B, as anxious, shy, sarcastic,
etc.) there is suffering that accompanies the unavoidable change
in that reality. The identifications we have of ourselves are all
temporary and unreal. The only sense in which they are real is in
the way that we’ve conceptualized the world. But even the
identifications that seem real (as a particular gender, a particular
race or ethnicity, as child or parent, e.g.), are not a real part of
the world but are only there as the way humans have
conceptualized the world17.
The concept of non-lying then is something more
fundamental than simply not telling little white lies to family and
friends, though that is an ethical obligation as well. Indeed, nonlying begins with not lying in the way we normally think of lying
to form that habit. We begin in that more obvious way in order
to become someone who commits to non-lying in this deeper
sense. The habit of not lying grows to a commitment to the
truth, which extends to a search for the eternal truths presented
in the yoga theory.
Asteya is the principle of non-stealing. That it is wrong to take
something that is not yours is something most of us learn from
an early age, and asteya covers those wrong-doings. However,
asteya is broader than that because there is a deeper sense of
belonging here that is the issue underlying this yama. What
actually belongs to you in a way that you can truly identify it as
yours? The world of prakriti is a transient, ever changing world,

147

LEIGH DUFFY

so there is nothing that belongs to you in any permanent way.
Even the things we can rightly identify as belonging to us are only
ours temporarily and in a practical way, a way that makes sense
based on how we conceptualize the world.
Taking what is not yours is not just contrary to the goals of
yoga, but it is wrong because it is something that literally cannot
be done. Think of the Self as purusha and you see that nothing
can belong to the Self, not even the body or the thoughts you
have since they are a part of prakriti. It is useful to think of them
as yours in some way, since, as conscious beings in a physical
world, we still have to operate, and these distinctions, though
temporary, are useful to us. However, the fewer things we
identify as “mine”, the closer we are to the true nature of the
world, and the easier it is to experience a life without the
suffering caused by the attachments to prakriti, to a world that
necessarily involves suffering18.
Non-attachment applies not only to material things, but to
the physical world and the body, to identifications, and to ideas
as well. Being non-attached doesn’t equate to being detached or
to not caring. That would go against other ethical principles. You
can care dearly about your teenage child, for example, but being
attached would be to suffer when that teenager goes off to
college, to dwell on her absence, and to be unable to move
forward in life. That attachment is all due to a sense of that child
being “my child” when that identification is not a real one.
Wanting that child to remain a child is to be attached to one way
the world is without recognizing that all ways the world was, is,
or will be are temporary. Put simply, taking what is not yours is
adding more attachments in prakriti, which inhibits realizing
Self.
Similar to non-stealing, aparigraha, not coveting or nonhoarding, is related to the idea of non-attachment, but this yama
extends beyond simply not taking what does not belong to you.
Aparigraha is keeping from desiring more than what you have
and not clinging to what you do have, even if “what you have” is

148

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

very loosely defined. It is not hoarding what you do find to be
yours or label as yours. Coveting and hoarding are related
directly to attachment and since being attached is to suffer, this
yama is a logical conclusion from the rest of the yoga theory.
Coveting what you don’t have is not the same as having goals.
(That’s the most common response to this yama – “if I shouldn’t
want what I don’t have, do I give up? Do I stop having goals?” “I
don’t yet have a tenure-track job or own a home, does that
mean I should stop trying?”) To have goals is a separate
endeavor than to covet. Coveting implies desire in a different
sense.
If you consider that, in a practical sense, it is useful to see –
temporarily – some things as yours (it is, for example, your
temporary body and clearly not mine), aparigraha means not
clinging to even those things, not hoarding them in a way that
you cannot let go. Consider again the parent who is clinging to
her young adult child and cannot let go of the idea of being a
parent to that child. Hoarding in this way is the same as fighting
the world of change. This principle applies not just to literal
children, but also to the ideas, creations, words, theories,
articles, and books that we think of as ours. When we identify
with being a parent, artist, writer, philosopher, or creator, we
form attachments in the relationships we have with others, to
ideas and creations we identify as ours. To see these
relationships, ideas, and creations as temporary and to accept
change is to practice aparigraha.
Understood in this way, one can see the direct issue that
hoarding or coveting has with the goals of the yoga practice.
Clinging to objects of prakriti keeps the yogi tied up in prakriti
and farther away from Self realization. The yogi is to lessen the
involvement with prakriti as much as possible in order to
understand the Self and experience that freedom as Self, distinct
from the world of prakriti19.
The yama of brahmacharya, or celibacy, is also a restraint, but
in the yoga world in the West, this is probably the most

149

LEIGH DUFFY

controversial of the moral principles. Yoga instructors in the
West have many theories of what this restraint really means and
why it is a part of the practice. Some argue that as the physical
practice developed, yoga was meant for younger boys, who
would be distracted easily by their sexual desires, and any
distraction from the practice was to be avoided. This is how the
story usually goes, so that the modern day yogi can happily
ignore this principle, taken literally, recognizing that she is not
the yogi at whom this principle was directed. Considering
though that the asana practice was directed at teenage boys
only in one school of yoga, however, that view does not make
sense given the ancient roots of the other eight limbs.
Others argue that brahmacharya doesn’t mean celibacy, but
a control over sexual energy. One can be sexually active, but one
should not use one’s sexuality in a way that harms others or that
is desirous of someone who isn’t one’s significant other, etc.
However, that would be to add a yama into a theory that would
already address those concerns. Ahimsa and asteya, for
example, extend into all areas of life, so the theory could already
argue against rape or adultery, for example, with the
justification of these two yamas.
Others still argue that brahmacharya does not apply to all
yogis. Given the historical context of this practice and its roots
in a society with a caste system, some argue that brahmacharya
was only meant for Brahmins, or the priests and scholars. Those
who were land-owners, on the other hand, were expected to
procreate in order to have help with the work. Depending on
one’s own specific work (or karma or dharma depending on the
interpretation), sexual acts may or may not be permitted or even
expected20.
I believe this last view gets closest to the right way of
understanding this particular yama. The yamas and niyamas are
universal and to apply to all, but just as ahimsa may have a
“restricted” sense (the fisherman who must practice ahimsa also
must harm the fish), it is possible that there is also this restricted

150

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

sense of brahmacharya. Brahmacharya might be restricted
when a person is young and starting a family (and maybe in
other times as well), but for the person ready to commit to this
path of yoga toward the goal of Self realization, brahmacharya
would be a necessary component of the practice. Abstaining
from sexual activity contributes to this goal, as it is a restraint
from attachments, desires, and involvement in prakriti. Sexual
acts are a way to indulge in the sensory world, which is a world
of suffering. Even those acts that are pleasurable and the
relationships that we value will cause suffering when they end.
Abstaining from them as much as possible lessens the
attachments and desires found in prakriti.
Just as the fisherman practices ahimsa as much as possible in
a restricted sense and could, theoretically, commit to that ideal
when he is ready to commit to the goals of yoga, a person could
hold this ideal of brahmacharya but in a restricted sense (maybe
that is simply limiting sexual activity or being more mindful
about it) until that person is ready to commit to the practice and
the goals of it, including Self realization and universal
awareness21.
Understanding brahmacharya as celibacy that has a universal
meaning as well as a restricted meaning makes sense given the
other yamas and the other theoretical beliefs of yoga. This might
not be a desirable result, but this is one reason I think it is
important to study this entire system philosophically. To take it
as a matter of dogma, in which you must have faith or simple
belief without reasons, would be to treat it more like a religion,
but given that there are good reasons for the other yamas, it
seems that there should be good reasons for brahmacharya – or
at least reasons, and whether they are good ones should be a
question for discussion.

Conclusion
With these reasons for the yoga restraints, the ethics of yoga
resembles a deontological ethical theory found in other

151

LEIGH DUFFY

philosophical schools of thought. These principles rely on a duty,
based in the rest of the yoga philosophy, and not simply on the
consequences of the actions. It is the central tenet of a
distinction of the physical and mental world from the world of
purusha that drives all of the yamas and niyamas. The duty
toward truth and understanding as well as lessening the
attachments to the world of prakriti serve as the foundation for
the particular guidelines of how to act. This is similar to Kant’s
emphasis on good will and our duty to the categorical
imperative 22 . These ideas serve as the foundation for the
particular guidelines Kant provides as well (such as to always
help others when you are able and to always tell the truth).
The Dualism of yoga is a central feature of the philosophy and
explains the rest of the practice. The other eight limbs are there
as a practical guide toward Self-realization, and toward that
freedom that comes from breaking the bonds of prakriti. The
yamas, taken together as a limb, are one of those guides. I have
argued that each of the yamas is rooted in this understanding of
the world. The reasons for each depend on a dualistic view of
the world and on the goals of the yoga practice as they relate to
that dualism. The argument would be much clearer without one
particular yama, that of brahmacharya, to muddy the waters,
but when has philosophy ever been crystal clear and without
difficulties? Doing philosophy involves being critical, reflecting,
making sense of things, questioning presuppositions, and
refusing to accept anything without questioning it. We can and
should do philosophy in that way with the yoga system of beliefs
as our subject matter.23
Buffalo State College

152

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

Bibliography
Dasgupta, Surendranath. Yoga as Philosophy and Religion. Dover
Publications, Mineola, NY, 2002.
Descartes, Rene. Meditations on First Philosophy: With Selections from
the Objections
and Replies. Translated by Michael Moriarty, Oxford University Press,
Oxford, 2008.
Descartes, Rene. Meditations on First Philosophy. Translated by Ian
Johnston, Broadview Press, Toronto, 2013.
Gupta, Bina. An Introduction to Indian Philosophy: Perspectives on
Reality, Knowledge, and Freedom. Routledge, NY and London,
2012.
Iyengar, B.K.S. Light on Yoga. Schoken Books, NY. 1966.
Iyengar, B.K.S. Light on the Yoga Sutras of Patanjali. Harper Colins,
London, .1993
Kant, Immanuel. Critique of Pure Reason. Translated by Paul Guyer and
Allen Wood, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1998.
Kant, Immanuel. Practical Philosophy. Translated by Mary Gregor,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1996.
Murty, M. Ram. Indian Philosophy: An Introduction. Broadview Press,
Toronto, 2013.
Satchidanananda, Sri Swami, translator. The Living Gita: The Complete
Bhagavad Gita. Integral Yoga Publications, Buckingham, VA,
1988.
Schopenhauer, Arthur. The World as Will and Representation.
Translated by E.F.J. Payne, Dover Publications, NY. 1969.
Stoler Miller, Barbara, translator. Yoga: Discipline of Freedom. The
Yoga Sutra Attributed to Patanjali. Bantam Books, NY, 1998.

153

LEIGH DUFFY

NOTES
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

9.
10.
11.

12.
13.

14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.

See Descartes’ sixth Meditation.
See Gupta, p. 135 for a helpful summary of the arguments for this
conclusion.
Yoga Sutras 1.2
Yoga Sutras 1.4
Yoga Sutras 2.26
Yoga Sutras 2.28-29
See Yoga Sutras 2.29-55 for more on each limb.
Dasgupta and Murty use the term ‘restraints,’ Gupta uses the
term ‘control’, and Stoler Miller uses the phrase ‘moral
principles.’
Dasgupta, Murty, and Stoler Miller all use the term ‘observances.’
Gupta uses the term ‘regulation.’
Yoga Sutras 2.15
Interestingly, Schopenhauer made this same point in The World
as Will and Representation. Schopenhauer read and was
influenced by many works in Indian Philosophy, including The
Bhagavad Gita.
Thanks to an anonymous reviewer for clarity on this point.
Satchidananda makes this point in his commentary on chapter 3
of The Bhagavad Gita, but in the classical view, it is wrong to
cause any kind of harm. This would include fishing.
Thanks to an anonymous reviewer for pointing this out.
Yoga Sutras 4.14-17
Yoga Sutras 1.1-4
Yoga Sutras 2.20
Bhagavad Gita 13.8-9
Yoga Sutras 2.39
In Light on Yoga, Iyengar considers this idea, but rejects it. Rather,
he claims that brahmacharya is a life of celibacy, but also of
“religious study and self-restraint” and argues that we must

154

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

“translate the higher aspects of Brahmacharya” into daily life (p.
34).
21. In her translation of the Yoga Sutras, Stoler Miller explains
“brahmacarya” as “abstinence from sexual activity and the
retention of semen, which contains vital power” (p. 91). Dasgupta
describes this yama as “the restraint of the generative organ and
the thorough control of sexual tendencies” (p. 141). Murty breaks
down the word into its parts: brahma and acharya, meaning
“universal awareness” and conduct or “a regulated way of living
guided by self-discipline to realize Brahman, or universal
awareness” (p. 39). These interpretations are all consistent with
my view here.
22. See Kant’s Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals.
23. Many thanks to the audience at the 2016 meeting of the Society
for Indian Philosophy and Religion at the Pacific APA convention
in San Francisco for their helpful comments on an earlier version
of this paper.

KISOR KUMAR CHAKRABARTI

155

Annotated Translation of
Udayana’s AATMATATTVAVIVEKA
Kisor Kumar Chakrabarti
In Continuation
The same thing can be the object of different cognitive states.
Text. Yatra arthakriyaasiddhiriti cet sarveshhaam anuvRtteh
kasya arthakriyeti kim nishcaayakam. Na kiMcit, kintu
samkeerNa-arthakriyaa-virahaat ekam eva tatra vastu. Na ca
ekasmin pratibhaasabheda iti eka eva pratyayah tatra
saalambana iti bruuma iti cet.Tathaapi katama iti anishcaye sa
eva anaashvaasah. AsaMkeerNaapi ca arthakriyaa na vyaktitah,
saamagreetah sarva-sambhavaat. Ataeva na santaanatah
niyamah, na hi eka-santaana-niyataa kaacit arthakriyaa naama.
Kaamcit arthakriyaam prati pratyakSha-anupalambha-gocara eva
tathaa vyavasthaapyata iti cet. Tarhi duuratamaadi-upalambhaa
api tathaa vyavasthaapyaah, sarveSaam api teSaam taam taam
arthakriyaam prati prayojakataayaah anvaya-vyatirekagocaratvaat iti. (339-340)

Tran. Objection: That (cognitive state the object of) which
leads to successful action (is reliable). Reply: The objects of) all
(the said) cognitive states are interconnected; under the
circumstances, what would determine whose object leads to
successful action? Objection: Nothing (there is nothing that
could determine). Since there is no mixed successful action,
there is only one real object there. Further, since cognitive states
cannot be different if the object is one and the same, only one
cognitive state there has an object that is real—this we say.

156

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

Reply: Still since there is uncertainty about which cognitive state
(among the cognitive states of being existent, being a substance,
etc.) has a real thing as the object, there remains that lack of
assurance. Although there is no mixed (effect), successful action
does not take place from (only) one thing, for everything comes
into being from a (causal) aggregate. Therefore, since (since
effects originate from causal aggregates and not from only one
thing), there is no rule that effects originate from one stream;
indeed, there is no successful action that results from (only) one
stream. Objection: That which is known to be related by way of
agreement in presence and agreement in absence is so
determined [determined as a causal condition] with reference
to a given effect. Reply: In that case cognitive states of the most
distant and so on too should be so determined, for all of these
are known to be related by way of agreement in presence and
absence with respect to specific effects.
Note. The Buddhist had argued before: that cognitive state
the object of which is acquired is reliable; Udayana offered
objections to refute this Buddhist view. In response the Buddhist
seeks to establish reliability of a cognitive state in another way.
[Yatra arthakriya-siddhih iti cet.] Now the Buddhist says: that
cognitive state the object of which leads to successful action or
is causally efficacious or produces an effect is reliable. In the
Buddhist view only that which is causally productive is real. That
which is not causally productive is unreal. Accordingly, since
that which is causally productive is real, that cognitive state the
object of which is causally productive is reliable. On the other
hand, since that which is not causally productive is unreal, that
cognitive state the object of which is not causally productive and
unreal is unreliable. In other words, although many
representations are involved, if there is only one product, that
object is real and other representations are of something unreal
(yadyapi vahavah pratibhaasaa dRshyante tathaapi arthakriyaa cet ekaiva tadaa tadviSaya eva vastubhuutah anye ca
pratibhaasaa avastu-viSayaa eva iti, SM 340). Again, since only

KISOR KUMAR CHAKRABARTI

157

that which is causally productive is real, that cognitive state the
object of which is causally productive is reliable
(arthakriyaakaarNa eva sattvaat yasya arthakriyaa dRshyate
tat-viSayaka eva pratyayah pramaa, RS, 341). Unique particulars
in the Buddhist view are causally productive and are real. Hence
indeterminate perceptions having the unique particulars as
objects are reliable. But nothing other than unique particulars
are causally productive and are real in the Buddhist view. For
example, difference from others is a construction, is not a
unique particular and is unreal. All determinate cognitive states
have unreal constructions as objects and are unreliable in the
Buddhist perspective.
Udayana replies (sarveSaam anuvRtteh…kim nishcaayakam):
From a distance, say, a banyan tree may be perceived as existent
(sat), then as one gets closer as a substance, then as an earthen
substance, then as a tree and then finally as a banyan tree, as
noted before. The objects of all these cognitive states appear to
be coherent. At least in the Nyaya view the banyan tree is not
only possessed of the feature of being a banyan tree but also
possessed of the feature being a tree, an earthen substance, a
substance as well as the feature of existence (satva). Of these
cognitive states the object of which one is causally productive
(productive of an effect like flower, leaf, etc.), it may be asked.
But the question cannot be answered with certainty, for there is
no decisive factor to determine which object is causally
productive to the exclusion of the others. Under the
circumstances, since it cannot be determined the object of
which cognitive state is causally productive, it cannot also be
determined which one of these cognitive states is reliable.
However, if it cannot be determined which one of the cognitive
states of being existent, etc. is reliable, it cannot also be
determined which one leads to voluntary effort (sat-aadipratyayaanaam katamah pratyayah pramaa iti anishcaye
pravRtti-anavadhyavasaaya eva iti, SM, 340).

158

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

The Buddhist responds (na kiMcit,… iti cet): There is no such
decisive factor. That is, it cannot be determined which one of
the cognitive states of being existent, etc. is reliable. Still no
effect is ever produced with a mixed nature. For example, pot
halves when conjoined may produce a pot and threads when
conjoined may produce a cloth; but these never produce
something that is of the nature of both a pot and a cloth. This
suggests that each effect coming into being has a distinctive
nature of its own that does not overlap with the nature of a
different effect. Accordingly, since the objects of the cognitive
states of being existent, being a substance, etc. do not produce
an effect of a mixed nature, only one of the objects of these
cognitive states can be said to produce something that is real.
This one effect that is real cannot be the object of all these
cognitive states, for different cognitive states do not have the
same object. Hence only that cognitive state the object of which
produces an effect that is real is reliable and not the others.
Udayana replies (tathaapi katama…kaacit arthakriyaa
naama): Suppose it is granted that only that cognitive state the
object of which produces a real effect is reliable and not the
others. Still, the question remains: which one of these cognitive
states has the object that produces a real effect? If there is no
decisive evidence to settle this, the uncertainty over which one
of these cognitive states is reliable to the exclusion of others
persists. Further, suppose that it is also granted that effects do
not have a mixed nature. Still, no effect is ever produced from a
single causal condition. All effects are produced from sum totals
of causal conditions. For example, a piece of cloth is produced
only if each of the causal conditions of threads, a weaver,
conjunction of threads, etc. is available and not otherwise.
Hence it is not the case that an effect such as a sapling is
produced from only one stream of momentary seeds; rather, the
sapling can come out of only an aggregate of many such streams
of momentary entities such as the seed, soil, water, and so on.
This suggests that only one object of one of the said cognitive

KISOR KUMAR CHAKRABARTI

159

states should not produce a real effect and that no real effect is
ever produced from only one stream of momentary entities as
the Buddhist claims.
The Buddhist responds (kaaMcit arthakriyaam…iti cet):
Suppose it is granted that effects originate from a totality of
causal conditions. Still, causal connections are known from
agreement in presence (pratyakSa, tatsatte tatsattaa) and
agreement in absence (anupalambha, tat-asatte tat-asattaa). It
may be known from agreement in presence and absence that
the banyan tree is a causal condition of effects like the leaves,
etc. But there is no such agreement in presence and absence
between existence (sattaa), substance-hood (dravyatva), etc.
and the effects of the banyan tree. If the banyan tree is known
to be causally productive, the cognitive state with the banyan
tree as the object may be accepted as reliable. Still, since
existence, etc. are not known to be causally productive, there is
no justification for accepting the cognitive states with existence,
etc. as objects as reliable.
Udayana replies (duuratamaadi…gocaratvaat iti): It may be
granted that the cognitive state of the banyanan tree is reliable
because the banyan tree is known to be a causal condition of
certain effects. But at the same time existence, etc. too may be
known by way of agreement in presence and absence to be
causal conditions of certain effects. For example, substancehood may be known to be a causal condition of conjunction of
the parts of the banyan tree; earth-ness (pRthiveetva) may be
known to be a causal condition of the smell of the banyan tree,
and so on. If so, the cognitive states of existence, etc. may be
reliable and the banyan tree may be the object of all these
cognitive states of existence, etc. That is, the same banyan tree
may be reliably known to be existent, a substance, an earthen
substance, a tree, and a banyan tree. This suggests, contrary to
the Buddhist position, that even when cognitive states are
different, they may have the same object.

160

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

Text. Syaadetat. Na dharmaantaraakaareNa pratibhaasabhedo bheda-hetuh, kiMtu parokSa-aparokSa-ruupatayaa. Saa
hi na dharmabhedaanapyupaadaaya samarthayitum shakyaa,
teSu api parokSa-aparokSa-jnaanodyaat, tatra api
dharmaantara-anusaraNe anavasthaanaaat iti cet. (342)
Tran. Objection: Let it be so. When cognitive states are
different, their objects are different, we say, not due to different
features but due to directness and indirectness [directness and
indirectness are the grounds for holding that the respective
objects are different]. Directness or indirectness should not be
accepted as specific features of the object, for features of the
object too may be known directly or indirectly. If additional
directness or indirectness are assumed with reference to the
said directness or indirectness of the features of the object, a
vicious infinite regress would result.
Note. Udayana has argued before that even when cognitive
states are different, their objects need not all be different;
rather, different cognitive state may share the same object. For
example, the same banyan tree may from a distance be
perceived merely as something, then, when closer, as a
substance, then as a tree and then as a banyan tree. Here
although different features of the banyan tree have become
objects of different cognitive states, the same banyan tree may
also be claimed to be the object of each of the said cognitive
states. This may undercut the Buddhist position that since
determinate and indeterminate perceptions are different
cognitive states, their objects should also be different. That is,
the Buddhist claims, unique particulars that alone are real are
objects of indeterminate perception; but the objects of
determinate perceptions have non-unique common features
(saamaanyalakSaNa) and are not real. Udayana has sought to
cast doubt on the Buddhist position that the objects of
indeterminate perceptions and determinate perceptions are
always different.

KISOR KUMAR CHAKRABARTI

161

The Buddhist responds (syaadetat…anavasthaanaat iti cet).
In the given example the same banyan tree is claimed to be the
object of different cognitive states such as that it is something,
it is a substance, it is a tree, etc. Here different features of the
same banyan tree are claimed to be revealed in the said
different cognitive states. But the different features of the same
thing are not intended to be the ground for holding that the
objects of determinate and indeterminate cognitive states are
different. On the other hand, that indeterminate perceptions
are direct and determinate perceptions (and other determinate
cognitive states) are indirect is intended to be such ground. Such
directness and indirectness should be features of the cognitive
states themselves and not of the objects of the cognitive states.
If it is held that such directness and indirectness are features of
the objects, an infinite regress would result for the following
reason. In the Nyaya view the characterized thing may be
grasped directly and indirectly and further the features or
characters of the characterized thing may also be grasped
directly or indirectly. For example, not only grass, something
characterized, may be grasped directly and/or indirectly, but
also the characters such as the green color may be grasped
directly and/or indirectly. Accordingly, if directness or
indirectness were features or characters of the objects, the
latter directness and indirectness too could be grasped directly
and/or indirectly; and if these further directness and
indirectness too were grasped directly and/or indirectly, an
unstoppable regress would ensue. To avoid this, directness and
indirectness should be held to be features of the cognitive
states. But directness and indirectness are opposed and cannot
belong to the same thing, in this case the same cognitive state
(na ca ekam vastu parokSam-aparokSam ca sambhavati,
virodhaat, RS, 343). These opposed features can only belong to
different (perceptual, inferential, etc.) cognitive states the
objects of which accordingly must also be different (parokSa-

162

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

aparokSa-lakSaNa-pratibhaasa-bhedaat
viSaya-bhedah
pratyakSa-laiMgikaadi-jnaanaanaam aavashyaka, SM, 343).
Text. Na. Tayoh avishyaakaaratvaat. Dividho hi
jnaanadharmo viSayaavacchedo jaatibhedah ca. Tatra
viSayaavachheda-bhedena viSayasya bhedasthitih abhedaniraakaraNam vaa, na tu dviteeyena. Tasya kaaraNa-bhedena
eva upapatteh shruti-anumiti-smRtivat. Yathaa ca viSayabhede
api kaaraNabhedaat eva aparokSa-jaateeyam indriyajam
jnaanam, tathaa viSaya-abhede api parokSaaparokSajaateeyam-indriyaliMgajnaanam bavat kena
vaaryate. VaaraNe vaa kaarya-bhedam prati kaaraNa-bhedah
aproyojakah syaat, tathaa aakasmikah sah aapadyeta. (344)
Tran. Reply: No. Those two [directness and indirectness] are
not due to the object cognized. There are two kinds of features
of a cognitive state: being of an object and being of a specific
kind. In that connection differences in the object or refutation
of sameness is based on differences in specification of the object
but not on the second, for that is accounted for by differences
in the causal conditions as in the cases of (different kinds of
cognitive states, viz.) cognition from authority, from inference,
and remembrance. Just as even where there are differences in
the objects there takes place due to differences in the causal
conditions, direct sensory awareness, so also even where is no
difference in the object there take place indirect awareness
(arising from a sense organ) and indirect awareness (arising
from) an inferential mark; who can deny this? And if this is
denied, differences in the effects would not be due to
differences in the causal conditions. Then that would become
accidental.
Note. The Buddhist position is that directness and
indirectness are characters of cognitive states. Directness and
indirectness are opposed. Hence these cannot belong to the
same cognitive state. A cognitive state that is direct cannot be
indirect and a cognitive state that is indirect cannot be direct.

KISOR KUMAR CHAKRABARTI

163

Such directness and indirectness are due to the nature of
cognized objects. That cognitive state in which unique
particulars (svalakSaNa) become objects is direct; that cognitive
state in which difference from others (anyaapoha) becomes the
object is indirect.
Udayana replies that directness and indirectness are not due
to the nature of cognized objects: hence it is not reasonable to
hold that the objects of direct awareness must be different from
objects of indirect awareness. He points out that cognitive states
have the feature of having an object. They also have the feature
of being of a specific kind, such as being perceptual, being
inferential, etc. Of these two features the first can provide the
basis for holding that the cognized objects are different or that
they are not the same. For example, based on that in one
cognitive state the object is, say, a river, and in another state the
object is, say, a mountain, it may be held that the objects of the
two cognitive stages are different. But from the mere fact that a
cognitive state is direct, and another cognitive state is indirect it
does not necessarily follow that their objects are different. The
same object may be perceived or inferred, etc. due to the
differences in the causal conditions of the cognitive states. For
example, an object may be perceived if there is sensory
connection, etc. Then the same object may be inferred if there
is awareness of pervasion, etc. (yathaa tatraiva viSaye
saakSaatkaari-jnaanam aanumaanikam ca jnaanam, SM, 345).
just as the same object may be grasped in different kinds of
cognitive states due to differences in causal conditions so also
different objects may be grasped in the same kind of cognitive
state if the causal conditions are the same. The point is that since
even if cognitive states are of different kinds, the cognized
object may be the same, there is violation of agreement in
presence (anvaya-vyabhicaara). Further, even if the cognized
objects are different, the cognitive states may be of the same
kind: thus, there is violation of agreement in absence (vyatirekavyabhicaara); hence specific difference (jaatibheda) of cognitive

164

JOURNAL OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

states cannot be accepted as the ground of difference in
cognized objects. In the Buddhist view also specific difference of
cognitive states should not be accepted as such ground, for in
the Buddhist view too the same object may be inferred,
remembered
and,
known
through
authority
(…parokSaviSayatve tulyepi shaabdatva-anumititva-smRtitvaruupa-jnanagata-jnanajaatibhedah kaaraNa-bhedaat eva
Bauddhaanaam… BT, 345). What if differences in the causal
conditions are not accepted as the causal conditions of different
kinds of cognitive states? Then the origin of different kinds of
cognitive states would have to be accidental. But Udayana has
already argued that accidental origin of effects is not acceptable
and on this the Buddhist agrees with Udayana.
Institute of Cross Cultural Studies and Academic Exchange

To be continued.

