CROSS-CULTURAL APPROACHES
TO CONSCIOUSNESS

9781350238503_txt_rev.indd 1

28-06-2022 13:00:13

CROSS-CULTURAL APPROACHES
TO CONSCIOUSNESS

MIND,
NATURE AND
ULTIMATE
REALITY
Edited by Itay Shani and
Susanne Kathrin Beiweis

9781350238503_txt_rev.indd 3

28-06-2022 13:00:14

CONTENTS

L IST OF F IGURES
N OTES ON THE E DITORS AND C ONTRIBUTORS
A CKNOWLEDGMENTS
Introduction
Susanne K. Beiweis and Itay Shani
Part One
1

2

3
4

5

23

45

Emergence and Mental Causation

Consciousness, Physicalism, and the Problem of Mental Causation
Christian Coseru
Abhinavagupta’s Svātantryavāda: Mental Causality, Emergentism,
and Intuitionist Mathematics
Loriliai Biernacki
Karma and Mental Causation: A Nikāya Buddhist Perspective
George Wong Soo Lam

9781350238503_txt_rev.indd 5

1

Consciousness and Ultimate Reality

On the Identification of Being and Consciousness in Advaita
Vedānta
Wolfgang Fasching
Cosmopsychism and Non-Śankaran Traditions of Hindu
Non-dualism: In Search of a Fertile Connection
Itay Shani

Part Two

vii
viii
xi

71

95
119

28-06-2022 13:00:14

vi

CONTENTS

Part Three
6

7

8

Realism, Idealism, and Panpsychism

Consciousness as the Fundamental Reality of the Universe:
A Master Argument for Buddhist Idealism
Alex Watson
Huayan Buddhism’s Conceptions of the Realness of Reality:
A Transformation from Subjective Idealism into Holistic Realism
JeeLoo Liu
Converging Outlooks? Contemporary Panpsychism and
Chinese Natural Philosophy
Pierfrancesco Basile

Part Four
9

143

177

201

Illusionism

The Magic of Consciousness: Sculpting an Alternative Illusionism
Bryce Huebner, Eyal Aviv, and Sonam Kachru
10 Cognitive Illusion and Immediate Experience: Perspectives
from Buddhist Philosophy
Jay L. Garfield
11 Interrogating Illusionism
Anand Jayprakash Vaidya

245

I NDEX

291

9781350238503_txt_rev.indd 6

223

267

28-06-2022 13:00:14

CHAPTER FOUR

Abhinavagupta’s
Svātantryavāda: Mental
Causality, Emergentism,
and Intuitionist
Mathematics
LORILIAI BIERNACKI

1 INTRODUCTION
How do we get a concept of mind, indeed a mind that is not simply mere
epiphenomenon but that can effectively cause events within our current
paradigm of materialism—that is, within a paradigm which reduces causal
relations to the interplay of physical objects, that is, neurons and molecules?
The notion of mental causality, the idea that the mind can influence the
material substrate is fraught, problematic for a materialist paradigm. On the
one hand, much of our science follows an understanding that only matter can
affect matter; mental constructions, whatever they are, cannot affect matter.
For this scientific perspective, to suggest otherwise is to slide into the hocuspocus of magic. On the other hand, the idea that mind does not affect the
physical world—at a minimum inducing change in one’s own physical body, as
when a loving thought slows the heart rate—but even more broadly, that the
mind does not impact the material world—this seems to lead to a view that

9781350238503_txt_rev.indd 95

28-06-2022 13:00:18

96

CROSS-CULTURAL APPROACHES TO CONSCIOUSNESS

goes against common sense. If what we think has no effect on the world or
our bodies, that our consciousness, our minds are simply irrelevant, as Daniel
Dennett famously argued, mere epiphenomenon (Dennett 1991), then in a
sense we wind up erasing the impact of centuries of human culture, including
even the human thought that has generated the very science we use to address
the question. In other words, much is at stake, since a notion of mental
causality is tied to the idea of free will, as we see with John Searle famously
lifting his arm as an instance of both (Searle 2006). Here, the crux of the
question is how might what we think of as thought manage to interact with
and affect materiality? To get around the problem of mechanism, a number
of contemporary materialist philosophical renditions rely on a concept of
emergentism as a way of supporting a link between the mental and matter so as
to render mental causality efficacious. To put this, for the sake of brevity, much
too simplistically, if mind emerges out of matter, then its seeming difference
from matter is not an ontological barrier to downward causality, where mind
can interact with materiality.
Of course, mental causation as a concept relates to a variety of formulations
addressing the nature of the mind-body relation, for instance, that certain mental
patterns can generate physiological effects, such as heart rate or brain chemistry
release of dopamine, or more radically, that the mental mantra practice of a
yogi can prevent contact with fire from burning her skin, or that a yogi like Sai
Baba can generate a mūrti, a statue of Kṛṣṇa through thought alone, and so on.
For the purposes of this paper I will focus on only one particular philosophical
consequence of mental causation, the aspect of free will. Even as the idea of
mental causality encompasses a number of different components, addressing the
component of free will as one particular aspect of mental causality highlights
what I suggest we can see as an intrinsic link between a subjective perspective
and mental causality.
With this, I offer a different avenue than emergentism for linking mind to
materiality and thus enabling a capacity for the mental to affect the physical.
I draw on Abhinavagupta’s eleventh-century articulation of Svātantryavāda, the
“Free-will Doctrine” to point to a model for mental causation that does not rely
on emergentism; instead Abhinavagupta’s model proposes a modal argument
based on a foundational subjectivity as a means of positing mental causation.
I suggest that Abhinavagupta offers a model where mind itself, consciousness as a
first-person subjectivity is a foundational category that generates the materiality
of the world we encounter. This operates as a type of cosmopsychism, which
unfolds out of itself the materiality that makes up the physical world.
Certainly, proposing a foundational subjectivity is fraught; a perspective of
subjectivity is frequently criticized as being insufficiently scientific, with the
implicit equation of science with a third-person, objective perspective. This

9781350238503_txt_rev.indd 96

28-06-2022 13:00:18

ABHINAVAGUPTA’S SVĀTANTRYAVĀDA

97

criticism, I suggest, is unfounded; to support this, I draw from the work of physicist
Nicolas Gisin and before him, L. E. J. Brouwer’s articulations of Intuitionist
Mathematics (Brouwer 1981). What is interesting about this alternative path to
mental causation, based within a concept of free will, I suggest, is that Gisin and
Brouwer argue for its basis within a rigorous mathematical model that does not
depend on emergentism, or for that matter, on panpsychism. I suggest that we
find a similar framework to Gisin’s use of Intutionist Mathematics, and more
especially Brouwer’s entailment of subjectivity with his idea of the “Creating
Subject,” in Abhinavagupta’s Svātantryavāda, and that Abhinavagupta’s
model, intuitively derived, follows a similar logic. Abhinavagupta is not
a mathematician (and nor am I), and his own articulation of his model of
consciousness involves no mathematics; however, his model shares structural
similarities to these mathematical articulations, specifically: The inclusion
of free will, a non-deterministic system, a necessary inclusion of the idea of
time. What Abhinavagupta’s Svātantryavāda, Free-Will Doctrine adds to these
mathematical derivations is to make explicit the emphasis on subjectivity and
a first-person perspective, an element not found in Gisin’s articulation, which
is, however, incipiently articulated in Brouwer. With this, I suggest that we
ought not to discount subjectivity as a model simply because of a bias that sees
objectivity, a third-person perspective as more scientific or logically precise.
This also suggests that Abhinavagupta’s medieval adoption of a subjectively
oriented philosophical model can add to the conversation on causality1 and
that we might find productive results in unpacking this alternative path toward
accounting for mental causation.2

2 PANPSYCHISM, COSMOPSYCHISM, EMERGENTISM
While panpsychism was developed as a way around the hard problem, recently
a variety of thinkers have adopted forms of panpsychism as a way to entail
mental causation while still avoiding the philosophical problems accompanying
emergentism.3 As Godehard Brüntrup and Ludwig Jaskolla point out,
panpsychism offers “a world view which is capable of remaining within a
broadly conceived naturalist framework whilst accounting for the emergence
of a nonreductively conceived mental reality” (Brüntrup and Jaskolla 2016: 3).
Panpsychism, since it entails an already embedded notion of mind within all
matter, seems to stave off the problem of needing an emergentist doctrine, or
at least a strong emergentism, to account for mentality and mental causation.
Nevertheless, various models that embrace panpsychism still invoke a form of
emergentism, particularly as a way around the combination problem.4 Giulio
Tononi and Christof Koch’s Integrated Information Theory 3.0 (IIT 3.0)
is an illustrative case, asserting panpsychism, while relying on a form of

9781350238503_txt_rev.indd 97

28-06-2022 13:00:18

98

CROSS-CULTURAL APPROACHES TO CONSCIOUSNESS

emergentism to distinguish between objects that display consciousness (Phi in
their terminology) and those that do not. Tononi, for instance, proposes that
we might find consciousness even in a simple mechanical device, a photodiode.
Underwritten by a foundational panpsychism, actual, measurable consciousness
(Phi) emerges only in instances where information as self-reflexive activity
is demonstrated. The operating principle in this model is that if enough
information as bits is accumulated and nested within integrated circuits
of recursive feedback loops, meaning will emerge. A jump to consciousness
will occur.
Describing the process in an imaginary dialogue between Galileo and
Leibniz, Tononi writes, “which mechanisms would one have to add in order
to augment the lowly photodiode and make it like Galileo’s brain?” (Tononi
2012: 199). In order to get, as Tononi puts it, “meaning out of mechanism,”
the Baron tells Galileo,
By piling one mechanism on top of another, that’s how it’s done! … One
mechanism alone—things are this way and not another way—generates
hardly any information: one nondescript bit. But if you pile them up, so
that one builds upon another, not only side-by-side, but each standing on
the shoulders of the others, as it were, they generate far more information,
bits multiply.
(Tononi 2012: 203)
With enough nested circuitry one can make the jump from the mere mechanism
of a manufactured mechanical device, a photodiode, to the wonder of
consciousness. That is, Tononi’s method entails a kind of emergentism: “if
you pile them up” some new shift occurs; consciousness emerges. Tononi has
made it clear that he subscribes to a model of panpsychism; yet he incorporates
emergentism to explain why it is that even though consciousness is allpervasive, objects like a cellphone do not exhibit the self-recursivity required
for what we think of as consciousness (Oizumi, Albantakis, and Tononi 2014)
and (Tononi n.d.).
Abhinavagupta, on the other hand, does not subscribe to an emergentist
model.5 This is where his panentheism—which again might be considered akin
to what thinkers like Itay Shani, Joachim Keppler, and Philip Goff designate as
cosmopsychism, a kind of overarching single principle that spreads itself out into
what makes up the world—diverges from the type of micro-panpsychism Koch
and Tononi embrace.6 In this respect we might understand his panentheism as
a form of cosmic consciousness. Shani argues that it is possible to formulate
a cosmopsychism that avoids the combination problem entailed in micropanpsychism and can also preempt its mirroring obverse, the decombination
problem (Shani and Keppler 2018). While it may be possible to argue that

9781350238503_txt_rev.indd 98

28-06-2022 13:00:18

ABHINAVAGUPTA’S SVĀTANTRYAVĀDA

99

Abhinavagupta’s model evades the combination and decombination problems
by virtue of its adoption of a singular cosmic consciousness, I focus here
explicitly on the links his model proposes between free will and subjectivity as
the mechanism for mental causality.
In other words, embedded within Abhinavagupta’s conception of cosmic
consciousness is a separate avenue for arguing for mental causation: his
prioritization of subjectivity, with a concommitant freedom, over a third-person
perspective.7 Thus, he tells us elsewhere, “this in fact is freedom, which is the
capacity to do that which is exceedingly difficult. And that difficulty is to be
actually placed on the level of Māyā.”8 The idea of freedom, which is intrinsic to
subjectivity as modality, is what allows a singular consciousness to individuate
into a multiplicity of different conscious entities each with their unique capacities
to exercise divergent expressions of free will.9 Thus, he tells us: “When those
[beings] belonging to Māyā—even down to a worm, an insect—when they do
their own deeds, that which is to be done first stirs in the heart.”10 That is,
even the tiniest insect has an agency and a consciousness capable of choosing,
a subjectivity rising in the heart. Specifically, by subjectivity as modality I mean
that Abhinavagupta suggests a phenomenology of the first-person perspective at
its base entails an essential freedom that serves as foundational for subsequent
truth claims.11 In what follows, we look comparatively at the conditions for
this freedom in Abhinavagupta’s model in relation to Gisin’s adoption and
Brouwer’s articulations of Intuitionist Mathematics. Beginning with Gisin’s
articulation of the problem of real numbers, as the mathematical argument for
this alternative model, we then address specifically three areas of convergence
Abhinavagupta shares with Intuitionist Mathematics: Indeterminism, its links
to freedom, and the inclusion of time. After this we examine Abhinavagupta’s
postulation of subjectivity.

3 REAL NUMBERS
Gisin points to the origin of Intuitionist Mathematics in an early twentiethcentury debate between mathematicians L. E. J. Brouwer and David Hilbert
on how we might count numbers. Hilbert insisted that we understand every
real number with its infinite series of digits as a completed individual object
(Gisin 2020: 114). Brouwer, arguing for an Intuitionist Mathematics, took
the view that each point on a number line should be represented as a neverending process that develops in time (Gisin 2020: 114). As Gisin relates, the
question has to do with whether mathematics exists within time or whether
it operates within an idealized Platonic realm, and this mathematical debate
mirrored another debate also focusing on time, and happening around the same
time in Paris (Gisin 2020: 114). In this related debate, Albert Einstein debated

9781350238503_txt_rev.indd 99

28-06-2022 13:00:18

100

CROSS-CULTURAL APPROACHES TO CONSCIOUSNESS

the French philosopher Henri Bergson (Gisin 2020: 114). Bergson critiqued
Einstein’s conception of time prompting Einstein’s famous assertion “Il n’y a
donc pas un temps des philosophes” (The philosopher’s idea of time does not
exist) (Canales 2015: 5). Even as Einstein’s argument against Bergson eventually
eclipsed Bergson’s position, at the time Bergson’s critique that Einstein’s idea of
relativity and its assertion of time pertained not to physics, but to epistemology,
hit a nerve.12 So much so that it swayed the Nobel Prize committee to give
Einstein the Nobel prize for his work on the photo-electric effect, not for what
made him famous at the time, his celebrated formulation of relativity (Canales
2015: 3–4).
Perhaps aware of this other debate, Brouwer’s intuitionist mathematics
focused on understanding mathematics as embedded within a schema of
unfolding time. Precipitated by a logic problematizing an infinite series of
digits as ultimately a product of random selection, Brouwer formulated a
mathematics tied to a materially embedded reality, operative expressly within
the parameters of time and the free choices made by the mathematician
engaging a mathematical problem (van Atten 2018). Gisin, whose own work
spans classical and quantum physics, draws on Brouwer particularly in relation
to the problem of time, infinity, and information for a contemporary model.
Gisin points to the problem of a mathematically projected infinity in relation
to a finite volume. He says, “no finite volume of space can contain an infinite
amount of information. This is a well accepted result that follows from the
holographic principle, known as the Bekenstein bound” (Gisin 2019: 6). For
Gisin, a mathematical stipulation of real numbers as infinite carries its own
burdens, in particular, an unwieldy infinitude at the heart of physics. He
proposes as remedy an alternative mathematical physics based on Brouwer’s
Intuitionist Mathematics. This alternate mathematical system recognizes the
disjunct, the actual practical impossibility of a mathematics that operates
on an infinite amount of information contained between two numbers on a
number line. In a nutshell: The impossibility of containing an infinite amount
of information within a finite space.
Gisin derives his formulation from Brouwer’s Intuitionist Mathematics.
As Brouwer outlines the basic principles, the problem is that the history
of mathematics in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries introduced a
formalism divorced from an actual experiential engagement with mathematics.
Intuitionist mathematics proposes recognizing an intuitive understanding of
mathematics grounded in experience and developed intuitively, separate from
the formulation of a language to describe mathematics, instead understanding
mathematics as “an essentially languageless activity of the mind having its origin
in the perception of a move of time” (Brouwer 1981: 1–4). As such, Brouwer’s
formulation entails that certain logical conditions that we take for granted,
such as the law of the excluded middle, are simply artefacts of a historical

9781350238503_txt_rev.indd 100

28-06-2022 13:00:18

ABHINAVAGUPTA’S SVĀTANTRYAVĀDA

101

construction and only applicable in certain situations. (Brouwer 1981: 5–8).
To return to Gisin’s formulation of the problem of an assumed mathematical
infinity, Gisin tells us:
Today, everyone knows that they hold gigabytes of information in their
pockets … Furthermore, everyone knows also that each stored bit requires
some space. Not much, possibly soon only a few cubic nanometre (10−18 mm3)
… Consequently, assuming that information has always to be encoded in
some physical stuff, a finite volume of space cannot contain more than a
finite amount of information.
(Gisin 2019: 7)
This is his basic premise, that information occupies space. Information
encoded within a material substrate is limited, even as our current predominant
mathematics offers a system predicated on infinite information. Further:
Consider a small volume, a cubic centimetre let’s say, containing a marble
ball. This small volume can contain but a finite amount of information.
Hence, the centre of mass of this marble ball can’t be a real number …
since real numbers contain—with probability one—an infinite amount of
information … the assumption that a finite volume of space can’t contain
more but a finite amount of information implies that the centre of mass
of any object cannot be identified with mathematical real numbers. Real
numbers are useful tools, but are only tools. They do not represent physical
reality.
(Gisin 2019: 7)
As he outlines it, his formulation of Intuitionist Mathematics works much
the same as classical mathematics; its advantage lies in its acknowledgment
of this basic incompatibility—between a Platonic mathematics of infinity and
our current real-world awareness that a finite space can only contain a finite
amount of information. With this he proposes a mathematics and physics that
operates similarly to classical mathematics and physics, but which addresses the
problem of infinite information in a finite space:
In a nutshell, this alternative theory keeps the same dynamical equations as
classical mechanics, but all parameters, including the initial conditions are
given by numbers containing only a finite amount of information … I argue
that this alternative classical mechanics is more natural because it doesn’t
assume the existence of inaccessible information.
(Gisin 2019: 2)

9781350238503_txt_rev.indd 101

28-06-2022 13:00:18

102

CROSS-CULTURAL APPROACHES TO CONSCIOUSNESS

Even as Gisin’s alternative mathematical theory functions similarly to classical
mathematics in solving physics and mathematical problems, it nevertheless
carries with it a number of philosophical implications. I will address the
implications below: These include 1) a model that suggests indeterminism even
within classical physics, not just within quantum physics where it is familiar; 2)
this model is tightly linked to an assertion of free will, again, resonant with
Abhinavagupta’s philosophical model of Recognition (Pratyabhijñā), which
has alternatively been called the Free-Will Doctrine, Svātantryavāda; 3)
directly following from indeterminism, the reincorporation of time within
physics.

4 INDETERMINISM LINKED TO FREEDOM
Many of the philosophical ramifications of Gisin’s alternative mathematical
theory follow directly from postulating a primary indeterminism. Gisin derives
this from his initial premise that a finite amount of space cannot contain an
infinite amount of information. The finitude of physical space links back to
Brouwer’s intuitionist mathematics and Brouwer’s assertion that the sequences
of numbers generated on a continuum are not infinite, but instead generated
as random numbers (Gisin 2020: 115). As Gisin relates, understanding the
fundamentally uncomputable nature of real numbers means that we should
understand them instead as random numbers; the term “real numbers,” he tells
us, is a misnomer:
In other words, almost all real numbers are random in the sense that their
sequences of digits (or bits) are random … And these random numbers
(a better name for real numbers) should be at the basis of scientific
determinism? Come on, that’s just not serious! … it is also a great source of
confusion in the philosophy of science.
(Gisin 2016: 5)
That is, the very basis of our mathematical system leads us astray, inclining us to
miss the fundamentally random nature of real numbers. That they are random
means that they cannot be used to predict determinate outcomes; the random
quality of these numbers will yield only imprecise, indeterminate mathematical
results.The consequence is that scientific determinism has no solid foundation,
no real leg to stand on. This is where his alternative mathematics adheres more
closely to the actual situation of things. What it means is that at base, even
for classical physics—not just for quantum physics—the notion of a scientific
determinism does not follow our material situation. Gisin is quick to point out

9781350238503_txt_rev.indd 102

28-06-2022 13:00:18

ABHINAVAGUPTA’S SVĀTANTRYAVĀDA

103

that these parameters, determinism vs indeterminism, are elements built into
the particular model of mathematics we use:
One may object that intuitionism doesn’t derive indeterminism, but assumes
it from the start. That is correct. Likewise, classical mathematics assumes
actual infinite information from the start. These two views cannot be
distinguished empirically. One can always claim that instead of God playing
dice every time a random outcome happens, God played all the dice at once
before the Big Bang and encoded all results in the Universe’s initial condition.
(Gisin 2020: 115)
Pointing out that Einstein’s oft-quoted rejection of quantum physics’ structural
indeterminacy is simply kicking the can down the road, back chronologically
to the Big Bang, Gisin identifies the postulation of infinite information as an
assumption within classical mathematics. Thus, this alternative, Intuitionist
Mathematics instead takes as its premise indeterminism; God left some of the
dice-play for after the Big Bang. Gisin justifies choosing indeterminism as a
premise by pointing to the equally unsubstantiated and problematic presumption
of our usual mathematics, that it assumes infinite information from the start.
And as we saw, the problem with an infinity of information is that it is not
supported by what we actually know about information, that a finite space can
only contain a finite amount of information.13 This also entails as a foundation
for Gisin’s argument that there is a real world and that physicists model their
calculations on this real world, not on a mathematics that proposes infinite
information in real numbers.14 His alternative Intuitionist Mathematics is more
closely aligned to the idea of the world as real and physically tangible, because,
“it doesn’t assume the existence of inaccessible information”(Gisin 2019: 2).
Abhinavagupta’s model similarly, unlike an Advaita Vedānta ascription
of the world as illusion, emphasizes that the objects we encounter here are
real.15 As K. C. Pandey pointed out in early scholarship on Abhinavagupta,
Abhinavagupta’s philosophy tends to work against our expectations of ontology;
we tend to limit our choices to nondualism as idealism on the one hand, or else
an actually existing world with a plurality of really existing different entities.
Abhinavagupta subverted this false choice in a kind of have-your-cake and
eat-it-too, what Pandey in a seemingly oxymoronic gesture labels a “Realist
Idealism.”16 Elsewhere I argue that we might understand Abhinavagupta’s
nondual Śaivism precisely as a reclamation of a very real materiality (Biernacki
2022). In his eleventh-century Īśvarapratyabhijñāvivṛtivimarśinī, he reminds us,
“the object as something real is not to be denied.”17 The materiality of the world
is elemental to his philosophy of agency; as he tells us, “when you separate off the
effects [of creation, the body, etc.] then the state of Doership does not occur.”18

9781350238503_txt_rev.indd 103

28-06-2022 13:00:18

104

CROSS-CULTURAL APPROACHES TO CONSCIOUSNESS

The idea of “Doership” (kartṛtva) as activity in the world references the power
of the absolute as consciousness to connect to the materiality of the world; it is
this element that differentiates Abhinavagupta’s system from an idealist system
like Advaita Vedānta which sees the world as insubstantial (Māyā). In practical
terms, with the idea of “Doership” Abhinavagupta argues for an intrinsic link
between consciousness and matter and precisely, the capacity of consciousness
to generate material effects, that is, the capacity for mental causality.19
To return to Intuitionist Mathematics, even as it works empirically and is
indistinguishable from classical mathematics on an empirical level, it carries
profound philosophical ramifications. It radically alters how we think of the
world. It means that our world is not predetermined, not just for quantum
events, but even for a classical physics. Intuitionist mathematics tells us that
real numbers are actually random and thus not capable of offering determinate
outcomes. As Gisin puts it, “Here indeterministic is merely the negation of
deterministic … given the present and the laws of nature, there is more than
one possible future” (Gisin 2019: 3, n.2). This means as well that our models
of physics and the other sciences, including for instance a neuroscience that
proposes a capacity to determine outcomes mathematically, algorithmically,
these algorithms will at base—that is, in principle—be incapable of fully
determining an outcome. And not simply on an epistemological level. In fact,
ontologically, our world is not predetermined.20
Gisin also explicitly links this indetermination to freedom. He tells us, “our
acts of free-will are beginnings of chains of consequences. Hence, the future is
open, determinism is wrong” (Gisin 2016: 2). Similarly, pointing to the link
between indeterminacy and free will, Gisin argues, “The existence of genuine
free-will, i.e. the possibility to choose among several possible futures, naturally
implies that the world is not entirely deterministic” (Gisin 2016: 3). Ultimately,
Gisin supports his argument for free will with his mathematical demonstration
that real numbers should be understood as not real, but random numbers. As
he puts it:
the tension between free-will and creative time on one side and scientific
determinism on the other side dissolves once one realizes that the so-called
real numbers are not really real … the real numbers that theories use as
inital conditions and parameters are not physically real. Hence, neither
Newtonian, nor relativity, nor quantum physics are ultimately deterministic.
(Gisin 2016: 2)
Further, like Abhinavagupta, he makes the idea of free will foundational,
saying, “Free-Will comes first in logical order” (Gisin 2016: 2).
Abhinavagupta’s cosmology encodes indeterminacy as well, though
not through a temporal predictive model. As with Gisin, indeterminacy

9781350238503_txt_rev.indd 104

28-06-2022 13:00:18

ABHINAVAGUPTA’S SVĀTANTRYAVĀDA

105

is foundationally linked to free will, however, Abhinavagupta frames
indeterminacy as a corollary to subjectivity, “I-ness” (ahantā). Subjectivity
is the basic reality; it entails an originary state of plenitude, a dense mass of
consciousness (cidghana, cidānandaghana) as undefined and indeterminate, in
contrast to “This-ness,” the state of being an object.21 However, Abhinavagupta
understands indeterminacy entirely in psychological terms. Driven by an
overarching process that leads us astray—Māyā—this operation of Māyā acts as
a determinate form of thinking which limits our capacity to both know and to
do things in the world. Māyā is the process of individuation, a determination,
delimitation, and limitation of activity. Abhinavagupta quotes the Rudrayāmala
text, saying, “Māyā is the name of the one who deludes, who is seated in the
process of individuation, the limitation of activity,” (“māyāvimohinīnāma
kalāyāḥ kalanaṃ sthitam |” iti hi śrīrudrayāmalasāravākyam.) (Abhinavagupta
1985a: 3:285). An original indeterminate reality linked to subjectivity is lost
when Māyā begins to operate. The mind distinguishes one thing as different
from another (vikalpa), making determinate what was indeterminate, as
a phenomenology of mental processes. Even as Abhinavagupta’s model is
primarily based on a mental phenomenology, still, for Abhinavagupta as well,
this also means that events are not predetermined. And even though our karma
plays a role, still there is no fate already set in motion, impervious to our freewill choices, where we just go through the motions.22 The freedom (svātantrya)
tied to subjectivity has genuine creative effects. Real creativity is indeed possible,
even for limited beings, such as us humans, as Abhinavagupta makes clear: “‘or
by his own independence’—accepting the idea that there is creation which is
not dependent upon the creation of the Lord.”23 Indeed, this is the case even
for a lowly insect. As Abhinavagupta tells us, “When those beings belonging to
Māyā—even down to an insect—when they do their own deeds, that which is
to be done first stirs in the heart.”24
The structural similarity Abhinavagupta shares with Gisin’s model is thus:
Where we find indeterminism, we find freedom, and the converse as well.
Abhinavagupta, on the other hand, charts the link in terms of mental processes.
In a colorful metaphor that emphasizes the mental projection involved, that is,
the degree to which a sense of subjectivity is a habit of mind, Abhinavagupta
likens indeterminate subjectivity as freedom to the black soot that covers a
lamp. If it gets differentiated, parceled out into separate bits, or moved from the
lamp to some other spot, the blackness of the soot makes a mess; it is no longer
pure, no longer free, yet in its own place on the lamp, as an undifferentiated
mass of blackness, it is pristine.25
To reiterate, Abhinavagupta’s model is not a mathematical formulation, and
not based on Gisin’s understanding of the finitude of information. Rather, it is
tied to the idea of subjectivity; again, in this case what he shares with Gisin’s
model of indeterminacy is the link between indeterminacy and freedom. Unlike

9781350238503_txt_rev.indd 105

28-06-2022 13:00:18

106

CROSS-CULTURAL APPROACHES TO CONSCIOUSNESS

Gisin’s use, Abhinavagupta’s model is prescriptive, not a map that tells us how
the world is; indeterminacy is a state of mind that enables a greater capacity
for freedom. I suggest he probably derives his model from the meditation
practices of Tantra, charting the mind phenomenologically as it moves from
an initial indeterminate awareness to concrete conjectures as a mental process.
Abhinavagupta (Abhinavagupta 1985a: 3:330) tells us:
Free awareness, that is free, and awake. That is the name given to the form
of the one who is aware. That which is called “I”, in thinking “Who is that?”
when with the body etc.—the form of that I becomes filled up with ideas
like, “I am the one who is white;” “I am the one who is hungry;” and so
on, then, the body and so on, alone become predominant, displacing the
knower’s true form and status as pure consciousness. So the object alone
becomes predominant, not the form of the knower.
But when he sets out to direct thought to the form of pure consciousness
which is one unified mass of light, asking himself, “what Archetypes make
up the body etc.?,” then the Emptiness and the body etc., are no more as
they are made into the true real form which is awareness, pierced through
with the juice of consciousness. By practicing this, by properly entering
into this awareness, he gains the special Energies which are the attributes of
pure consciousness, and the miraculous yogic powers arise. However, even
without practicing it, just by entering into it only for a moment, bliss rises
up, along with the visible manifestation of other yogic experiences such as
bliss, trembling, deep slumber, a feeling of pervasiveness, and whirling.26
These occur one after the other and he attains liberation for his soul even
while still alive in the physical body.27
Thus, we see here that Abhinavagupta links freedom to subjectivity specifically
in terms of a phenomenology of the mind. This freedom also manifests as the
siddhis of the yogi, the powers to manipulate material objects, which we find in
the hagiographical tales of yogis inhabiting dead bodies, and changing matter.28
When the sense of “I” becomes limited as “I am hungry” and so on, one takes
on the status of being object, losing one’s true form as undifferentiated subject.
However, indeterminacy and determinate status are driven by subjective
awareness and as such, can be influenced by mental processes and mental
choices. Developing a particular habit of mind, entering into an awareness of
consciousness as an undifferentiated mass of light, one is then able to acquire
yogic abilities. Moreover, even without exerted practice, simply experiencing
this awareness, Abhinavagupta tells us, leads to states linked to yoga, such as
bliss and certain movements of the body such as trembling and so on. In this
way, indeterminacy as a marker of a particular awareness of subjectivity is
primarily a phenomenological process tied to freedom, and linked with yoga
and tied to yogic abilities as its expressions.

9781350238503_txt_rev.indd 106

28-06-2022 13:00:18

ABHINAVAGUPTA’S SVĀTANTRYAVĀDA

107

5 TIME
To bring this back to cosmology, we also find time reincorporated back in, as a
central feature, in both Gisin’s and Abhinavagupta’s models. For Abhinavagupta
this is important since his cosmopsychism stands in contrast to earlier, alternative
forms of nondualisms, such as Advaita Vedānta, which situate subjectivity within
an idealized time-free or time-transcendent reality—much as we see with Gisin’s
characterization of classical mathematics as Platonized and outside of time. In
his article “Time Really Passes, Science Can’t Deny That,” Gisin tells us “[n]ondeterminism implies that time really exists and really passes: today there are
facts that were not necessary yesterday, i.e. the future is open” (Gisin 2016: 2).
He bases his argument on the argument outlined earlier: A finite amount of
space cannot contain an infinite amount of information and that real numbers
are essentially random numbers. As a consequence, he tells us the future is not
predetermined. His insistence on this indeterminism, an open future itself entails
free will. A consequent corollary following from these two is the reality of time.
Gisin nuances his argument on time in this regard, allowing for two types of
time, what he calls Einsteinian- or Parmenides-time, the type of time amenable to
classical mathematics as “geometric-boring time” where no change occurs, and
where using real numbers works fine, and Heraclitus-time where actual change
occurs, and chance with its indeterminability is a factor (Gisin 2016: 6). With
this, he gives a system accommodating both the idea of time as symmetrical and
a pre-determined universe as Einsteinian-time and also the reality of time as a
genuine unfolding of events allowing for chance and free will. For Gisin, chance
and the possibility of actual newness, the open indeterminate future, Heraclitustime, can and does occur, while at other times Einsteinian- or Parmenidestime gives us the predictable world, which is mostly, but not always what we
experience. Abhinavagupta as well reincorporates an idea of time, in his case as a
corollary of a first-person embodiment. Like Gisin, Abhinavagupta pushes back
against the idea of timelessness by connecting time to free will, in his articulation
expressed as intentionality. Intentionality, as an orientation toward one thing or
another is the heart of a capacity to will. And this, he tells us, already embeds the
fact of time. I give here a long passage which outlines his position:
‘The intent of the will is the first instant of time’ (Śivadṛṣṭi 1/7–1/8). Even the
highest Reality, Śiva, the energy of bliss—which is that form where unfolding
is just about to happen—that energy of bliss has priority, i.e., primacy, and
prior existence with regard to the energy of will, [i.e., there is sequence
here as well]. The word ‘tuṭi’ is explained as a unit of time. Otherwise in
the absence of sequence how could there be states of priority and posterity?
However, with reference to those who are to be instructed and to those
limited souls who are completely within [the grip of Māyā], there [teaching
a lack of sequence] is appropriate.29

9781350238503_txt_rev.indd 107

28-06-2022 13:00:18

108

CROSS-CULTURAL APPROACHES TO CONSCIOUSNESS

Here, Abhinavagupta argues against the idea that some absolute reality, or deity,
might exist outside of time, beyond the reach of time. What Abhinavagupta
suggests here does go against a dominant reading of Abhinavagupta’s nondual
Śaivism, where it is aligned to an idea more akin to Advaita Vedānta, with a
space transcendent of time. What I suggest here is that if we read Abhinavagupta
closely, we see that he realizes the philosophical problem embedded within a
view that offers a transcendent space outside of time. As I suggest elsewhere
(Biernacki 2022), for his nondualism to really incorporate the world, it must
also incorporate time. And this is precisely why he brings the notion of time
back in, explaining that the idea of a transcendent space outside of time is really
just a skillful teaching tool for those who are caught in Māyā. At base, however,
time occurs at the very heart of the highest deity because that deity, Śiva, has
the power to will. The capacity to will, as intention, that is, as free will, is itself
indicative of time. Those schools of thought that locate a transcendent reality
outside of time, he tells us, are simply catering to students whose understanding
is limited. This works fine as expedient teaching, acceptable for folks who are
caught in the illusions of Māyā, but it is not the truth. He continues:
You may protest that it says here in this verse that limited souls which are
created have sequence; [since they exist within time], but the Śiva Archetype
does not. In reply [Utpaladeva] says “because of the universality of the
Subject.” There also, in fact, the presence of sequence is proved. So [the text]
says “that, in this way”.30
That is, the Subject, who resides in the limited Māyā-bound individual is the
same as the Subject which is Śiva. If the limited Subject can manifest sequence,
surely the highest reality Śiva has the capacity also to contain sequence.31 The
essence of his argument depends on the idea that subjectivity is foundational and
all-pervasive, in both the limited person and the highest absolute. Even if we can
postulate some absolute reality or transcendent deity, outside of time, the very
notion of a foundational subjectivity entails that it instantiates everywhere, allpervasively.32 This means that this subjectivity at base entails free will and that
just as we in our limited bodies experience the unfolding of events in time as a
result of free-will choices, this unfolding of time necessarily occurs also for the
cosmic consciousness that is the absolute reality and/or the highest deity and this
arises through the free will of both cosmic consciousness and our limited selves.33

6 SUBJECTIVITY
What Abhinavagupta’s Svātantryavāda, Free-Will model adds to these
mathematical derivations of free will is his emphasis on subjectivity. This
emphasis on subjectivity as necessarily tied to the idea of free will and

9781350238503_txt_rev.indd 108

28-06-2022 13:00:18

ABHINAVAGUPTA’S SVĀTANTRYAVĀDA

109

non-determinism is not found in Gisin’s work. Abhinavagupta, on the other
hand, includes it it as a central component of his thinking. I suggest that the
idea of subjectivity as an element in Abhinavagupta’s model intuitively follows
from the notion of free will. And even as Gisin is silent on the notion of
subjectivity, Brouwer’s work on Intuitionist Mathematics, in contrast, turned
as well toward the idea of subject, referenced as the “Creating Subject,” and
pointing to the role of the free choices made by the mathematician as part of
the configuration of an Intuitionist Mathematics. Moreover, I suggest that the
idea of a foundational subjectivity restructures the way causality operates, and
as such, mental causality is written in at the base; it does not need to be derived.
Intuitionist Mathematics gestures toward this, offering a mathematical logic
premised on free will, the reality of time, and a non-predetermined reality and
with this, the element of subjectivity as intrinsic. First, we can briefly look at
Abhinavagupta’s model to get a sense of his conception of subjectivity and then
look at Brouwer’s formulation.
Subjectivity is foundational to Abhinavagupta’s model of consciousness; it
is the marker for consciousness. Subjectivity, the “I,” is the basis, which then
expands outwardly, taking on a third-person perspective to become the objects
we encounter. Abhinavagupta says:
The Subject’s form, which is a unity of awareness contains also an excess,
an abundance of awareness. This is deposited into the side of the object that
is going to be created. So inwardly the [object] has the attribute of śakti,
Energy which is none other than the form of consciousness.34
To be an object, that is, insentient, is to be in the grip of what we might call an
excess of third-person perspective, “this-ness” (idantā), in contrast to an innate
subjectivity, “I-ness” (ahantā), the first-person perspective. Subjectivity as the
“I” (ahantā) is in essence a form of awareness (vimarśa), yet an awareness that
intrinsically links to activity (kriyā) and with this, is tied to the material world.35
In Abhinavagupta’s system, however, “this-ness” and “I-ness” are modes and as
such, not two irreparably separate categories. Rather, subjectivity is embedded
at the core of the “this-ness” (idantā) that makes up the objects in the world.
In other words, subjectivity is the foundation; the third-person perspective is
secondary and derived from this.
Even mere objects, a clay jar, at base are simply consciousness as subjectivity.
He tells us, “that clay jar—its true nature is the essence of consciousness when
it is in a state without mental differentiation; it is complete, like consciousness
itself, the body of the whole world.”36 That is, even a mere object has, a deeply
retained sense of subjectivity. We see,
[a]nd in precisely this way, even while accepting the state of being mere
object, by properly, in a true way touching and perceiving the object’s

9781350238503_txt_rev.indd 109

28-06-2022 13:00:18

110

CROSS-CULTURAL APPROACHES TO CONSCIOUSNESS

“This-ness” in the highest sense, then out of the objects, those “things”
perceived, consciousness alone flows forth. The “thing” in its essential
nature is the expanse of Light (prakāśa). And this expanse of Light consists
of an active awareness (vimarśa), the “I” which is not looking towards
something other.37
Thus at the heart of everything is a foundational subjectivity, premised on a
monism. Abhinavagupta draws his monism from his predecessor Somānanda,
whose model approximates a pantheism (Nemec 2014). Abhinavagupta adds
nuance and the precision of a dual-aspect model to Somānanda’s animist
nondualist pantheism which sees all things as the expanse of light (prakāśa)38
to formulate his own panentheism as dual-aspect, with both the expanse of
light (prakāśa) and its inner awareness as subjectivity (vimarśa). The light of
consciousness (prakāśa) congeals to make objects in the world. This is one
aspect of his dual-aspect monism. At the heart of this expanse of light—out of
which things come to be—at the heart is a subjectivity; this is the second aspect
of his dual-aspect monism. This is the “I,” an active awareness (vimarśa), which
is what gives even a clay jar its life, its sentience.
Abhinavagupta explains this dual-aspect monism in cosmological terms, as a
cosmic subjectivity, which is the absolute, (Śiva), which then unfolds to make
our world, yet which nevertheless does not lose its inner consciousness: “pure
consciousness lying in the core exists as a state containing both inner and outer.
As Māyā’s creation spreads out, expands into many branches, the Lord remains
still within the core.”39 As Māyā’s creation spreads out; we get the complex
variety of our world, while still all the while, even in seeming dead matter, clay
jars, a pure awareness, consciousness remains at the core. His cosmopsychist
model entails a panpsychism—all things are innately conscious—yet they derive
from a single unfolding cosmopsychist reality.
As I mentioned, while we do not see the notion of subjectivity in Gisin’s
work, Brouwer’s work, on the other hand, points to a notion of a subject that
underlies his model of intuitionist mathematics. He called this the “Creating
Subject.”40 As Mark van Atten thoughtfully lays out, Brouwer formulates
intuitionist mathematics from a postulation of a subjectivity of the mathematician
generating free choices.41 His idea of the “Creating Subject” focuses on
whether the temporal order in which a mathematician establishes mathematical
theorems can change the mathematical argument.42 His arguments suggest that
the person, the subject engaging in a mathematical problem within the system
of intuitionist mathematics does not exist outside the system, but is, in fact,
integral to it. The idea is radical; it eats away at the core of a postulation of
objectivity. This turn to an idea of the subject as foundational offers a radically,
profoundly different model for understanding the world. As such, it left some

9781350238503_txt_rev.indd 110

28-06-2022 13:00:19

ABHINAVAGUPTA’S SVĀTANTRYAVĀDA

111

of his students perplexed and uncomfortable. His student, Arend Heyting, who
later compiled his writings and succeeded him as Mathematics professor at the
University of Amsterdam, wrote this regarding Brouwer’s idea of the “Creating
Subject”: “It is true that Brouwer in his lecture introduced an entirely new idea
for which the subject is of essential importance. As I said, I feel that it is still
questionable whether it is possible and whether it is good to introduce this idea
in mathematics” (Niekus 2010: 31). The problem, of course, with bringing in
subjectivity is precisely that it upends the notion that science generally, and the
mathematical logic that underpins it, offers truth precisely because it proposes a
universal, third-person, objective reality divorced from subjective perspectives.
When Brouwer brings back in the “Creating Subject” he throws a wrench in
the gears of this logic, concluding instead that our external world cannot be
calculated and predetermined outside of a subject engaging in mathematical
operations.
This entails as well an idea of freedom; as van Atten points out, the “Creating
Subject” is essentially free in the choices she makes.43 This freedom carries with
it also again the idea of indeterminism. The Creating Subject cannot know
in advance what will come in (van Atten 2018: 1573); in other words, the
future is not predetermined, and thus not calculable by an algorithm.44 It may
also be possible to liken Brouwer’s understanding of the Creating Subject to a
cosmic subjectivity. Iemhoff reads it this way (Iemhoff and Zalta 2020: 2.2),
and in this sense, it is akin to Abhinavagupta’s formulation of a cosmological
cosmopsychism, however, this goes beyond the scope of this paper.45 In any
case, Brouwer offers a way of doing the precise work of mathematics, while
retaining the idea of a subjective perspective.

7 CONCLUDING REMARK
I suggest here that it is the shift to a foundational subjectivity that Abhinavagupta
makes that underwrites the possibility for a mental causation not reliant on
emergentism. The reliance on a subjective perspective goes against our habitual
invocation of a third-person perspective as more “logical.” However, the
mathematical demonstrations of Gisin’s and Brouwer’s adoption of Intuitionist
Mathematics afford a method for inscribing free will, non-determinism and
time, and in Brouwer’s work particularly, an intrinsic subjective perspective
for a philosophy of science. Abhinavagupta’s cosmology shares these features
with Intuitionist Mathematics, while emphasizing the element of subjectivity as
foundational to mental causality. Abhinavagupta’s articulation of a subjectively
oriented philosophical model can add to our thinking on models of mental
causality.

9781350238503_txt_rev.indd 111

28-06-2022 13:00:19

112

CROSS-CULTURAL APPROACHES TO CONSCIOUSNESS

NOTES
1

Abhinavagupta, for instance, asserts causality lies not with material objects,
but within a subjective perspective, telling us: “it cannot be proved that the
relation of cause and effect is grounded within what lacks sentience. Rather,
however, the relation of cause and effect lies only with that which is conscious”
(Abhinavagupta 1985a: 3:257) jaḍe pratiṣṭhitaḥ kāryakāraṇabhāvo na upapadyate,
api tucidrūpa eva.

2

I discuss this in great detail, with specific attention to understanding
Abhinavagupta’s relevance for a contemporary philosophy of mind, in Biernacki
(forthcoming, 2022), The Matter of Wonder: Abhinavagupta’s Panentheism and
New Materialism, particularly in the fourth chapter. I also discuss the relevance
of Abhinavagupta has for contemporary philosophy of mind in Biernacki (2015,
2016).

3

See, for instance, Chalmers (1996). For an examination of different models,
see (Goff 2017), and for an extensive overview (Bruntrup and Jaskolla 2016).
See as well Strawson (2006) particularly Galen Strawson’s work on subjectivity
(Strawson 2017).

4

See Sam Coleman’s articulate critique of the combination problem and why
panpsychism still has a problem with its reliance on emergentism, even as his
primary argument focuses on panpsychism more generally (Coleman 2014).

5

See, for instance, Ratie (2014: 171).

6

See, for instance, Shani (2015) and Goff (2019).

7

I outline the details of Abhinavagupta’s model of subjectivity at great length in a
forthcoming publication.

8

The quote continues, “This happens because of the power (niyatiśakti) to
determine things as one way or another.” In the interest of space I will not
go into greater depth here, but propose elsewhere that we may read this
as an appeal to theology, and his recognition of the intractability of the
decombination problem (forthcoming), even if, as we see below it also entails
that even a mere insect can lay claim to this freedom. (Abhinavagupta 1985b:
1:180:) “etadevasvātantryaṃ yadatidurghaṭakāritvam | durghaṭaṃ ca tat
niyatiśaktikṛtādeva māyādaśāyāṃ.”

9

I discuss at great length Abhinavagupta’s model linking subjectivity to freedom
(Biernacki, Matter of Wonder: Abhinavagupta’s Panentheism and New
Materialism, Oxford University Press, 2022, forthcoming). Abhinavagupta’s
cosmopsychism as all-pervasive entails it even in an insect or a clay jar.
Abhinavagupta tells us that even for a “clay jar– its true nature is the essence of
consciousness” in (Abhinavagupta and Utpaladeva 1986: ad 1.6.3, line 1237)
“citsvabhāvo ‘sau ghaṭaḥ.”

10 Abhinavagupta, Īśvara Pratyabhijñā Vivṛti Vimarśinī, ed. Paṇḍit Madhusudan
Kaul Śāstrī, vol. 3 (Delhi: Akay Reprints, 1985), 260: “Māyīyānāṃ kīṭāntānāṃ
svakāryakaraṇāvasare yat kāryaṃ purā hṛdaye sphurati.” See also footnote 55
below, which discusses the distinction Nemec sees between Somānanda and
Utpaladeva.
11 This might be understood as akin to Descartes declaration that his thoughts might
be true or false, but that his awareness of thinking was indisputable.

9781350238503_txt_rev.indd 112

28-06-2022 13:00:19

ABHINAVAGUPTA’S SVĀTANTRYAVĀDA

113

12 Bergson wrote of Einstein’s theory of time that it is “a metaphysics grafted upon
science, it is not science,” in Canales, Jimena (2015: 6).
13 Gisin (2019: 7, n.10) tells us, “Here I am clearly building on the huge success of
quantum information science and on Landauer’s famous claim—‘Information is
Physical’, by which he meant that information has always to be encoded in some
physical stuff in Gisin (2019: 7, n.10).
14 Gisin points to the disjunct for physicists around the problem of real numbers and
infinite information as one that physics mostly rejects in favor of working with the
finitude of our real and limited world. Quoting Max Born he says, “My experience
is that most physicists reject the faithfulness of such a representation, but admit—
often with regret—that they don’t see how one could do otherwise. For example,
Max Born, one of the fathers of quantum theory, stressed that ‘Statements like
‘a quantity x has a completely definite value’ (expressed by a real number and
represented by a point in the mathematical continuum) seem to me to have no
physical meaning,’” in Gisin (2020: 115). And again he tells us, “in practice one
never uses real numbers with all their infinitely many digits. Think, for example, of
computer simulations that necessarily at each time only consider finite information
numbers,” in (Gisin (2020: 116).
15 One of Abhinavagupta’s first twentieth-century interpreters, K. C. Pandey,
stressing that Abhinavagupta understood the world as real, labeled
Abhinavagupta’s philosophical system as a “Realist Idealism,” in Pandey (1963:
320). Isabelle Ratie argues that the dichotomy of realism/idealism does not work
for Abhinavagupta’s Pratyabhijñā and that it does “consider the phenomenal
world as perfectly real,” in Ratie (2011: 481, n.4).
16 (Pandey 1963: 320).
17 “Anapahnavanīyatayāvastueva” (Abhinavagupta 1985a: 3:288).
18 Tataḥ kartṛtvaṃ vyatirikte kārye na upapadyate (Abhinavagupta 1985a: 3:316).
19 I unpack the argument he uses in great detail elsewhere (forthcoming).
20 This is in a sense also the point that Karen Barad makes about Niels Bohr’s
interpretation of quantum indeterminacy as ontological in contrast to
Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle as epistemological, in Barad (2007: 115–16).
21 It is important to note that Abhinavagupta’s formulation here does not entail
indeterminacy but at best offers secondary support. I thank Itay Shani for pointing
this out.
22 As I note elsewhere (forthcoming), fate, in this way, is never entirely determined,
but only partially, by the web of five sheaths (kañcuka) that usually overlay our
awareness. These include time, a limited sense of knowledge, a limited capacity
to do, desire, and fate (niyati). By accessing an innate subjectivity, we can be not
constrained by sheaths. This means the freedom to change destiny is somewhat
accessible, to the extent we can embrace a stance of subjectivity.
23 “Svātantryeṇavā” iti īśvarasṛṣṭyanapekṣayā. Nirmāṇam
itisamarthitamitisambandhaḥ (Abhinavagupta 1985a: 3:260).
24 Ipvv vol.3 p. 260: “Nirmātṛpade” iti. Māyīyānāṃ kīṭāntānāṃ svakāryakaraṇāvasare
yat kāryaṃ purā hṛdaye sphurati.
25 Abhinavagupta tells us, “Freedom is awareness. This is the reality. There, the
impurity occurs by destroying [freedom] through making separate portions,

9781350238503_txt_rev.indd 113

28-06-2022 13:00:19

114

CROSS-CULTURAL APPROACHES TO CONSCIOUSNESS

because this is in fact removing its essential nature. This impurity is a contraction,
limiting one’s own inherent wealth… For example, if you take a portion of
kajjal, the black coal from an oil lamp out of its own proper element and place
it on some other substance, then there it’s just dirt, impurity [making a mess].
But in its own natural habitual state [on the lamp] it is a single unified creation, a
form which is one dense mass [of black. Without a counterpoint of comparison]
it is completely free from impurity, supremely pure, though that very thing
was earlier considered a fault.” In Abhinavagupta 1985a: 3:313 “‘Svatantro
bodha’ityetattattvam. Tatrabhāgāntarahānyā svarūpāpahārāt malamaṇutāṃ
saṃkocamādadhānamāṇavaṃ dvidhā. Malaṃhi anyena vijātīyenayogaḥ
kajjalaṃśaḥ svadhāyāḥ, tadaṃśo’pi kajjalasyeti ekajātīyamekaghanaṃ rūpaṃ
yatnirmalaṃviśuddhaṃ.” For the terminology of consciousness as an
undifferentiated mass, cidghana, see also Bansat-Boudon (2014: 43–4).
26 Emendation to the version from Muktabodha which reads dhurni instead of
ghurni.
27 (Abhinavagupta 1985a: 3:330: ) “Svatantra” iti. Svatantrabodho nāma
boddharūpo’hamitiyo gīyate, sakaḥ iticintāyāṃ yadādehādinātadrūpaṃ
pūryateyogauraḥ, so’haṃ; yadṣuddhitaḥ, so’hamityādi;
tadādehādirevapradhānībhavati saṃvitsvarūpaṃ nyakkṛtaṃ jātamitibhedyameva
pradhānībhavati, na vedakarūpam, yadātudehādeḥ kiṃtattvamiti cintopakramaṃ
prakāśaghanamevasaṃvidrūpamiti, tadābodhassvarūpīkṛtaṃ tadrasānuviddham
eva śūnyādidehāntamavabhātīti abhyāsāt tasyasaṃviddharmāḥ śaktiviśeṣāḥ
samyagāviśanto vibhūtīrutthāpayanti, anabhyāse’pitutatkṣaṇāveśa eva ānando
dbhavakampanidrāvyāptirūpaghūrṇyāvirbhāvanakrameṇa jīvanmuktatālābhaḥ
(Abhinavagupta 1985a: 3:330).
28 Somadeva’s Kathāsaritsāgara offers a nice illustration of these powers of a yogi, in
(Somadeva 1915, passim).
29 “Yadātutasyaciddharmavibhavāmodajṛmbhayā |vicitraracanānānākāryasṛṣṭipravart
ane|| bhavatyunmukhatācittāsecchāyāḥ prathamātuṭiḥ | (2/8) iti. (Abhinavagupta
1985a: 3:263) Paramaśive’pi bhagavati aunmukhyarūpāyānandaśakterīcchāśakty
apekṣayā prathamatvaṃ pūrvabhāvitvaṃ, tuṭiritikālāṃśarūpatvaṃ tadupapadyate;
anyathākramābhāve kathaṃ pūrvāparībhāvavyavahāraḥ kintu, upadeśyāpekṣayā
antargatamāyīyapramātrapekṣayā cayukto’sāviti.
30 Nanu atrasūtrekramavanto māyāpramātāraḥ sṛṣṭāḥ, natu śivatattvam
(Abhinavagupta 1985a: 3:263). Āha “pramātṛsāmānyāt” iti. Tatrāpihi
upapāditākramasthitiḥ. Ata eva uktaṃ “tad evam” iti.
31 In a gesture that seems to accommodate both views, as Gisin does with his
nuanced notion of two types of time, Abhinavagupta tells us it depends on our
perspective. He gives us alternative readings of Utpaladeva’s text on which he
is commenting here: “Alternatively, he says, ‘Or perhaps’ these souls, these
Māyā-bound souls do not at all [have sequence either] here viewing them
from the perspective of the ultimate reality” (Abhinavagupta 1985a: 3:263)
“Tevānakeciditivāstavaṃ pakṣamāha ‘athavā’ iti.” If the divine itself is free of
time, then we might suggest that viewed from this perspective ordinary beings
are as well. This last point does indeed offer a counter-argument. I suggest that
this is characteristic of Abhinavagupta’s style, to give us a rich presentation of
possibilities that do not all agree. I thank Susanne Beiweis for pointing this out.

9781350238503_txt_rev.indd 114

28-06-2022 13:00:19

ABHINAVAGUPTA’S SVĀTANTRYAVĀDA

115

32 As Gisin points out, tied to these ideas of free will and time unfolding is also a
logical refutation of the Law of the Excluded Middle. He draws from Brouwer
here as well (Brouwer 1981: 5–8). Gisin tells us that this Law depends upon the
assumptions of infinite information tied to real numbers and that if we adopt a
different mathematical model, that of intuitionist mathematics, the Law of the
Excluded Middle no longer holds, in Gisin (2020: 116). The example he uses has
to do with the incorporation of time, for instance, the question of whether it will
be raining in a year or not is not amenable to the Law of the Excluded Middle.
Given the use of this concept as a way of criticizing Indian philosophy, Gisin’s
observation of the assumptions entailed in the Law of the Excluded Middle is
interesting. However, Abhinavagupta’s adoption of structural similarities to
Gisin’s intuitionist mathematics is not found in other Indian philosophies, such as
Advaita Vedānta.
33 George Dreyfus articulates this idea I think as well from a Buddhist perspective,
when he suggests that we leave phenomenology when we posit a transcendent
self, in Dreyfus (2013: 135).
34 Abhinavagupta, Ipvv, 3:258: Bodhaikarūpasya pramātur yad
adhikamabodharūpaṃ, tat nirmātavyapakṣe nikṣipyate iti tasya yat nijam
śaktirūpaṃ dharmaḥ.
35 Elsewhere, I translate vimarśa as “active awareness” and discuss the relationship
between vimarśa as an active awareness and prakāśa as the elment of light which
gives rise to the appearance of our material world in great detail (Biernacki 2022).
Given the complexity of the argument and the constraints of space I will not go
into this argument here. I also there discuss the relation these terms bear to the
terms jñāna, knowledge, and kriyā, action.
36 “Tadavikalpadaśāyāṃ citsvabhāvo ‘sau ghaṭaḥ cidvadeva viśvaśarīraḥ pūrṇaḥ”
(Abhinavagupta and Utpaladeva 1986: ad 1.6.3, line 1237). See here also
Catherine Prueitt’s extended discussion of this passage relating this to the concept
of apoha, differentiation as delimitation in Prueitt (2017).
37 Tathā hi vedyadaśām aṅgīkṛtavatām api ata eva ucitena idantāparāmarśena
parāmṛśyānāṃ bodha eva prakāśātmā sāraṃ vastu, prakāśaś ca ananyonmukhāhaṃ
vimarśamayaḥ (Abhinavagupta 1985a: 3:274). Here again Abhinava indulges in a
play on words where parāmarśa means both touching the “other” and touching
the highest. And again he playfully contrasts this with the word “vimarśa” the
supreme power of active awareness, the “touching” of the Lord.
38 Abhinavagupta derives this dual-aspect monism from Utpaladeva’s writings;
clearly present in Utpaladeva’s work, it is less clear in Somānanda’s writings.
39 Abhyantaracinmātrāpekṣayā antarbahirbhāvasya sadbhāvaḥ, māyīye tu sarge >bhy
antareśvaravṛddhyādyapekṣayā bahuśākho >sau (Abhinavagupta 1985a: 3:262).
40 See particularly Mark Van Atten’s helpful analysis of Brouwer’s “creating subject”
in van Atten (2018). See also Niekus (2010). The mathematics involved in both
of these articles is beyond my skill set, however, both of these authors, van Atten
in particular, do a good job of situating these mathematical proofs within a
contextual argument to make them accessible for broader philosophical interest.
41 As van Atten (2018: 1594) points out here, quoting Troelstra, intutionist
mathematics entails the “subjectivistic viewpoint of intuitionism.”

9781350238503_txt_rev.indd 115

28-06-2022 13:00:19

116

CROSS-CULTURAL APPROACHES TO CONSCIOUSNESS

42 As van Atten points out, Brouwer’s intuitionist mathematics recognizes the
foundational priority of the subject. Van Atten tells us, “the Creating Subject
cannot simply accept a proof from outside, and must go through the steps to
reconstruct the evidence. In the end, then, its own ability to make A evident is
what really matters,” in (van Atten 2018: 1595).
43 Van Atten makes this point within a mathematical formulation, and it may be of
interest for mathematically inclined readers to examine the mathematical proof
he lays out in detail; for our purposes here, I focus on the philosophical idea
of subjecitivy underlying the model. I reproduce here van Atten’s mathematical
formulation, symbols intact, for interested readers, but the mathematical proof
is beyond my ken: “Then it can be argued from the essential freedom of the
Creating Subject, that ∀n°˛°˛∃k(a*n (k) = 1) (112) because the Creating Subject
is free to work towards constructing its nth lawlike sequence, but that ∀n ∃k(a*n
(k) = 1) (113) is not true, because the same freedom allows the Creating Subject,
for given n, not to begin constructing its nth lawlike sequence by whatever stage
k the lawlike sequence a*n indicates,” in (van Atten 2018: 1609). Also van Atten
reiterates the importance of freedom, the free choices of the “Creating Subject”
saying, “Troelstra is clear that Creating Subject sequences (‘empirical sequences’)
do depend on free choices of the Creating Subject, and that they are not lawlike in
a sense that would include their being independent of the Creating Subject’s free
choices,” again in (van Atten 2018: 1609).
44 This brings in again the idea of time, as a separate argument from what we saw
in Gisin’s argument for including time in a mathematical schema. As van Atten
points out, we find this in Brouwer: “To see why the time parameter in this sense
is mathematically relevant for the Creating Subject, recall Brouwer’s statement
in his dissertation that mathematics is first of all an act.” I am reminded here of
Abhinavagupta’s statement that we saw earlier, linking “Doership” to the reality
of the world. That is, the world is real because it is linked to the willful actions
of a subject. In this case Abhinavagupta shares with Brouwer a recognition of the
fundamental importance of instantiated, material activity as an element of a firstperson perspective.
45 Van Atten addresses this element of reading Brouwer’s Creating Subject as a
singular subject, as well, and quotes Brouwer to argue, in effect, against this
reading, suggesting rather that the Creating Subject be understood schematically,
with a possible instantiation in a variety of subjects, in (van Atten 2018: 1595).
In both cases, I think what is key is the shift in the model from a third-person
perspective to subjectivity as the grounding perspective.

REFERENCES
Abhinavagupta (1985a), Īśvara Pratyabhijñā Vivṛti Vimarśinī, ed. Paṇḍit Madhusudan
Kaul Śāstrī, vol. 3, 3 vols., Delhi: Akay Reprints.
Abhinavagupta (1985b), Īśvara Pratyabhijñā Vivṛti Vimarśinī, ed.
Paṇḍit Madhusudan Kaul Śāstrī, reprint. Vol. 1., 3 vols., Delhi:
Akay Reprints. Available online: https://archive.org/details/
IshvaraPratyabhijnaVivritiVimarshiniAbhinavaguptaPart1KashmirSanskrit/
mode/2up.

9781350238503_txt_rev.indd 116

28-06-2022 13:00:19

ABHINAVAGUPTA’S SVĀTANTRYAVĀDA

117

Abhinavagupta and Utpaladeva (1986), Isvarapratyabhijnavimarsini, Adhikaras 1–4.
Based on the following edition: Īśvara-pratyabhijñā-Vimarśinī of Abhinavagupta
: doctrine of divine recognition, Sanskrit Text with the commentary Bhāskarī, ed.
K. C. Pandey and K. A. Subramania-Iyer, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, digital on
Goettingen Register of Electronic Texts in Indian Languages. Available online:
http://gretil.sub.uni-goettingen.de/gretil/1_sanskr/6_sastra/3_phil/saiva/abhiprvu.
htm.
Atten, Mark van (2018), “Creating Subject, the Brouwer-Kripke Schema, and
Infinite Proofs,” Indagationes Mathematicae, 29 (Virtual Special Issue-L.E.J.
Brouwer after 50 years): 1565–636. Available online: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
indag.2018.06.005.
Bansat-Boudon, L. (2014), “On Śaiva Terminology: Some Key Issues of
Understanding,” Journal of Indian Philosophy, 42 (1): 39–97.
Barad, K. (2007), Meeting the Universe Halfway: Quantum Physics and the
Entanglement of Matter and Meaning, Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Biernacki, L. (2015), “The Conscious Body: Thinking about the Relation between
Mind and Body with Abhinavagupta’s Tantra,” in E. Kelly, A. Crabtree and
P. Marshall (eds), Beyond Physicalism: Toward Reconciliation of Science and
Spirituality, 349–86, Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
Biernacki, L. (2016), “Connecting Consciousness to Physical Causality:
Abhinavagupta’s Phenomenology of Subjectivity and Tononi’s Integrated
Information Theory,” Religions, 7: 1–11.
Biernacki, L. (2022, forthcoming), Matter of Wonder: Abhinavagupta’s Panentheism
and New Materialism, New York: Oxford University Press.
Brouwer, L. E. J. (1981), Brouwer’s Cambridge Lectures on Intuitionism, ed. D. van
Dalen, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bruntrup, G. and L. Jaskolla, eds (2016), Panpsychism: Contemporary Perspectives,
New York: Oxford University Press.
Canales, J. (2015), Physicist and the Philosopher: Einstein, Bergson, and the Debate
That Changed Our Understanding of Time, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Chalmers, D. (1996), The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory,
New York: Oxford University Press.
Coleman, S. (2014), “The Real Combination Problem: Panpsychism, Micro-Subjects,
and Emergence,” Erkenntnis, 79: 19–44. Available online: https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10670-013-9431-x.
Dennett, D. (1991), Consciousness Explained, New York: Little, Brown and Co.
Dreyfus, G. (2013), “Self and Subjectivity: A Middle Way Approach,” in M. Siderits,
E. Thompson and D. Zahavi (eds), Self, No Self? Perspectives from Analytic,
Phenomenological and Indian Traditions, 114–56, New York: Oxford University
Press.
Gisin, N. (2016), “Time Really Passes, Science Can’t Deny That,” in R. Rennar
and S. Stupar (eds), In Time in Physics, 1–15, Cham, Switzerland: Birkhauser –
Springer, arXiv:1602.01497v1. https://arxiv.org/pdf/1602.01497.pdf.
Gisin, N. (2019), “Indeterminism in Physics, Classical Chaos and Bohmian Mechanics:
Are Real Numbers Really Real?,” Erkenntnis, October 1–13. Available online:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10670-019-001658.
Gisin, N. (2020), “Mathematical Languages Shape Our Understanding of Time in
Physics,” Nature Physics, 16 (2): 114–16. Available online: https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41567-019-0748-5.

9781350238503_txt_rev.indd 117

28-06-2022 13:00:19

118

CROSS-CULTURAL APPROACHES TO CONSCIOUSNESS

Goff, P. (2017), Consciousness and Fundamental Reality, New York: Oxford
University Press.
Goff, P. (2019), “Cosmopsychism, Micropsychism, and the Grounding Relation,” in
William Seager (ed.), The Routledge Handbook of Panpsychism, 144–56, Leiden:
Routledge.
Iemhoff, R. (2020), “Intuitionism in the Philosophy of Mathematics,” in E. N. Zalta
(ed.), Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Available online: https://plato.stanford.
edu/archives/fall2020/entries/intuitionism/.
Nemec, J. (2014), “Evidence for Somānanda’s Pantheism,” Journal of Indian
Philosophy, 42: 99–114.
Niekus, J. (2010), “Brouwer’s Incomplete Objects,” History and
Philosophy of Logic, 31 (February): 31–46. Available online: https://doi.
org/10.1080/01445340903445071.
Oizumi, M., L. Albantakis and G. Tononi (2014), “From the Phenomenology
to the Mechanisms of Consciousness: Integrated InformationTheory 3.0,”
PLOS: Computational Biology, May. Available online: http://journals.plos.org/
ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003588.
Pandey, K. C. (1963), Abhinavagupta: An Historical and Philosophical Study, 2nd
enlarged edn., Varanasi: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series.
Prueitt, C. (2017), “Shifting Concepts: The Realignment of Dharmakīrti on Concepts
and the Error of Subject/Object Duality in Pratyabhijñā Śaiva Thought,” Journal
of Indian Philosophy, 45: 21–47. Available online: https://doi.org/DOI10.1007/
s10781-016-9297-8.
Ratie, I. (2011), “Can One Prove That Something Exists beyond Consciousness?
A Śaiva Criticism of the Sautrāntika Inference of External Objects,” Journal of
Indian Philosophy, 39: 479–501.
Ratie, I. (2014), “Śaiva Interpretation of the Satkāryavāda: The Sāṃkhya Notion of
Abhivyakti and Its Transformation in the Pratyabhijñā Treatise,” Journal of Indian
Philosophy, 42 (March): 127–72.
Searle, J. R. (2006), “Minding the Brain,” Gale Literature: Book Review, New York
Review of Books, 53 (17), November 2, 2006. Available online: https://www.
nybooks.com/articles/2006/11/02/minding-the-brain/.
Shani, I. (2015), “Cosmopsychism: A Holistic Approach to the Metaphysics of
Experience,” Philosophical Papers, 44 (3): 389–437.
Shani, I. and J. Keppler (2018), “Beyond Combination: How Cosmic Consciousness
Grounds Ordinary Experience,” Journal of the American Philosophical Association,
4 (3): 390–410.
Somadeva (1915), Kathāsaritsāgara, Gottigen, Germany: Nirnaya-Sagar Press in
GRETIL. Available online: http://gretil.sub.uni-goettingen.de/gretil/1_sanskr/5_
poetry/4_narr/sokss_pu.htm.
Strawson, G. (2006), “Realistic Monism: Why Physicalism Entails Panpsychism,” in
A. Freedman (ed.), Consciousness and Its Place in Nature: Does Physicalism Entail
Panpsychism? 3–31, Exeter: Imprint Academic.
Strawson, G. (2017), Subject of Experience, New York: Oxford University Press.
Tononi, G. (2012), Phi: A Voyage from the Brain to the Soul, New York: Pantheon.
Tononi, G. (n.d.), “Why Scott Should Stare at a Blank Wall and Reconsider (or, the
Conscious Grid),” Shtetl-Optimized: The Blog of Scott Aaronson (blog). Available
online: http://www.scottaaronson.com/blog/?p=1823 (accessed April 13, 2016).

9781350238503_txt_rev.indd 118

28-06-2022 13:00:19

