  
   
  



The Divine Roots of
Human Love*
William C. Chittick
Ibn al-'Arabi begins his long chapter on love (mahabba) in
the Futuhat al-Makkiyya - as he begins most of the book's 560
chapters - by citing relevant Qur'anic verses and prophetic
sayings (II 322.16). 1 He points out first that love is a divine
attribute, and he lists several of the Qur'anic verses in which
God is the subject of the verb 'to love'. Fourteen of these
verses mention those whom God loves and another twenty­
three mention those whom God does not love. In every case,
the objects of God's love or lack of love are human beings.
Indeed, the Qur'an associates love only with human beings
among all creatures. Hence love is a key term if we are to
understand what differentiates human beings from other cre­
ated things. Most other divine attributes - such as life,
knowledge, desire, power, speech, generosity, justice, mercy,
and wrath - have no necessary connection with the human
race.
When Ibn al-'Arabi turns to prophetic sayings concerning
love, he cites first the famous hadith of the Hidden Treasure:
'I was a treasure that was not known, so I loved to be known.
Hence I created the creatures and I made Myself known to
them, and thus they came to know Me.' Second, he cites a
prophetic saying that he mentions innumerable times in his
works, more often, I am sure, than any other hadith. Again,
it is a hadfth qudsf, which is to say that God is speaking:
Those who seek nearness to Me seek nearness through nothing
I love more than the performance of what I have made incum­
bent upon them. My servant never ceases to seek nearness to
Me through supererogatory works until I love him. Then,
* First presented to 'Amor Divino, Amor Humano', the 3rd International
Congress on Ibn al-'Arabi, in Murcia, 2-4 November 1994.

56

William C. Chittick

when I love him, I am his hearing through which he hears, his
sight through which he sees, his hand through which he
grasps, and his foot through which he walks.
The Shaykh cites Qur'an and Hadith at the beginning of
this chapter for the same reason that he cites them at the
beginning of most chapters.-He wants to mention what he
calls the 'divine roots' (al-usul al-ilahiyya) of the discussion.
On one level, this means simply that he wants to show that
what he has to say is based on the revealed texts. On a
deeper level, his reason for mentioning the divine roots has
to do with his perspective on reality, a perspective that has
come to be called the doctrine of wahdat al-wujud, the
'Oneness of Being' or the 'Unity of Existence'.
In all his works, Ibn al-'Arabi focuses upon reality itself,
and reality is wujud, that is, being, existence, or that which is
found. Wujud is the Real (al-haqq), which is another name for
God. In itself, wujud is concealed and nonmanifest. In other
words, it is the Hidden Treasure. However, wujud loved to be
known, so it created the universe in order to be known.
Those who know wujud in a full sense are true human beings,
or Perfect Man (al-insan al-kamil). But people cannot know
wujud unless wujud makes itself known to them. It makes
itself known by manifesting itself in three basic ways:
through the universe, through the self, and through scrip­
ture. Scripture, the Qur'an in particular, is the key that opens
the door to the universe and the self. Unless Muslims have
recourse to the Qur'an, they cannot know the universe and
themselves. And unless they know themselves, they cannot
know God. Ibn al-'Arabi frequently reminds us of the
Prophet's words, 'He who knows himself knows his Lord.' It
follows that he who does not know himself does not know
his Lord.
For Ibn al-'Arabi, as for other Muslims, the Qur'an is the
means whereby one comes to know oneself and one's God.
The Qur'an is God's self-revelation with the specific goal of
guiding human beings to knowledge of reality. Hence the
first task of the seeker of God is to search out the meanings
of the Qur'an, because the meanings of the Qur'an are the
meanings of wujud itself.

The Divine Roots of Human Love

57

In short, when the Shaykh says that Qur'anic verses are the
divine roots of things, he means to say that the verses mani­
fest the very principles of wujud, the very sources of the exis­
tence that we find in our own experience. The Qur'an gives
expression to the realities of wujud in the clearest possible
manner, and hence, in our search to understand the realities,
we need to look first at the Qur'an. One of the most signifi­
cant realities for understanding the nature of human beings,
and therefore the reality of God Himself, is love.
Love has many similarities with wujud. For example, like
wujud, it cannot be defined. At the beginning of his chapter
on love, the Shaykh reminds his readers of this fact:
You should know that known things can be divideq into two
sorts. One sort can be defined, and the other sort cannot be
defined. Those who know and speak about love agree that it is
one of the things that cannot be defined. A person recognizes
it when it abides within himself and when it is his own
attribute. He does not know what it is, but he does not deny
its existence. (II 325.13)
The Shaykh calls love 'a knowledge of tasting' (IV 7.2),
which is to say that people cannot know love until they have
tasted it and experienced it in themselves. But, even then,
they cannot explain it to others. As the Shaykh says, 'He who
defines love has not known it, and he who has not tasted it
by drinking it down has not known it' (II 111.12).
Although God or wujud cannot be known in Himself, He
can be known inasmuch as He chooses to show Himself.
Once He shows Himself, we can summarize what we know
about Him by mentioning His attributes, or, as He Himself
does in the Qur'an, by mentioning His 'most beautiful
names'. In the same way, love cannot be known in itself, but
its attributes and names can be known and described.
THE NONEXISTENCE OF THE BELOVED
Perhaps the first and most important attribute of love in Ibn
al-'Arabi's view is that love's object does not exist. This flies
in the face of common sense, because we like to think that

58

William C. Chittick

we love someone or something, not nothing. The Shaykh
writes,
Many mistakes may occur in love. The first of them is that
people imagine that the object of love is an existent thing ...
In fact, love's object remains forever nonexistent, but most
lovers are not aware of this, unless they should be knowers of
the realities. (II 337.17)
lbn al-'Arabi's basic point is not difficult to understand.
When people love something, they desire to achieve a near­
ness or a union with the object of their love. As long as they
have not achieved the object of their desire, it does not exist
in relation to them.
It is characteristic of the beloved to be nonexistent, and neces­
sarily so. The lover loves to bring the nonexistent thing into
existence, or for it to occur within an existent thing. (II
332.10)
In his chapter on love, the Shaykh explains why love's
object cannot exist. It should be clear from his discussion
that by 'nonexistent' he means nonexistent in a relative
sense. In other words, the object is nonexistent in relation to
the lover. Thus, the lover loves to have something that he
does not have, or he loves to achieve something that he has
not achieved.
Love never becomes attached to anything but the nonexistent
thing, that is, the thing that does not exist at the moment the
attachment is made. Love desires either the existence or the
occurrence of its object. I say, 'or occurrence', because love can
become attached to making an existent thing nonexistent ...
We said that love desires the existence of the object of
love and that, in reality, the object of love is nonexistent.This
is because for the lover, the object of love is the desire to
achieve union with a specific individual, whoever it may be. If
it is someone whom it is appropriate to embrace, then he
loves the embracing.If it is someone with whom sexual inter­
course can be had, then he loves the sexual intercourse.If it is
someone to be sat with, then he loves the sitting.

The Divine Roots ofHuman Love

59

Hence the love of the lover becomes attached only to that
of the individual which is nonexistent at the moment. He
imagines that his love is attached to the person, but this is not
so. It is this that incites him to meet and see his beloved. He
does not love the beloved's person or the beloved's existence
in entity, because the beloved already possesses personhood or
existence, so there would be no profit in love being attached
to the beloved's personhood. (II 327.2)
The Shaykh continues this passage by answering certain
objections. Some people may say that they loved compan­
ionship, or kissing, or intimacy with a person. Then, when
they achieved their goal, they found that their love persisted.
Hence, love can exist along with its object. The Shaykh
replies that, in fact, the object still does not exist, because
love's object has changed. Now the object is the continuity
of what was achieved, not the achievement itself. Continuity
is not an existing thing. On the contrary, it is the arrival,
moment by moment, of the nonexistent object of love. He
writes,
When you embrace the person, and when the object of your
love had been embracing, or companionship, or intimacy, you
have not achieved the object of your love through this situa­
tion. For your object is now the continuity and permanence of
what you have achieved. Continuity and permanence are
nonexistent. They have not entered into existence and their
period has no end. Hence, in the time of union, love attaches
itself only to a nonexistent thing, and that is the continuity of
the union. (II 327.11) 2
GOD'S LOVE
All things are rooted in wujud, which is God, and love is no
exception. Hence, if it is universally true that the object of
love is nonexistent, the reason for this must be that God's
love, which is the root of all love, takes a nonexistent thing
as its object. In fact, the idea that God loves what is non­
existent is a· corollary to one of the most basic themes of Ibn
al-' Arabi' s works: God is wujud and everything other than

60

William C. Chittick

God is not wujud. Hence, everything other than God can
properly be called 'adam, that is, nonexistence.
One of the Shaykh's most famous technical terms is 'ayn
thabita, 'immutable entity'. The immutable entities are the
things of the universe as known by God for all eternity.God
knows all things and God does not change, because God is
eternal.It follows that God has always known all things and
will always know them.These 'things' (shay') are the 'enti­
ties', and they are referred to in the Qur'anic verses that
mention that God speaks to a thing in order to create it.
Thus the Shaykh writes,
God's words, 'I was a Treasure' affirm the immutable entities
...They are mentioned in His words, 'Our only speech to a
thing [when We desire it, is to say to it "Be", and it is'] [16:40].(II
232.12)
The things or entities found in the Hidden Treasure are
immutable because God's knowledge of them never changes.
Notice that these things are 'things' before God creates them.
In other words, before they come to be found as existent
entities in the universe, the immutable entities are nonexis­
tent. Then, on the basis of His knowledge of them, God
bestows existence upon them and they become manifest as
what the Shaykh sometimes calls the 'existent entities' (a'yan
mawjuda). However, the existence of these entities does not
belong to them. Existence belongs to God alone. There is
only one wujud, and that is the wujud of God, or rather, the
wujud that is identical with God.Hence, the immutable enti­
ties, as Ibn al-'Arabi remarks in a famous phrase, 'have never
smelt a whiff of existence', and they never will smell it.
Moreover, this is also true of the 'existent entities', since
their existence in no way belongs to themselves, but rather
to God.
The hadith of the Hidden Treasure tells us that God cre­
ated the creatures out of His love to be known.Hence love is
the motivating force of creation.The creatures that He cre­
ates are the objects of His love. They are, in themselves,
nonexistent immutable entities.Hence the objects of God's
love are nonexistent.God's love is true love, the source of all

The Divine Roots ofHuman Love

61

love. It follows that love, by definition, is directed toward the
nonexistent, or, to use the Shaykh's terminology, 'attaches
itself' (ta'alluq) to nonexistence, that is, takes nonexistence
as its object.
If love is directed toward the nonexistent, and if love is the
source of all God's creative activity, it follows that nonexis­
tence exercises power throughout existence. In other words,
the whole universe is rooted in nonexistence and depends
upon nonexistence to exist. All activity of all things in the
universe stems from God's love. And all the loves and desires
of the creatures follow in the pattern of God's love, which is
to say that they also are directed at nonexistence. Hence,
nonexistence itself is the root of all creation. The Shaykh
writes,
We maintain that every effect exercised upon an existent
thing belongs to the nonexistent thing. The ultimate goal is
nonexistent. That is why it is correct for the seeker to seek it.
No one desires what is existent. Thus the nonexistent goal
exercises effects in bringing things into existence. In other
words, the nonexistent thing is the cause of God's bringing
into existence whatever He brings into existence. (IV 431.8)
We can summarize the importance of nonexistence in the
Shaykh's ontology by saying that wujud and nonexistence, or
the Real and everything other than the Real, are the two pil­
lars upon which the whole universe stands. On one side, God
alone is wujud. On the other side, the creatures have no
wujud. Wujud on its own simply is. Nonexistence on its own
simply is not. But love is an inherent attribute of wujud, and
it is the nature of love to express that which is unexpressed,
to bring into manifestation that which is hidden, to create
that which has not yet been created. Thus love is the inher­
ent tendency of wujud to become manifest, to assert its own
reality by showing itself to everything that is not. Love is the
overflow of infinite wujud into every possibility of existing,
and the possibilities of existing are defined by entities that do
not in themselves exist, though they are known to God. Each
immutable entity is a specific mode of not existing, because
each represents a possible mode in which wujud can be

62

William C. Chittick

delimited, defined, specified, and determined. When wujud
delimits itself through the entity, wujud shows itself as less
than its infinite self, and hence it becomes differentiated
from wujud as such. The infinite creatures of the universe are
the infinite differentiations and delimitations to which wujud
is susceptible. Each creature is a self-showing or a self-disclo­
sure (tajallf) of wujud and, at the same time, it does not exist,
because wujud alone is wujud. It follows that each creature is
wujud/not wujud or, as Ibn al-'Arabi commonly expresses it,
He/not He (huwa la huwa), that is, God/not God. 3
Why is love an inherent attribute of wujud? One answer is
simply that reality is the way it is, and it is not our task to
understand why. The Shaykh, however, prefers to provide
answers. In one passage, he explains the genesis of love by
referring to two divine names, Beautiful (jamfl) and Light
(nur). The Qur'an calls God the Light of heaven and earth,
while the Prophet employs the name Beautiful in the famous
hadith, 'God is beautiful, and He loves beauty.' This hadith is
especially important because it makes explicit the principle
that every beautiful thing is inherently lovable, and this
principle has repercussions throughout Islamic thought.
Beauty, in short, is that which attracts love, just as love is
attracted by everything beautiful.
The Shaykh associates love both with the divine beauty
and the divine light. Light is that which is manifest in itself
and makes other things manifest. Thus wujud is light,
because it is the Manifest (zahir) and it makes other things
manifest by creating them. In contrast, the immutable enti­
ties are nonexistent, which is to say that they dwell in dark­
ness and nonmanifestation, because they have no wujud and
no manifestation in themselves. Hence, when God brings the
entities into existence, He showers light upon darkness. In
themselves, the entities are simply possibilities of existence
known to God. They do not pertain to any mode of actual­
ized existence until God's light shines upon them. The
Shaykh writes,
The divine love derives from God's names Beautiful and Light.
Light goes forward to the entities of the possible things and
dispels from them the darkness of their gaze upon themselves

The Divine Roots of Human Love

63

and upon their own possibility. It occasions for them a seeing
that is Light's own seeing, because light alone allows anything
to be seen. Then God discloses Himself to the entity through
the name Beautiful, and it falls in love with Him. (II 112.33)
The Shaykh is saying that the Hidden Treasure is both
beautiful and luminous, because it is wujud. The nonexistent
things have nothing of their own with which to perceive the
divine beauty. In order for God to be able to say to the things
'Be!', they must be able to perceive His words, and all percep­
tion, as the Shaykh tells us, depends upon light, that is, man­
ifestation.4 Light makes itself and others known by its very
nature. God's light, shining upon the nonexistent entities,
bestows upon them the ability to see, and they see that
which is found, which is God. 'God is beautiful', and beauty
occasions love by its very nature. Hence the entities fall in
love with God, but they can only see God with God's own
light. They have no light of their own. In other words, they
come into existence only through God's wujud, because there
is no other wujud. Thus God's love for the immutable entities
gives rise to their love for Him, and His wujud gives rise to
their existence. This explains one of the meanings of the
Qur'anic verse, 'He loves them and they love Him' (5:54).
God loves the nonexistent immutable entities, and the
goal of His love is to give existence to the entities. But the
entities themselves never change, since they are immutable.
They do not in fact come to exist. To call them 'existent enti­
ties' is simply a convention, not an expression of the actual
situation.
God's love attaches to the created thing because the created
thing is nonexistent. Thus the created thing is the object of
God's love constantly and forever. As long as there is love, the
existence of the created thing cannot be supposed along with
it. Hence the created thing never comes to exist. (II 113.29)
If the created thing never gains true existence, then the
existence that we perceive can belong only to God, the
Manifest, who is wujud. God makes Himself manifest in a
form that is named the 'existent entity'. This entity is what

64

William C. Chittick

the Shaykh often calls a 'locus of manifestation' (mazhar). It
is the manifestation of wujud within specific and delimited
confines. But wujud alone is manifest, since manifestation
belongs to light, not to darkness; to existence, not to non­
existence; to God, not to the creature.
Once the Light of God becomes manifest in the entity and
the entity comes to exist in a certain manner, it sees the
Beautiful. Then it becomes a true lover of God. Hence it is
utterly engrossed in the object of its love. It forgets itself and
sees nothing but the Beloved. Having forgotten its own self,
the entity knows nothing of itself, so it knows nothing of its
own love. In fact, what occurs is that God loves Himself
through the locus of manifestation that is the existent entity.
Just as 'There is no god but God', so also 'There is no lover
but God.' And the object of God's love is God Himself, since
'God is beautiful, and He loves beauty.'
The entity of the possible thing becomes a locus of manifesta­
tion for God, so it becomes nonmanifest within Him and is
annihilated [fana'] from itself. Hence it does not know that it
loves Him. Or, it is annihilated from itself in Him while in this
state, so it does not know that it is a locus of manifestation for
Him. It finds from itself that it loves itself, for everything is
innately disposed to love itself. Nothing is manifest in the
entity of the possible thing but God, so none loves God but
God. The servant is not qualified by this love, since love has
no property within him. After all, nothing of the servant loves
God save God, who is manifest within him. God alone is the
Manifest. (II 112.34)
If the servant loves nothing but himself, this is because he
loves his own nonexistent entity, which is to say that he
desires to keep it coming into existence. But the servant's
love is simply the reflection of God's love. If the servant loves
none but himself, this is because God loves none but
Himself. He loves that of Himself which is not yet manifest,
and that is the Hidden Treasure. Hence He brings it into
manifestation by disclosing it. The immutable entities that
He loves are the possibilities of existence found in the infi­
nite, nondelimited reality known as wujud or the Hidden

The Divine Roots of Human Love

65

Treasure. They do not exist in themselves, but they do exist
as objects of wujud's self-knowledge. God loves these objects
when they are nonexistent, and the goal of His love is to give
them existence. At the moment He gives them existence, He
ceases loving them, because love is directed only at non­
existence. Hence He loves the next moment of the thing's
existence, which is to say that He loves the continuity of the
thing's existence. This is one of several ways in which the
Shaykh explains his famous doctrine of the 'renewal of cre­
ation at each instant'. God continues to renew the existence
of things ad infinitum. God never ceases to love the exis­
tence of the immutable entities for all eternity, because they
remain forever nonexistent. Thus, at each moment His love
for the existence of the nonexistent things produces a new
creation. The Shaykh writes,
No lover loves anything but himself. This is why God
described Himself by saying that He loves the loci of manifes­
tation. These loci are a nonexistence in an entity. Love
attaches itself to what becomes manifest, and He is the
Manifest within it. The relationship between the Manifest and
the loci of manifestation is love. But love attaches itself only
to nonexistence. Thus, in this case, the object to which it
attaches itself is continuity, and continuity has not been made
present, for it extends to infinity, so it can never be made pre­
sent. (II 113.7)
By loving the nonexistent things, or by loving the manifes­
tation of the nonmanifest, God loves the Hidden Treasure
and gives it existence. For the Shaykh, this explains the
meaning of the divine name Loving (al-wadud), which the
Qur'an attributes to God in two verses. In one of these
verses, the Qur'an says that God is 'the Forgiving, the
Loving, the Lord of the Throne' (85:14-15). In his chapter on
the divine names, the Shaykh writes that the meaning of the
name Loving is that God constantly and without cease brings
the universe into existence for our sake. We are immutable
entities. But through the tongue of our own situation, which
is nonexistence, we constantly beg God to bestow existence
upon us.

66

William C. Chittick

We, with the tongue of our states and our words, never cease
saying to Him, 'Do this, do that', and He never ceases doing it.
Moreover, we say to Him, 'Do!' only as a result of His activity
within us.Do you think His doing things is forced upon Him,
when none can force Him? High indeed is He exalted above
that! On the contrary, this is the property of the name Loving,
for He is the Forgiving, the Loving, the Lord of the Throne
[85:14-15].(IV 260.6)
It is highly significant that this verse mentions that God is
'the Lord of the Throne'. The Qur'an associates the Throne
with the name All-merciful. The All-merciful sits upon the
Throne, and His Throne embraces the heavens and the earth.
Hence God has mercy upon all things.In this case, God has
mercy on all those who love, since all things are lovers.He is
generous and bountiful by nature, because wujud is infinitely
full and infinitely effusive.He gives the best that He has with
Himself, and that is wujud itself, which is His own reality.
Thus He constantly brings the creatures into existence, for
they love what they do not have, which is wujud.
He has mercy only upon the ardor of the lover, which is a del­
icate yearning for the encounter with the Beloved.No one
encounters the Beloved save with His attribute, and His
attribute is wujud. Hence He bestows wujud upon the lover.If
there was anything more perfect than that with Him, He
would not have been stingy with it ...5 If there had been
something else and He had kept it to Himself, this would have
been a stinginess that is incompatible with generosity and an
incapacity that contradicts power.Thus God reported that He
is the Forgiving, the Loving, that is, fixed in love in His unseen
reality. After all, He sees us, so He sees His beloved.Hence He
delights in His beloved.(IV 260.6)
HUMAN LOVE
God loves the nonexistent things called the immutable enti­
ties.They remain forever nonexistent in themselves, but His
love for them brings them into existence continually and for­
ever.From one point of view, God has a single object of love,

The Divine Roots ofHuman Love

67

which is the universe and everything it contains. Everything
He loves is nonexistent and remains nonexistent forever.
From another point of view, the universe itself is nothing but
the manifestation of wujud. Hence God loves Himself, and
through loving Himself He gives manifest existence to that
which was nonmanifest.
Human beings, as images of wujud, also possess the
attribute of love. The object of their love is always nonexis­
tent in relation to themselves. When we consider God and
the universe as two different realities, the object of human
love may be God or something in the universe. But when we
understand that the universe is nothing but the self-disclo­
sure of God, the object of human love can only be God. And
since God in His Essence is forever nonmanifest, unknow­
able, and unattainable, the true object of love is always
nonexistent in relation to human beings.
In one passage, the Shaykh makes this point while dis­
cussing the proper attributes of the disciple on the path to
God. Literally, the 'disciple' is the 'desirer' (murfd), and he
should desire God alone. Nevertheless, the Shaykh insists,
the object of his desire is in fact nonexistent, both in the
sense that is absent from him because he has not reached it
and in the sense that it will always remain nonexistent for
him because he can never reach God's Essence.
In our view, the object to which desire attaches is nonexis­
tence. You already know that knowledge of God is desired by
the servant, and you know that no created thing can gain
knowledge of God as He knows Himself, even though crea­
tures have the desire to achieve that. As long as the servant
stands in this station, he is inseparable from desire's property,
that is, attachment to the nonexistent thing.
Knowledge of God, as we have said, cannot exist, so the
property of desire is more complete in the servant of God than
in someone who perceives the object of his desire. Hence
desire is true desire only when it is attached to an object that
cannot be perceived. Desire itself remains qualified by exis­
tence only so long as its object is qualified by nonexistence.
If the desired object were to be found or established, then the
property of desire would disappear. If the property disap-

68

William C. Chittick

peared, desire itself would disappear. It follows that desire will
never disappear from us, because its object can never be
achieved. (II 522.4)
The Shaykh makes a similar point when discussing the
attribute of 'seeking' (talab). As he says, 'The object of seek­
ing is nonexistence; it is either the bringing to nonexistence
of an existent thing or the bringing into existence of a
nonexistent thing' (III 317.13). The seeker, like the desirer, is
trying to find God. But the God that can be sought is the
God that can be conceptualized and understood. Such a God
is not God in Himself, but rather, 'the God of belief', which
is God as He shows Himself to the seeker.6 God in Himself
can never be found, and the object of the seeking does not
exist, since only the God who can never be found by the
creature has true wujud.
It is impossible for anyone to love God, because the object to
which love attaches is nonexistence, but it is impossible for
any relationship of nonexistence to be ascribed to the Real or
to what derives from Him. Thus no love attaches to God from
any created thing. (II 113.27)
If God in Himself cannot be sought, then what are the
seekers seeking? What have the Sufis been singing about in
their poetry if not love for God? The Shaykh replies that they
are loving and seeking not God in Himself, but the God that
they can encompass and embrace. They cannot embrace God
in Himself, but they can embrace God as He shows Himself
to them. But that God is not wujud, but rather the radiance
of wujud, the self-showing of wujud. What people gain from
this seeking is their own benefit.
The Real cannot be sought for the sake of Himself. On the
contrary, He can only be sought for the sake of benefit. After
all, the profit of seeking is to gain [tahsifj the object of seeking,
but the Real cannot be gained by anyone. Thus He cannot be
sought by anyone in the cosmos. (II 605.29)
The benefit that the seeker seeks is the joy and bliss of

The Divine Roots ofHuman Love

69

knowing, seeing, and witnessing God in His self-disclosure.
In respect of His Essence and His wujud, nothing stands up to
the Real. He cannot be desired or sought in His Essence. What
the seeker seeks and the desirer desires is only knowledge of
Him, witnessing of Him, or vision of Him. All of these are from
Him. They are not He Himself. (II 663.9)
Since God in Himself cannot be sought, those who truly
know things as they are - those whom the Shaykh calls the
'gnostics' or the 'Folk of God' - make no attempt to seek
Him, since He is unattainable. Rather, they seek their own
benefit, and their own benefit is 'felicity' (sa'ada), that is, the
everlasting vision of God in this world and the next. As the
Shaykh puts it, 'God cannot be attained through seeking.
The gnostics seek their own felicity, not God' (IV 443.1). In
other words, what they seek is the joy of participating with
full awareness in the never-ending creation of the universe,
the never-ceasing process whereby God loves the nonexistent
things and brings them into existence.
The Folk of God know that they can never attain to their
Beloved and hence that they can never know their Beloved.
Their Beloved is nonexistent in relation to them and will
remain forever nonexistent, and this for them is the source
of the greatest joy and felicity, for it requires that they leave
nonexistence and enter into existence continually and for­
ever. All creatures love by their very nature. The difference
between the Folk of God and ordinary people is that the lat­
ter think they know what they love. In fact, their true
beloved remains forever nonexistent and inaccessible, and
hence it can never be known. They are ignorant of their own
ignorance.
Although there are many lovers - or rather, everyone in exis­
tence is a lover - no one knows the object to which his love
attaches. People are veiled by the existent thing within which
their beloved is found. They imagine that the existent thing is
their beloved, but, in reality, it is their beloved only indirectly.
In reality, no one loves a beloved for the sake of the
beloved's self. Rather, he only loves the beloved for the sake of

70

William C. Chittick

his own self. This is the verified truth. After all, the nonexis­
tent thing is not qualified by desire that the lover should love
it for its sake and should abandon his own desire for the sake
of the beloved's desire. Since this is not the actual situation,
there remains only that the lover loves the beloved for the
sake of himself. (II 333.21)
POVERTY
We have seen that the Shaykh's explanation of love needs to
be understood in the context of the relationship between
wujud and the nonexistent immutable entities. Another way
to understand it is in the context of 'poverty' (faqr). The term
poverty is well known as one of the preferred synonyms for
Sufism. Few Sufis in Islamic history have called themselves
Sufis. Much more commonly, they refer to themselves as the
poor (using the Arabic faqfr or Persian darwfsh).
Poverty is an innate creaturely attribute in face of God,
who is the Wealthy or the Independent (al-ghanf). The terms
are derived from several Qur'anic verses, especially 35:15: 'O
people, you are the poor toward God, and God, He is the
Wealthy, the Praiseworthy.' God is the source of all good and
all existence, while people have nothing of their own. Hence
God is not only infinitely wealthy but also praiseworthy, that
is, He is to be praised for every good and for everything that
exists.
In lbn al-'Arabi's vocabulary, poverty is equivalent to the
philosophical term possibility (imkan). It refers to the nonex­
istence of all things in themselves. In contrast, wealth or
independence refers to wujud and the fact that God has need
for nothing, because He is all reality. Hence, in Qur'anic
terms, 'God is independent of the worlds' (3:97).
Some Sufis debated as tp whether the goal of Sufi practice
was to be poor and needy toward God or to be wealthy and
independent through God. For the Shaykh, poverty toward
God is identical with independence through Him. However,
poverty is the fundamental situation of created things
because they have nothing of their own. Since they are
inherently poor, it is their very nature to love and to seek
what they do not have. The object of their love and seeking

The Divine Roots of Human Love

71

is always nonexistent in relation to themselves. Ultimately,
everything in the universe is poor, so everything in the uni­
verse is a seeker and a lover.
He who is independent through God is poor toward Him. But
the relationship to God through the word poverty is more
appropriate than the relationship through independence. This is
because independence is a description of the Essence that
abolishes the interrelationship between the Essence of the Real
and creation, but every seeking announces an interrelation­
ship, since no one aspires for what is already present. Hence
people seek only something that is not with them in the state
of seeking. This is why seeking attaches itself only to non­
existence, which is the same as the nonexistent thing. The
sought object may be within an existent entity, or not within
an existent entity.
There is nothing in the engendered universe save a seeker,
so there is nothing in the engendered universe save the poor
toward what he seeks. (II 263.34)
People are poor toward God. They also love God, and
nothing else. However, just as people become confused by
the forms to which they are attracted, so also their poverty
and need become specified and focused on specific things,
rather than on God. The goal of the Sufis - those who know
their own poverty for what it is - is to have no object toward
which they are poor save God. But, as we have seen, the
object of seeking can only be nonexistence. So here again,
the Sufis love God by loving that which cannot be delimited,
defined, constricted, or understood.
Poverty is an affair that is inherent in everything other than
God. There is no way to escape from it ... However, poverty's
goals are diverse in terms of the specification of that toward
which the poor person is poor and the meaning for which he
has need.
Know that, since it is known that poverty and need are an
attribute of the very essence of things, the object to which
things attach themselves and toward which they are poor is
the seeking of the continuation of their engendered existence

72

William C. Chittick

and of their bliss in the most perfect manner, such that the
contrary does not interrupt them.
The people of this path do not see this in their states or
beliefs save in God. Hence they are poor toward Him and
toward no one else.
Their poverty toward Him is not correct in their existence
when they exist. Their poverty toward their existence is only
in the state of their nonexistence. That is why He gives them
existence. So the object to which poverty is forever attached is
nonexistence, that He may bring it into existence for them,
since in His hand is bringing it into existence. (II 600.32)
The goal of the lover and the seeker should be to strive for
God alone, not for any specific gift of God. To love some spe­
cific thing would be to be unaware that true love is focused
on that which is nonexistent relative to us in an absolute
sense. Since only wujud is absolutely other than the nonexis­
tent thing, the true object can only be God.
When you come to understand that poverty has this quality,
keep it in mind constantly in every breath and in every state,
and attach your poverty to God in a nondelimited sense, with­
out any specification. This is more appropriate for you. If you
are not able to achieve the lack of specification, then at least
attach it to God with specification. God revealed to Moses, 'O
Moses, place none other than Me in the place of your need
and ask Me even for the salt you put in your dough.' (II
264.19)
THE GOAL OF LOVE
The hadith of the Hidden Treasure tells us that God loved to
be known. The Qur'an and the tradition in general make it
clear that the knowledge that God desired to actualize
through creation can be achieved only by human beings,
who are God's chosen representatives. Since God created
only human beings among all creatures in His own image,
they alone are able to know God's self-disclosure in a full
sense. Thus the Qur'an tells us that God taught Adam all the
names, and one of the interpretations of this verse is that

The Divine Roots ofHuman Love

73

these were the names of God, that is, the names that desig­
nate wujud, the Real. This special knowledge that God taught
to Adam explains his superiority over all other creatures. The
goal of human life is to actualize the knowledge of the names
that were taught to Adam when God created him in His own
image.
The fundamental focus of Ibn al-'Arabi's writings is not, as
many would say, upon wahdat al-wujud, the Oneness of
Being. Rather, his basic concern is to explicate the nature of
human perfection. Although he never mentions the term
wahdat al-wujud, he refers repeatedly to al-insiln al-kilmil,
Perfect Man. His most famous work, the Fusus al-Hikam,
begins with a discussion of Adam, the original Perfect Man,
and the rest of the work deals with the various modalities of
human perfection. Hence it is natural that Ibn al-'Arabi's dis­
cussion of love should lead to an explication of how Perfect
Man is the object of God's love. For example, he devotes a
significant portion of his relatively short subchapter on the
divine name Loving to the explanation of how Perfect Man is
the goal of God's love and actualizing perfection is the goal
of human love.
Given that Perfect Man is Ibn al-'Arabi's most prevalent
theme, the idea is extremely difficult to summarize in a few
words. By explaining the nature of Perfect Man, the Shaykh
clarifies the reality of God, the nature of the cosmos, and the
diverse modalities of human existence, since all of these are
brought to their full actualization through Perfect Man.
Hence Perfect Man has divine, cosmic, and human dimen­
sions. In the section on the divine name Loving, the Shaykh
focuses on the cosmic dimensions. I will quote part of the
passage shortly. Before doing so, however, let me summarize
how human perfection is bound up with the infinity and
inaccessibility of wujud and, at the same time, with love for
nonexistence.
God in Himself is no thing, which is to say that He is no
existing thing, because He is wujud itself, which is the source
of all existing and nonexisting things. If human beings are to
attain to the perfection of the divine image, they cannot be
any specific thing. They must be, at one time, all things and
no thing, just as God is all things and no thing.

74

William C. Chittick

When ordinary human beings love specific things, they
focus their aspirations and desires on specific, designated
objects. By doing so, they turn away from an infinite number
of other possible objects of desire. God, on His part, loves all
things in the state of their nonexistence. Hence His love
embraces everything that can possibly exist, and through His
love He brings the universe into existence moment by
moment for all eternity. As for Perfect Man, he is like God in
that he loves everything and nothing. Thus he is totally dif­
ferent from ordinary people, who love this and that.
The Shaykh calls the state of human perfection achieved
by Perfect Man 'the station of no station' (maqam la maqam).
Every other human being stands in a specific station that is
delimited and defined by the specific objects of his love and
aspiration. Perfect Man alone stands in no station, because
he has fully actualized a love that has no specific thing as its
object. Rather, the object of his love is the infinite Essence of
God, and that always remains inaccessible to him and
nonexistent for him. He is defined by his love and aspiration
for the 'nothing' that is the source of everything. Hence he
has perfected the divine image, for he is indefinable and
inaccessible, just as the object of his love is indefinable and
inaccessible. By living in no thing and no station, Perfect
Man is freed from every thing and every station. By being
poor and needy toward all things, or toward nothing whatso­
ever, Perfect Man is poor and needy only toward God. Hence
he is independent through God. 7
In love, the mark of Perfect Man is a universal poverty,
that is, an utter annihilation of self that brings about a need
for God in the full wealth and independence of His total self­
disclosure. That full self-disclosure is the universe in its
entirety. Through a love for God that is absolute and non­
delimited (mutlaq), Perfect Man loves all things. The charac­
teristic of this love is to be nonspecific, and it may appear in
the seeker who has not yet fully actualized the state of per. fection. In the following passage the Shaykh provides a brief
description of this type of love and points out its relationship
to human poverty.
The subtlest thing that you may find in love is an excessive

The Divine Roots of Human Love

75

passion, a longing, an agitated yearning, a passion, a wasting
away, and an inability to sleep or to take pleasure in food all
the while that you do not know who it is or how it is that you
love, and your beloved does not become specified for you...
This is similar to the covenant made with the children of
Adam that He is our Lord, so that no one can deny it after­
wards. Hence you find in the original nature [fitra] of every
human being a poverty and need toward an existent thing
that can support him, and that is God, but he is not aware of
Him. That is why God says, 'O people, you are the poor toward
God' [35:15]. He is saying to them that the poverty and need
which you find in yourself is attached to God, no one else, but
you do not recognize Him. So we come to know God through
Him. (II 323.35, 324.7)
The Shaykh sometimes calls the nonspecific and nondelim­
ited love that is actualized by the Folk of God and Perfect
Man 'divine love', since, like God's love for the universe, it
does not distinguish among the entities.8
The mark of divine love is love for all engendered things in
every presence, whether suprasensory, sensory, imaginal, or
imaginalized.9 Every presence has an eye from His name Light
through which it looks upon His name Beautiful, for that light
clothes it in the robe of existence. (II 113.6)
On the cosmic level, Perfect Man plays the role of the
intermediary between God and created things. Perfect Man is
the actualized image of God, and hence he embraces every­
thing in the divine reality. The cosmos in all its diversity also
discloses the divine reality, but in a dispersed, differentiated,
and specified manner. Hence Perfect Man is one through
God's Oneness and many through the infinite things that
he encompasses, which are the objects of God's knowledge,
the immutable entities. The universe is infinitely dispersed,
God is One, and Perfect Man is both one and many. Only
he has a complete knowledge of God's manifestation
through creation. Only he knows the Hidden Treasure in its
fullness. Hence Perfect Man alone is the true beloved of God.
From this point of view, Perfect Man is the reality of the
whole cosmos.

76

William C. Chittick

To bring this discussion to a close, let me quote the
promised passage from the Shaykh's explanation of the
divine name Loving. The passage can serve as a convenient
summation of the Shaykh's main teachings concerning
divine and human love.
The whole cosmos is one human being that is the beloved.
The individuals of the cosmos are the bodily parts of that
human being. God did not describe the beloved through the
love of its Lover. Rather, He made it a beloved, nothing else.
When God provides someone with a love for Him that is
like His love for that person, He bestows upon him witnessing
and He gives him bliss through witnessing Him in the forms
of the things. Hence God's lovers in the cosmos correspond to
the pupil of the eye in the eye. Although the human being has
many parts, nothing witnesses and sees save only his two eyes.
Thus the eye is like the lovers in the cosmos.
God bestows witnessing upon His lovers because He
knows their love for Him. This knowledge of His is a knowl­
edge of tasting. So His activity toward His lovers is the same as
His activity toward Himself, and that is nothing but witness­
ing in the state of the wujud that is beloved to the beloved.
God created the jinn and mankind only to worship Him
[51:56]. Hence, among all the creatures, He created them
alone for His love, since none worships Him and none makes
himself lowly before Him save a lover. All those other than
human beings glorify Him in praise, because they do not wit­
ness Him in order that they might love Him. Thus He dis­
closes Himself to none of His creatures in His name Beautiful
save to the human being and within the human being - so far
asl know.
This is why a human being does not become totally anni­
hilated and enraptured by love except in love for His Lord or
for someone who is the locus of disclosure for his Lord [that is,
another human being, created in God's image].
The entities of the cosmos are all lovers because of Him,
whatever the beloved may be, since all created things are the
pedestals for the Real's self-disclosure. Their love is fixed, they
are loving, and He is the Loving. The whole situation is con­
cealed between the Real and creation through creation and

The Divine Roots of Human Love

77

the Real. That is why God brought the name Forgiving along
with the name Loving [in the verse He is the Forgiving, the
Loving, Lord of the Throne, the Glorious (85:14-15)]. After all,
Forgiving means literally 'curtaining'. Thus it is said that [the
famous Arab lover] Qays loved Layla, since Layla derives from
the locus of disclosure. In the same way, Bishr loved Hind,
Kuthayr loved 'Azza, Ibn al-Durayj loved Lubna, Tawba loved
al-Akhyaliyya, and Jamil loved Buthayna. But all these women
were pedestals through which the Real disclosed Himself to
them.
The beloved is a pedestal even if the lover is ignorant of
the names of what he loves. A man can see a woman and love
her, without knowing who she is, what her name is, who her
relatives are, and where she lives. Love, by its very essence,
requires that he seek out her name and her home so that he
may attend to her and know her in the state of her absence
through the name and the relationship. Thus he will ask
about her if he lacks the witnessing of her.
So also is our love for God. We love Him in His loci of self­
disclosure and within the specific name, which is Layla,
Lubna, or whatever, but we do not recognize that the object is
identical with the Real. So here we love the name but we do
not recognize that it is identical with the Real. Thus we love
the name and do not recognize the entity.
In the case of the created thing, you know the entity and
you love. It may be that the name is not known. However,
love refuses anything but making the beloved known. Among
us are those who know God in this world, and among us are
those who do not know Him until they die while loving some
specific thing. Then they will come to understand, when the
covering is lifted, that they had loved only God, but they had
been veiled by the name of the created thing. (IV 260.12)

Notes
1. References throughout are to al-Futuhiit al-Makkiyya, Cairo,
1911. For a French translation of the chapter on love, see Traite de
l'Amour by M. Gloton (Paris: Albin Michel, 1986).

78

William C. Chittick

2. Compare the following: 'Love attaches itself only to a non­
existent thing. It desires to see that thing as existent within an exis­
tent entity. Then, when love sees the thing, love is transferred to
the continuity of that state whose existence it loves in that existent
entity' (II 337.18).
3. On this phrase as the most succinct expi;ession of the Shaykh's
ontology, see W. C. Chittick, The Sufi Path of Knowledge: lbn
al-'Arabf's Metaphysics of Imagination (Albany: SUNY Press, 1989),
passim.
4. On light as the source of perception, see Chittick, Sufi Path, p. 214.
5. In the dropped sentence, the Shaykh supports his argument by
referring to the famous statement of al-Ghazali that this world is the
best of all possible worlds. See Chittick, Sufi Path, p. 409n6.
6. On the diverse gods of belief, see Chittick, Sufi Path, Chapter 19
and idem, Imaginal Worlds: lbn al-'Arabf and the Problem of Religious
Diversity (Albany: SUNY Press, 1994), Chapters 9 and 10.
7. On human perfection and the 'station of no station' see
Chittick, Sufi Path, Chapter 20, and idem, Imaginal Worlds, passim.
8. In the explications given to his disciple lbn Sawdakin, the
Shaykh said, 'When you see that love or something else is nonde­
limited, then you should know that it is a divine affair, because the
relationship of the Real to all things is the same. But when you see
that love is specified, then you should know that it is a property
that pertains to accidents and constitution.' (M. Profitlich, Die
Terminologie lbn 'Arabfs im 'Kitii.b wasii.'il al-sii.'il' des lbn Saudakfn
[Freiburg im Breisgau: Klaus Schwarz Verlag, 1973], p. 2).
9. In the last sentence of the subchapter from which this passage
is taken, the Shaykh adds a gloss for the benefit of those who are
not sure of the difference between imaginal (khayii.lf) and imaginal­
ized (mutakhayyal): 'Know that all of imagination is real, but some
of imaginalization is real and some umeal' (II 113.32). He seems to
be implying that imagination pertains to the external, cosmic
World of Imagination, which he sometimes calls 'discontiguous
imagination'. In contrast, imaginalization refers to the microcosmic
imagination of individuals, or 'contiguous imagination', such as
what appears to people in dreams. On the problems with defining
exactly what the Shaykh means in such passages, see Chittick,
Imaginal Worlds, Chapter 6.

