DEATH AND THE WORLD OF IMAGINATION:
IBN AL-CARABÏ'S ESCHATOLOGY
Teachings about eschatology or the "return" (al-mctad) to God make up the
third of the three principles of Sunni Islam, after Divine Unity (al-tawhììd) and
prophecy (al-nubuwwa). Those Sufis who discuss eschatology cover a wide
variety of topics, two of the most important being the "voluntary return" (al·
rujü al-ikhtiyärT) and the "compulsory return" (al-rujif al-idfirari)1; the first
deals with the path of attaining spiritual perfection in this life, the second with
the nature of physical death and bodily resurrection.2 The great Ibn al-c Arabi
(d. 638/1240) discusses both topics voluminously and sets the stage for all
subsequent treatments by Sufis, philosophers, and theologians down to recent
times. In the present article an attempt will be made to outline a few of his
teachings on the compulsory return and suggest how they fit into his overall
world view.
Revelation and Reason
Sufi teachings are often looked upon as a departure from "orthodox" Islam,
but in most cases this view rests upon a misuse of the term "orthodoxy" and an
ignorance of the exact content of the teachings in question. More careful
examination tends to support the thesis of Stephen Katz and others as to "The
'Conservative' Character of Mystical Experience"3; the specifically Sufi explanations of Islamic teachings are not made to subvert the dogma but to support it
and to open the way to faith for those individuals who find the unidimensional
explanations offered by the theologians and jurists intellectually or spiritually
stultifying. Ibn al-'Arabi's exposition of Islamic eschatology fits into this
category. Far from rejecting such articles of faith as the two angels who question
the soul in the grave, the blast on SeraphiePs trumpet that awakens the dead, the
Balance set up to weigh human deeds at the Resurrection, and the division of
human beings into the inhabitants of paradise and hell, Ibn al-c Arabi maintains
that anyone who attempts to turn these doctrines into metaphors or allegories

1

Cf Ibn al-cArabi, al-Futûhàt al-Makkiyya (Beirut Dar 5âdir, n d ) , III, 223
For an overview of Islamic teachings on eschatology, see William Chittick, "Eschatology," in
Islamic Spirituality Foundations, ed S H Nasr [vol 19 of World Spirituality An Encyclopedic
History of the Religious Quest] (New York Crossroad, 1987), pp 378-409, for the teaching of a
well-known Sufi, see Chittick, "Rumi's View of Death," Alserat, XIII, 2 (1987), 30-51 Ibn alc
Arabrs doctrines provide a good deal of the data and principles with which the later philosphers
constructed their systematic treatments of eschatology, cf Mulla Sadrá, The Wisdom of the Throne,
tr J W Morns (Princeton Princeton University Press, 1981) For an excellent summary of Islamic
eschatological dogma with, however, no attempt to explain how it has traditionally been interpreted,
see Jane I Smith and Yvonne Y Haddad, The Islamic Understanding of Death and Resurrection
(Albany State University of New York Press, 1981)
3
See Katz's chapter by this name m his Mysticism and Religious Traditions (Oxford Oxford
University Press, 1983), cf Annemarie SchimmeFs chapter in the same volume
2

51

52

THE MUSLIM WORLD

through "rational hermeneutics" (al-t(?wil al-aqUf only proves that his
intelligence is corrupt and his faith imperfect. There is no reason, says Ibn alc
Arabi, why the Quranic verses and badith that are often interpreted or
explained away in order to make them fit into a rational system of thought
cannot be understood literally—that is, as long as one understands the Quranic
metaphysics and cosmology and the ontological referents of the passages in
question.
The problem of how to understand the revealed data is often discussed in
terms of the theological concepts of "Similarity" (tashbih) and "Incomparability"
(tanzih). The general tenor of Islamic thought as developed by the theologians
and philosophers has been to negate any Similarity between God and the
creatures and to affirm God's Incomparability. Hence, when the Qur*än and
hadith speak of God's hand, face, eye, foot, speech, and laughter, these terms
need to be interpreted in such a way that God's Incomparability is not affected;
one could say that the traditional data is thoroughly "demythologized." It is Ibn
al-cArabi's contention that such hermeneutical efforts are based upon ignorance
of the nature of reality and disrespect for the revealed character of the Qur'ân
and the badïth.
The religion has brought statements that contradict rational evidence,
since it ascribes to God such attributes of temporal things as coming,
descent, sitting down, joy, laughter, hand, and foot. . . . At the same time
the Qur*än says, "Nothing is like Him" (S. 42:11), though these attributes
have been affirmed. But if they were impossible, as is concluded by reason
(al-aqt), God would not have attributed them to Himself; the true
revelation would be false. (– 319.26)5

4

Henry Corbin and others would make tdwil a cornerstone of Sufism, and this is true provided
one understands that there is more than one kind of tdwil and that the kind a modern interpreter—
whether Muslim or non-Muslim—is tempted to make is precisely the kind that Ibn al-e Arabi and
other Sufis stigmatize As soon as a text is approached with the attitude that it can be interpreted to
suit our own purposes, the result will be a ta'wil of the rationalistic, individualistic, and ego-centric
kind that the Sufis considered unacceptable Speaking explicitly about ta'wil, Rumi tells us,
"Interpret yourself, not the traditions, curse your own brain, not the rosegarden" (Mathnawl, I,
3744) An appropnate interpretation of the Qur'an will be the result of years of devotion to the
text—in the sense of both reverence and service (cf RümFs famous comparison of the Qur'an to a
bride, Arberry, Discourses of Rumi [London John Murray, 1961], pp 236-37, William Chittick,
The Sufi Path of Love [Albany State University of New York Press, 1983], Ò 273) The Sufis felt that
one had to approach the Qur'än with the realization that one's own mind is forgetful and corrupt
and needs to be awakened by the Holy Word Ibn al-c Arabi likes to quote the Qur'anic verse, "Fear
God, and God will teach you" (S 2 282) The key to understanding is total absorption into the
Divine Word, which reforms the Divine Image upon which man was originally created In short, true
taVil—"to take [a text] back to the Origin"—presupposes spiritual transformation, so that the
intellect within man, the impersonal light bestowed by God, grasps the meaning appropnate to the
specific application by discerning how God intended the text to be applied ("God will teach you")
5

Roman numerals refer to the volume number of the edition of the Futühät al-Makkiyya
mentioned in note 1, and these are followed by page and line numbers, when volume I is mentioned,
the second set of numerals refers to O Yahya's critical edition, Cairo, 1972 on

DEATH AND THE WORLD OF IMAGINATION

53

Ibn al-cArabi's eschatological teachings represent one side of a many-sided
endeavor to prove the literal accuracy of the revealed data; this is the wider
context within which the following doctrines need to be situated.
The Ontology of Imagination
Henry Corbin and others have demonstrated the importance of imagination
for Sufism and Islamic philosophy.6 Ibn al-c Arabi insists that it is impossible to
gain a true understanding of the Islamic revelation without perceiving the role of
imagination within the cosmos. "He who does not know (ycfrij) the ontological
status (martaba) of imagination (al-khayäl) has no knowledge whatsoever" (II
312.2). Long before Ibn al-cArabi imagination had been employed in
interpreting Islamic eschatological teachings; Avicenna had suggested its
relevance and al-Ghazâlï had made extensive use of the explanatory possibilities
it provides.7 But Ibn al-c Arabi is the great exponent of the concept as the
indispensible means for understanding the true nature of after-death experience.
The term imagination refers to an ontological and epistemological reality that
plays a fundamental role in both the macrocosm and the microcosm, though the
individual faculty of the mind that goes by this name participates in its nature
only imperfectly. Perhaps the most striking feature of imagination is its
ambiguous character; as Ibn al-c Arabi says, "It is neither existent nor
nonexistent, neither known nor unknown, neither affirmed nor denied" (I
304.23; 4, 408.11). The common example of an imaginai (not "imaginary")
reality is the image that a person perceives in a mirror: "He knows for certain
that in one respect he has perceived his own form, but he also knows for certain
that in another respect he has not perceived it" (I 304.24; 4, 408.12).
Ontologically, imagination is situated between the spiritual and the corporeal,
possessing characteristics of both sides. Hence it is often referred to as an
"isthmus" (barzakh), which is defined as "something that separates two other
things."8 A standard example in the sensory realm is the line that divides shadow
from sunlight; though we see the line, it exists as such only in virtue of the two
realities it separates. In the same way, imagination separates the spiritual or
unseen world from the corporeal or visible world; all of its specific
characteristics derive from its intermediate situation. In the macrocosm the
imaginai world stands between the spirits (al-arwäh), which are disengaged or
disembodied (mujarrad), luminous, simple (noncompound), and one, and the

6

See Corbin's seminal study, Creative Imagination in the Sufism of Ibn cArabi (Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1969); cf. his Spiritual Body and Celestial Earth (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1977).
7
See William Chittick, "Eschatology"; Fazlur Rahman, "Dream, Imagination, and cAlam almithâl" in The Dream and Human Societies, éd. G.E. von Grunebaum and R. Caillois (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1966), pp. 409-19.
8
Amrfäsil bayn amrayn, I 304.16 (4, 407.6). Cf. S. al-rjakïm, al-Mitjam al-sùfi (Beirut: Dandala,
1981), pp. 191-96.

54

THE MUSLIM WORLD

corporeal bodies (al-ajsäm), which are tenebrous, compound, and multiple. In
the microcosm imagination corresponds to the animate soul (al-nafs al·
hayawàriï), which acts as an intermediary between the body and the disengaged
spirit, which was breathed into the human reality by God (S. 15:29; 38:72).9
The characteristic activity of imagination is to embody (tajsid) that which is
disembodied and to spiritualize (tarawfyun) or sublimate (talfij) that which is
corporeal. Its intermediate status means that everything that leaves the unseen
world for the visible world, or the visible world for the unseen, must first be
imaginalized. Thus, for example, the angels appear to human beings in imaginai
form, and revelation is first imaginalized before it takes the sensory form of a
scripture. Likewise the visions of spiritual things experienced by the saints take
place in the imaginai world; relatively few of them are able to leave imagination
behind and enter into the realm of disengaged spirits and purely intelligible
meanings (al-mdäni al-méqûla).
The vast majority of people experience the reality of imagination most directly
in dreams. For, says Ibn al-c Arabi, "God placed dreams in the animate world so
that all men might witness the World of Imagination and know that there exists
another world, similar to the sensory world" (HI 198.23).10 In dreams "Meanings
are transferred from their state of disengagement from material substrata
(mawädd) into the clothing of material substrata" (II 379.24).
The traditional basis for establishing a connection between dreams and
disengaged meanings lies in Qur'anic references to Joseph's ability to interpret
dreams (S 12:144, 100) and the many ahädith which demonstrate that the
Prophet used to exercise this power. Ibn al-c Arabi is particularly fond of
referring to a badith found in al-Bukhän:
"In a dream I was given a cup of milk, so I drank it until I saw that even
my fingertips were quenched. Then I gave the rest to cUmar."
The Prophet was asked, "How do you interpret it, oh Messenger of
God?"
He replied, "Knowledge."
Here, says Ibn al-c Arabi, a disengaged meaning has assumed an appropriate
form and become embodied within the world of imagination.11 Ibn al-c Arabi
also likes to refer to the Prophet's saying, "I [dreamed that I] saw my Lord in
the form of a youth." For, Ibn al-c Arabi says, "The dreamer sees meanings in
the form of sensory objects, since the reality of imagination is to embody that
which is not properly a body" (II 379.3).
If on the one hand Ibn al-c Arabi employs the term imagination to refer to the
isthmus between the spiritual and corporeal worlds, on the other he uses it to

9

On the ontological status of imagination in the context of both the macrocosm and the
microcosm as discussed by Ibn al-cArabfs immediate followers, see William Chittick, "The Five
Divine Presences From al-Qünawi to al-Qaysari," MW, LXXII (1982), 107-28
10
Cf II 378 24
11
II 311 14

DEATH AND THE WORLD OF IMAGINATION

55

describe the whole of created reality, which is an isthmus between Being and
nonexistence. In a well-known poem in the Fu$ù$ he writes,
Engendered existence (al-kawn) is nothing but imagination, though in
reality it is Truth (fraqq).
Whoever understands this has grasped the mysteries of the Path.12
The term "engendered existence" is synonymous with the "cosmos" (al·
älam), which is defined as "everything other than God" (mä siwä Allah). The
first line of the poem (which paraphrases the shahäda: "There is no god but
God") affirms that everything other than God is unreal or "imaginai"; but, to the
extent that things do possess some reality—otherwise we could not speak of
them—they derive from God. So imagination is the self-manifestation of the
Real. The whole mystery of existence lies in the fact that the cosmos is both real
and unreal at the same time; the spiritual traveler's task is to discern between
these two dimensions and pass by way of the relatively real side of the cosmos to
the absolutely Real.
c

The reality of imagination is transmutation (tabaddul) in every state and
manifestation (zuhùr) in every form. There is no true being which does not
accept transmutation except God; so there is nothing that possesses Real
Being (al-wujûd al-muhaqqaq) except God. As for that which is other than
God, that is imaginai existence. So when God manifests Himself within
this imaginai existence, He only appears in keeping with its reality, not in
His Essence (dhat), which possesses true Being. . . .13 This is what is meant
by God's words, "Everything is perishing except His Face" (S. 28:88), i.e.,
except His Essence, since no state in the cosmos continues to endure,

12
Fusûs al-hikam, ed. A. c Afìfì (Beirut: Dar al-Kitäb al-c Arabi, 1946), p. 146; cf. Ibn at Arabi: The
Bezels of Wisdom, tr. R.W.J. Austin (New York: Paulist Press, 1980), p. 197.
13
The "reality" {haqiqa) of imaginai existence refers to its delimited nature, or its inability to
manifest Nondelimited Being as such. "Anything other than God" is delimited by its own reality or
quiddity (mähiyya), i.e., that which defines it as "other." God alone has no "reality" if by that we
mean delimitation and definition; hence God's "Reality" is Being as such, pure Nondelimitation
(al-lä tdayyun). In this sense haqiqa is synonomous with cayn or "entity." Each individual thing or
entity is a delimitation or restriction of Being, a darkening of the Absolute Light; the infinite
possibilities of delimitation possessed by Nondelimitation are known as the "immutable" or "fixed"
entities {al-dyân al-thäbita); they are fixed for all eternity since they express the very nature of God's
Reality, or since they are the eternal objects {al-mdlûmât) of the Divine Knowledge. So an entity in
this sense is a thing, delimited by definition, whether we conceive of it within God's Knowledge—and
therefore "nonexistent" (mddùm) with relation to the cosmos—or "existent" (mawjüd) at a level
appropriate to its own nature. Nevertheless its existence belongs only to God, who alone is; the thing
is but a restriction imposed upon Nondelimited Being by Its own radiation; or by the fact that
Being's infinity allows It to assume every form while It remains eternally transcendent in Itself. The
term "entity" can also refer to the "Reality" of God, but then it is equivalent to Nondelimited Being
or the Essence (al-dhât). Cf. William Chittick, "Sadr al-Dïn Qùnawî on the Oneness of Being,"
International Philosophical Quarterly, XXI (1981), 171-84; cf. Chittick and P.L. Wilson,
Fakhruddin 'Iraqi: Divine Flashes (New York: Paulist Press, 1982), pp. 3-17.

56

THE MUSLIM WORLD
whether it be engendered or divine. . . . Hence, everything but God's
Essence undergoes transformation (istihäla), rapid or slow; everything but
God's Essence is intervening imagination and vanishing shadow. Therefore
no engendered existent in this world, in the next, and in whatsoever is
between them, neither spirit, nor soul, nor anything other than God's
Essence, remains in a single state; on the contrary, it is transmuted from
one form to another constantly and forever: imagination is nothing but
this. (II313.12)14

When defined as "everything other than God" imagination is also called by
other names, well-known to those familiar with Ibn al-cArabï's teachings.
Perhaps the most famous is the "Breath of the All-Merciful" (nafas al-rahmän),
the exhalation of God within which all created beings take shape, just as words
take shape within human breath. This in turn is identified with the Cloud (al·
c
amä) within which was God—according to the Prophet—"before" He created
the creatures.15
The cosmos in the state of its existence is nothing but the forms that are
received by the Cloud and that become manifest within it. So if you look
at the reality of the cosmos, you will see it as a vanishing accident. . . ,
while the fixed substance is the Cloud, which is none other than the Breath
of the All-Merciful. All the forms that become manifest in the cosmos are
accidents within the cosmos and may vanish; they are the possible existents
(al-mumkinät) and are related to the Cloud as forms are related to a
mirror [within which they appear]. (Ill 443.8)16
Imagination employed as a synonym for the Cloud or for the Breath of the
All-Merciful is described as being "nondelimited" (mutlaq), since, as the infinite
Self-manifestation of God, it can act as a receptacle for any form whatsoever. In
contrast the particular ontological realm within the cosmos which is also known
as "imagination" and which acts as an isthmus between the spiritual world and
the corporeal bodies is described as "discontiguous" (munfaçil); it in turn is
contrasted with "contiguous (mutta$it) imagination," that is, the microcosmic
imagination of "animal man" (al-insän al-hayawäm), the individual who has not
attained to the spiritual degrees of the saints and the Perfect Man (al-insän
al-kämil)}1 Imagination is discontiguous if it is independent of the subject that

14
Cf Fusûs al-hikam "The cosmos is fantasy, it has no real existence, this is the meaning of
'imagination' you have been made to imagine that it is something superadded to God, subsisting m
itself But this in fact is not the case
Since the situation is as we have described it, you should
know that you are imagination and everything that you perceive—saying, This is not Γ—is
imagination So all of existence is imagination within imagination, while True Being belongs to God
alone," pp 103-104 Cf Austin's rendering, Ibn af Arabi, pp 124-25, and ‘ Izutsu, Sufìsm and
Taoism (Tokyo Iwanami Shoten, 1983), Ò 7
15
Cf William Chittick, "The Words of the All-Merciful," Parabola, VIII, 3 (1983), 18-25
16
Cf Corbm, Creative Imagination, pp 184-90
17
Cf II310ff

DEATH AND THE WORLD OF IMAGINATION

57

perceives it, "contiguous" if it depends upon the individual mind. Hence,
The contiguous kind disappears with the disappearance of the imaginer,
while the discontiguous kind is an essential ontological level, forever
receptive toward meanings and spirits, which it embodies through its
intrinsic nature. (II 311.19)18
To the extent that it is perceived by man, discontiguous imagination comes from
"outside" (min khärij). "It is an independent and integral ontological level made
up of embodied forms that are put on like clothing by meanings and spirits" (II
296.19).
God brings the three worlds—the spiritual, imaginai, and corporeal—into
existence within the Breath of the All-Merciful or nondelimited imagination,
which, acting as an isthmus between the Light of Being and the darkness of
nonexistence, manifests the properties of both sides. The macrocosm in turn
reflects these three primordial states—Being, imagination, and nonexistence—in
its three ontological levels: the spiritual world manifests the Light of Being, the
corporeal world displays the darkness of nonexistence, and the imaginai world
embraces the properties of both. Just as discontiguous imagination is an isthmus
between the spiritual and corporeal worlds, so nondelimited imagination is the
"Supreme Isthmus" (al-barzakh al-dlä) or the "Isthmus of Isthmuses," for "It
possesses a face turned toward Being and a face turned toward nonexistence"
(III 46.31).
Figure 1 illustrates the above scheme: The circle represents nondelimited
imagination, "everything other than God's Essence." Nonexistence describes the
state of the things (al-ashyä,) or entities (al-dyän) of the cosmos before God
brings them into existence. Strictly speaking, however, the entities remain
forever nonexistent, since Being belongs to God alone; what appears within the
Breath of the All-Merciful is their properties (ahtkäm) or effects (äthär), which
are neither existent like God nor nonexistent like the entities in themselves. "The
Entity of God is described by existence, while the properties of the entities of the
cosmos become manifest within this Entity; or, It becomes manifest through
them" (III 107.28). That which exists is Being alone; if the delimitations of
Being—the entities—possess specific attributes and characteristics, this is
precisely because of their nonexistence and their consequent negation of
Nondelimited Being.19

18
19

Cf. Ill 442.4.
See note 13 and the sources mentioned there; also Izutsu, Sufism and Taoism, pp. 160-61.

58

THE MUSLIM WORLD
NONDELIMITED BEING
(God in Himself, the Essence)

Spirits

Discontiguous Imagination
Corporeal
Bodies

NONEXISTENCE
(the cosmos in itself)
Figure 1 The Cosmos as Nondelimited Imagination, "The Breath of the
All-Merciful"
Concerning the ontological role of both nondelimited and discontiguous
imagination, Ibn al-c Arabi likes to quote the Qur'anic verse, "God let forth the
two seas that meet together, between them an isthmus they do not overpass"
(S 55 20) "If it were not for the isthmus," says Ibn al-c Arabi, "the two seas
would not become distinct" (III 47 26) These "two seas" are Being and
nonexistence, or the spiritual world and the corporeal world, depending on how
the verse needs to be applied m a given context
As for contiguous imagination, it reflects discontiguous imagination at the
level of the microcosm As was pointed out, the clearest access man has to
contiguous imagination is through his dreams And since dreams are the
imagination of the microcosm, it is not surprising to find Ibn al-c Arabi calling
the cosmos—nondelimited imagination—the dream of God
In reality, in respect of God's Name the Inward, the forms of the cosmos
are related to Him like the forms of a dream to a dreamer The
"interpretation" (tcfbir) of His dream is that these forms are His states
(ahwäl), so they are not other than He, just as the forms of a dream are the
states of the dreamer, nothing else—he sees only himself (II 380 4)20
Nondelimited imagination is infinitely vast, for it is the cosmos itself,
everything "other than God" "It is the vastest of engendered beings, the most
perfect of existents" (II 311 3) Even at the delimited level, that is in its

20
The cosmos as a dream that must be interpreted is an important theme of Ibn al-c Arabi's Fusus,
especially chapter 9 Cf Izutsu, Sufism and Taoism chap 1, Corbin, Creative Imagination ρ 242

DEATH AND THE WORLD OF IMAGINATION

59

discontiguous and contiguous forms, imagination can encompass all things in a
certain manner. Pointing to the skeptical views of rational thinkers when
presented with a description of imagination's qualities, Ibn al-c Arabi states that
even their ability to "suppose the impossible" (far4 al-mufyal) for the sake of an
argument depends upon imagination. "If the impossible did not receive existence
at some level or another, it could not be supposed" (II 312.20).
Nothing is vaster [than imagination], since, in its very reality, it governs
all things and non-things. It gives form to sheer nonexistence, to the
impossible, to Necessity, and to possibility. It makes existence nonexistent
and nonexistence existent. (I 306.6; 4, 417.1).
Having already heard that imagination is characteristically "neither this nor
that," we should not now be surprised to be told that imagination is not only
infinitely vast, it is also exceedingly narrow.
For imagination is not able to receive anything except as a form,
whether it be something pertaining to the sensory or spiritual levels, or a
relation, or an attribution, or God's Majesty, or His Essence. Were
imagination to attempt to perceive something without a form, its own
reality would not allow it to do so. . . . It ^ n n o t in any way disengage
meanings from material substrata. . . . Hence imagination is the vastest
thing that can be known; yet, in spite of this amplitude, which allows it to
be exercised over all things, it is unable to receive meanings as they are in
themselves, disengaged from material substrata. Hence [and here Ibn alc
Arabi refers to a series of fradith] it perceives knowledge in the form of
milk, honey, wine, or a pearl; it sees Islam as a dome or a pillar; it sees the
QurDän in the form of butter and honey; it sees a debt in the form of a
fetter; it sees God in the form of a human being or a light. Thus it is vast
and narrow, while God Himself is only vast. (I 306.13; 4, 418.3)
The Isthmus after Death
The Qur'än and the Hadith provide graphic descriptions of life after death,
the terrors of the Day of Resurrection, the torments of hell, and the joys of
Paradise. In general, the Islamic philosophers, while affirming the survival of the
soul in some mode or another, allegorized the text of the revelation, while the
theologians adamantly insisted on its literal accuracy—although many of them
felt it necessary to interpret those verses that suggested "Similarity" between
God and the creatures. Al-Ghazäli had already shown that both the
philosophers and theologians were correct in their own ways, though neither
group was able to grasp the full import of the eschatological data. He suggested
that imagination and the world of dreams provided the key to understanding.21
Ibn al-c Arabi expands on al-Ghazàli's suggestions in voluminous detail.
21

Cf. Chittick, "Eschatology.

60

THE MUSLIM WORLD

The existence of the "Isthmus" in the eschatological sense, that is, the period
between death and resurrection, is clearly established by the Hadith literature,
according to the Qur'än commentators, it is the object of reference in the verse,
"Beyond them is an Isthmus until the day they are raised up" (S 23 100) A
connection between the Isthmus and imagination is also well attested in the early
sources, especially when they are read with the hindsight of later thinkers The
Qur'an establishes a clear relationship between sleep and death (S 39 42), while
the Prophet called sleep "death's brother " It was only a short step from such
traditional data to the suggestion that the perceptions that take place during
dreams are somehow comparable to those of a dead man Moreover, many of
the descriptions of after-death experience provided by the ahädith are totally
explicit in speaking of the "embodiment" of works and of meanings For
example, the ahädith mention that negligent prayers will be rolled up like
shabby clothes and thrown in the sinner's face, good deeds will appear as lovely
people and evil deeds as ugly old hags, evil works will turn into dogs or pigs 22
By Ibn al-cArabi's time the imaginai nature of experiences in the Isthmus had
long been accepted by many philosophers, theologians, and Sufis, his task was
only to explain how this took place within the context of his own metaphysical
and cosmological teachings
As a microcosm, a human being contains the three created worlds spiritual,
imaginai, and corporeal His spirit derives from the Divine Breath, while his
body is made of dust, his soul (nafs), which is neither body nor spirit, dwells at
the intermediary level of imagination The soul is one like the spirit, yet it is
many like the body through its faculties Like imagination its nature is
ambiguous and not easily susceptible of definition This is all the more true since
several kinds of soul can be distinguished, depending upon the level of moral
and spiritual maturity The Qur'än speaks of the "soul that commands to evil"
(S 12 53), the "soul that blames" (S 76 2) itself for its own shortcomings, and
"the soul at peace" (S 89 27) with God, the Sufis have normally perceived these
as three levels of the soul's development The important point here is that the
reality that must be reformed and perfected is referred to as the soul, the "spirit"
is disengaged from outward manifestation, since it is the breath of God
In this scheme the function of the body is to provide a locus where the soul
can develop and expand as an isthmus between pure corporeality and pure
spirituality Without the body, the Divine Spirit could not manifest itself in the
form of a particular human individual Ibn al-c Arabi compares the One Spirit of
God to the sun, and the individual spirits to sunlight entering the windows of
houses He explains that God's wisdom requires these individual lights to
continue in existence, so He created for them bodies at every stage of their
development, including the Isthmus after death
Since God wants those lights to preserve the distinctness they have

22

Cf al-Ghazah, The Precious Pearl (al-Durra al-Fakhira), tr J I Smith (Missoula Scholar's
Press, 1981) pp 30 34, 36 49, 50, 53, 60, 87, Tabnzi Mishkat al-masabih, tr J Robson (Lahore,
M Ashraf, 1963-65) pp 340 448-49 490-91 1176

DEATH AND THE WORLD OF IMAGINATION

61

received, He creates for them Isthmus bodies, within which these spirits
remain distinct when they leave their this-worldly bodies in sleep or after
death. . . . They never cease to be distinct for all eternity; they never return
to their original state of being one entity. (Ill 188.1).
All the experiences of the grave that are dealt with in such detail in the Hadith
take place while the human spirit is connected to the imaginai body in the
Isthmus. In a long passage that throws a good deal of light on how he
understands such experiences, Ibn al-c Arabi describes twelve forms that may be
seen by the saints when they depart from their corporeal bodies at death; these
include works, knowledge, beliefs, station, state, angels, a Divine Name related
to God's Acts, a Name of the Attributes, a Name of the Descriptions (al-mfut),
a Name of Incomparability, and a Name of the Essence. Naturally enough in the
context, these forms appear in images that provide a foretaste of Paradise, not
of hell. Ibn al-c Arabi states that each of the twelve categories of form represents
an experience of "meanings," for, in the Isthmus, "meanings become embodied
and manifested in shapes and sizes, so they take upon forms" (II 295.30). Three
examples can suffice to demonstrate the tenor of this passage.
On the subject of works, Ibn al-c Arabi assumes that his readers are familiar
with the hadith, "He who has died has experienced h;* resurrection" (that is, the
"lesser resurrection," al-qiyamat al-fughrä), since he quotes a number of fcadith
about the resurrection to illustrate the embodiment of works. He also mentions
the Qur'anic verse, "But as for those who are niggardly with the bounty God has
given them. . . , what they were niggardly with will be hung around their necks
on the Day of Resurrection" (S. 3:180).
As for knowledge, Ibn al-c Arabi states that the dead man's knowledge of God
may be one of two kinds, rational or "unveiled" Can kashf). Then he explains
that
The self-revelation of the form of "unveiling" is more complete and more
beautiful [than that which derives from rational knowledge], since
unveiling and its attainment are the results of godfearingness and righteous
works; it is referred to in God's words, "Fear God, and God will teach
you" (S. 2:282). The saint's knowledge will become manifested to him at
death in a beautiful form or as a light which he wears and enjoys. (II
296.10)
Ibn al-c Arabi describes the appearance of the "form of a prophet" in
interesting detail. Note that he is alluding to his own teaching, which helps
structure the Futuhät and more particularly the Fu$ü$ al-fyikam, that the
Muslim saints "inherit" their sciences, states, and stations not only from the
prophet Muhammad but also from other prophets. Thus an individual saint will
have a spiritual connection to one of the pre-Islamic prophets in addition to his
connection to Muhammad.23
23

Ibn al-c Arabi maintains that after his own time, no Muslim saint will inherit directly from the
Prophet Muhammad, since such a state of perfection will no longer be attainable; instead, the saints

62

THE MUSLIM WORLD
Sometimes the prophet from whom the saint has inherited will appear in
self-manifestation, for [as the Prophet Muhammad said], "The men of
knowledge are the heirs to the prophets." Hence at death he will see Jesus,
or Moses, or Abraham, or some other prophet. Some of the saints may
pronounce the name of that prophet in joy when he comes to them, for the
messengers are all among the felicitous. So at death a saint will say
"Jesus," or he will call him "Messiah," as God Himself has done—this is
what usually happens. Those present will hear him speak words of this sort
and become suspicious, saying that at death he became a Christian and left
Islam. Or the saint will mention Moses or one of the Israelite prophets,
and they will say that he became a Jew. But he is one of the greatest
possessors of felicity in God's eyes, for the common people never know this
vision, only the Men of God, the possessors of unveilings. (II 296.27)

These few examples illustrate the general principle that man's situation within
the imaginai existence of the Isthmus is determined totally by his life in this
world; human life is the process of shaping the soul, which, as was said above,
came into existence when God breathed the spirit into the body. The soul, as an
isthmus between spirit and body, grows and develops in accordance with the
relationship it establishes between these two. No doubt there is a certain natural
development that is especially obvious in the early stages, that is, during infancy
and childhood. But even here "environment" plays an important role in
determining how the soul will grow. Witness the famous prophetic saying,
"Every child is born in the primordial [human] nature (al-fitra), then its parents
make it into a Christian, a Jew, or a Zoroastrian." Islam makes the practice of
religion incumbent from the age of puberty, when the intellect (al-aqï)—the
soul's power of discernment between true and false, real and unreal—begins to
manifest itself. From this point on, man assumes responsibility for his own
development. To the extent that he follows the "Balance of the Law" (rrìizàn
al-shar*; III 239.6) that is, the guidelines for moral, spiritual, and intellectual
development revealed through the Qur 3an and the Hadith—he will develop in
harmony with the Divine Form upon which he was originally created (for, in the
words of the Prophet, "God created man upon His own Form").
As the Balance of the Law gradually brings man's soul· into equilibrium (alf tidal) and integrates it into its proper relationship between spirit and body,
man develops in an "ascending" direction. In other words, the Divine Spirit that
was breathed into the body molds the soul in keeping with its own intrinsic
attributes, such as luminosity and knowledge. Without the Balance, man falls
away from the vertical axis and sinks down to the "lowest of the low" (S. 95:5)—

will inherit directly from other prophets and only indirectly from Muhammad This is the meaning
of Ibn al-c Arabfs famous doctrine concerning the "Seal of Sanctity" (khâtam al-walàya), by which
he means the Seal of Muhammadan Sanctity (a station which he apparently claimed for himself,
though his writings leave some ambiguity) Sanctity as such will not come to an end until the second
coming of Christ, who will be the Seal of Universal Sanctity Cf I, 184-185 (3, 174-177), 244 26 (4,
714), 318-319(5, 68-70), 11,41 10,49 14,50 11, 111,400 11,514 11, IV, 77 20

DEATH AND THE WORLD OF IMAGINATION

63

being totally dominated by bodily attributes such as darkness and ignorance—or
he strays into horizontal dispersion. In moral terminology the attributes which
tend in a downward direction are known as "predatory" (sabcT), while those
which bring about dispersion are known as "bestial" (bahiml).24 The Quinan
refers to all three tendencies—ascending, descending, and dispersive—in the
Fätiha (S. 1:5-7), recited by Muslims during every cycle of the canonical prayer:
"Guide us on the straight [= ascending] path, the path of those whom Thou hast
blessed, not the path of those against whom Thou art wrathful,25 nor of those
who are astray." The Straight Path is that of ascent and integration; through it
the soul attains to the perfections pertaining to its prototype, the Divine Form.
This path leads to felicity, whereas the other paths lead to suffering and torment.
Complete souls are those which profess God's unity and have faith; the
profession of unity (al-tawhld) and faith (alAmäri) prevent them from
becoming the locus of pain (al-alam) and chastisement (al-cadhäb). (Ill
175.21)
In short, life is a process through which a human being shapes his own soul;
in death, when the body is discarded, the soul becomes embodied in an imaginai
form appropriate to its own attributes; likewise, all its works, character traits,
knowledge, and aspirations appear to it in appropriate forms. "In the Isthmus
every human being is a pawn to what he has earned, imprisoned in the forms of
his works" (I 307.22; 4, 425.4).
The factor that sets the "two weighty creatures" (al-thaqalan, human beings
and jinn) apart from all others is precisely this development which they undergo
during their span of existence in this world. Ibn al-c Arabi quotes the words of
the angels in the Qur'än: "None of us there is but has a known station" (S.
37:164). Then he points out that all creatures except men and jinn share with the
angels in this attribute; moreover, after death, men and jinn will join their
ranks.26
The angels say, "None of us there is but has a known station." This is
the same with every existent, except the two weighty creatures, even though
they also are created within their own station. For within God's knowledge
they possess definite and determined stations which are hidden from them;
each person reaches his station with his last breath. So his last breath is his
known station, and upon it he dies. Hence the jinn and men were called to

24

Cf. Ibn al-c Arabi's discussion of the "sensual" or "concupiscent" soul (al-nafs al-shahawaniyya)
and the "irascible" soul (al-nafs al-ghaaObiyya), III, 237; both of these are contrasted with the
"rational soul" (al-nafs al~nà\iqd), which in essence is identical with the Divine Spirit. Cf. alGhazälfs division of the soul into four powers: rational, sensual, irascible, and satanic (R.J.
McCarthy, Freedom and Fulfillment [Boston: Twayne, 1980], p. 377).
25
The connection between Wrath (ghatfab) and the faculty of "irascibility" which goes by the same
name (al-quwwat al-ghacjabiyya) is not fortuitous.
26
On human perfectability in the eschatological context, see Chittick's "Eschatology" and
"Rumi's View."

64

THE MUSLIM WORLD
travel, and so they travel either upwards by answering the call of the Law,
or downwards, by answering the call of the Divine Will—but of this they
know nothing until after the Will's object is accomplished27 Every
individual human being and jinn ends his travel at the known station
which was created for him "Some of them shall be wretched and some
felicitous" (S 11 105) Every other creature is created in his station, so he
does not descend from it, nor is he commanded to travel to it, since he is
already there, this applies to angels, animals, plants, and minerals, all of
whom are felicitous with God no wretchedness can reach them (I 258 35,
4, 147 4)

When the soul enters the Isthmus after death, it gains a much clearer vision of
its own situation and understands that the body it has discarded was but a veil
Speaking of death, the Qur'än says "We have removed from you your covering,
so your sight today is piercing" (S 50 22) In this context Ibn al-c Arabi likes to
quote the famous saying of the Prophet "Men are asleep, but when they die
they wake up " However, the awakening through death is only the first
awakening, at the resurrection, man wakes up once more
Your awakening through death is like someone who dreams that he
wakes up In the midst of his dream he says, "I dreamed this and that,"
and he supposes that he is awake (II 313 6)
The period in the Isthmus prepares man for resurrection, just as the world
prepared him for death
In relation to the next world, the period m the Isthmus is like the period
that the embryo remains m its mother's womb God makes a person
undergo constant development, he keeps on developing until he is born on
the Day of Resurrection (III 250 19)
To ask why man dwells in the Isthmus before he is resurrected is like asking
why he is born and why he dies The answer is, in short, that this is the destiny
of the human soul, or that this is the law of creation God breathed the spirit
into the body, and from that point on the soul develops, even before that, at the
Covenant of Alastu (cf S 7 172), the spirits of Adam's children acknowledged
the sovereignty of their Lord and promised to observe their duties toward Him
27
In other words, they will gam no reward for following the Divine Will, since, as the Prophet
said, "Works will be judged by their intentions " They thought they were following some limited
goal and had no idea they were being "pulled by the forelock" (cf S 11 56 and Fusús, chap 10)
Only those who follow the commands of God as revealed by religion will ascend toward unity and
integration On the difference between the "engendering command" (al-amr al-takwinl) and the
"prescriptive command" (al-amr al-taklifi), see Chittick and Wilson, Fakhruddin 'Iraqi, pp 149-50
and 155-58, cf Chittick, "Ibn 'Arabi's own Summary of the Fusús" Journal of the Muhyiddin Ibn
* Arabi Society, I (1982), 56-58 See also Austin's remarks on the difference between the Divine Wish
(prescriptive command) and the Divine Will (engendering command), Ibn at Arabi, pp 31, 11 iff, et
passim

DEATH AND THE WORLD OF IMAGINATION

65

When God brought the human spirit into existence, He did so such that
it governs a natural, sensory form, whether in this world, in the Isthmus, in
the next world, or wherever. The first form in which it was clothed was the
form it wore when it acknowledged God's lordship at the Covenant. Then
it was gathered (htashr) from that form into its this-worldly, corporeal
form; it remains imprisoned within it from the fourth month of its
mother's pregnancy28 to the hour of its death. When the person dies, he is
gathered into another form from the time of death to the time of the
questioning [in the grave by the two angels]. . . . Then he is gathered to
another form in the Isthmus; or rather, his form is the Isthmus itself—in
this sleep and death are equivalent. Then he is held fast in the Isthmus
until the Trumpet sounds at the resurrection. (II 627.27)
During and after the resurrection, the soul undergoes further transformations,
until it takes its place in the Garden or the Fire. But even at these stages, it is not
attached to a fixed form in the sense that it possessed a corporeal body in this
world. To clarify this point we need to look more closely at the ontological
situation of the resurrection.
The Next World
The "Isthmus" is called by this name because it is an intermediate stage of
existence between this world (al-dunya) and the next world (al-äkhiraf9 and
because it is connected to the discontiguous world of imagination, though not
synonymous with it in every respect.30 It is not easy to discern the exact
difference between the Isthmus and the next world from Ibn al-c Arabi's writings.
In some passages he makes a clear distinction between the two. For example, he
writes that, in contrast to the Isthmus, the next world is "sensory (mahsüs) and
non-imaginal (ghayr khayâlï), for the resurrection is something real (muhtaqqaq),

28
The afrädith specify that the spirit is breathed into the body at this time; this fact has important
social consequences. Cf. Β.F. Musallam, Sex and Society in Islam (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1983).
29
However, the concept of isthmus is rather fluid; as Ibn al-'Arabi explains, "The resurrection
itself is an isthmus; nothing exists except isthmuses, since an isthmus is that which joins two things"
(HI 156.27). Moreover, Ibn al-'Arabi does not always speak about the Isthmus after death by
contrasting it with this world and the next; for example, he refers to it as "the first way-station
(manzil) of the next world" (IV 282.13).
30
The World of Imagination "follows" this world since everything that leaves this world enters
into it; in this respect it is identical with the Isthmus after death. But the World of Imagination also
"precedes" this world, and in this respect it is distinct from the Isthmus. Cf. Ibn al-'Arabi's
distinction between the "possible unseen" (al-ghayb al-imkànì) and the "impossible unseen" (alghayb al-muhâfi), III 78.23-30. In other terms, within the Circle of Being (dffirat al-wujùd) this
world marks the termination of the "Arc of Descent" (qaws al-nuzùl) and the beginning of the "Arc
of Ascent" (qaws al-sdüd); the World of Imagination plays a role on both arcs, but the Isthmus
pertains only to the Arc of Ascent. Cf. William Chittick, "The Circle of Spiritual Ascent according
to al-Qunawi," in P. Morewedge, ed., Neoplatonism and Islam (Albany: State University of New
York Press, forthcoming).

66

THE MUSLIM WORLD

existent (mawjûd), and sensory (frissi), similar to what man experiences in this
world" (I 311.20; 4, 447.9). Elsewhere he interprets a Quranic verse in a similar
vein: The people of Pharoah "will be exposed to the Fire, morning and evening;
and on the day when the Hour has come: 'Admit the people of Pharoah into the
most terrible chastisement'" (S. 40:45-46). The exposure to the Fire mentioned
here refers to the period in the Isthmus, when the people of Pharoah will be
tormented at the imaginai level; but in the next world they will be admitted to
the sensory fire of hell.31
These passages suggest that the basic difference between the Isthmus and the
next world lies in the distinction between imaginai and sensory existence; yet
imagination is by definition sensory, as was made clear earliej*: this is precisely
the reason for its "extreme narrowness" in spite of its infinite amplitude. Part of
the solution to this problem may lie in a distinction that Ibn al-c Arabi makes
(see below) between the ontological status of the Garden and the Fire, the latter
being more "solidified" than the former. Moreover, just as the Isthmus is an
awakening in relation to the sleep of this world, so the resurrection is an
awakening in relation to the Isthmus. Even if both pertain to imaginai existence,
the resurrection is more real; certainly the World of Imagination is broad
enough to embrace different levels of reality, as is clear, for instance, in the
distinction between its discontiguous and contiguous realms.
In any case, Ibn al-c Arabi makes clear that the "body" that is resurrected in
the next world is not similar to the this-worldly body in every respect:
Although the substances (al-jawähir) are exactly the same—for it is they
which are poured forth from the graves and raised up (cf. S. 100:9; 35:9)
the composition and constitution differ because of accidents and attributes
that are proper to the next abode, but not to this. (I 207.13; 3, 284.4)
One similarity between the next world and the Isthmus is the fact that in both
abodes the realities of things shine forth more clearly than they do in this world.
As Ibn al-c Arabi expresses the situation on the Day of Resurrection,
God will come in order to decide and to judge; so He will only come
under [the guise of] His Name, "Light." The earth will be made radiant
with the light of its Lord, and through that light every "soul will know its
works, the former and the latter" (S. 82:5), for it will find them present,
unveiled by that light. (II 485.32)
One of the results of the vision of things under the radiance of the eternal light
will be that everything is known for what it is; intentions and motivations can no
longer be dissimulated. Thus, says Ibn al-cArabi, in the next world human
beings will be ranked
according to the measure of their states in this world. He who was a
perfect slave in this world will be a perfect king in the next world. He who
31

I 299.9 (4, 378.9); 307.17 (4, 424.7).

DEATH AND THE WORLD OF IMAGINATION

67

possessed the attribute of ownership in this world—even if only [.in the
sense that he considered] his bodily organs his own property—will have his
domain in the next world decreased precisely in the measure that it was
expanded in this world. . . . So there is none mightier in the next world
than he who, in this world, reached the extremity of abasement (al-dhull)
in relation to God and the Truth; and there is none more abased in the
next world than he who reached the extremity of mightiness (al-cizza) in
his own soul in this world, even if he was nothing here but a buffoon. I do
not mean by "mightiness in this world" that a person should have been a
king: only that the attribute of his soul should be mightiness; and the same
goes for abasement. Even if, in his outward situation, he should have been
a king or something else, the station or state in which God places His
servant in relation to outward things is of no concern. The only thing that
can be taken into account is the state of his soul. (I 221.18; 3, 350.14)
Ibn al-c Arabi holds that a person's outward situation at the Resurrection and
what follows depends totally upon what he has made of himself in this world.
Although this remark can also be made concerning the Isthmus, a fundamental
difference lies in the fact that—as was pointed out—the Isthmus in relation to
the next world is like a dream, just as this world is a dream in relation to the
Isthmus. So much does the "outward" (al-zähir) of the next world depend upon
the "inward" (al-bä(in) of this world that the ontological situations of the two
abodes are in a sense reversed, and this represents one of the primary differences
between "sensory" experience in this world and the next.
Any question of a relationship between the outward and the inward—at any
ontological level—will have to be taken back to the relationship between the
Divine Names "Outward" and "Inward." As the Inward, God—or Nondelimited
Being (al-wujüd al-mutlaq)—is the Essence or Ipseity (huwiyya), while as the
Outward He is the existence within which the possible existents appear, just as
colors appear within light. So existence belongs only to God, not to the entities
(al-cfyän) or possible existents (al-mumkinät) that seem to possess some sort of
independent existence. Hence, says Ibn al-c Arabi,
God is the Outward in respect to the loci of outward manifestation (almazähir = the possible existents), but the Inward in respect to the Ipseity.
The loci of outward manifestation are multiple in respect to their own
entities,32 not in respect to that which is Outward within them; so Unity
derives from their outwardness, multiplicity from their entities. (II 93.35)
Elsewhere Ibn al-c Arabi explicitly identifies the Cloud with "the Outward of
God referred to in the Quranic verse, 'He is the First and the Last, the Outward
32
That is, the immutable entities, which are the objects of God's Knowledge but have no existence
of their own. See note 13; also William Chittick, "Ibn al-'Arabi and his School," in Islamic
Spirituality, II (vol. 20 of World Spirituality), forthcoming, where—in keeping with al-Farghâni's
formulation—the "Manyness of Knowledge" (kathrat al-ihn) is contrasted with the "Oneness of
Being" (wahdat al-wujüd). Cf. al-MU jam al-sùfi under al-zähir.

68

THE MUSLIM WORLD

and the Inward' (S. 57:3)" (II 310.13). Hence the "Outward" is identical with
nondelimited imagination to the extent that the latter represents God's Selfmanifestation, but not in the respect that it appears as "other than God." "God
is both the Outward witnessed by the eyes and the Inward witnessed by the
intellect . . .; however, the fact that a person witnesses God does not mean that
he must be aware that He is the object" (III 484.35).
God's Self-manifestation in imaginai forms is seen clearly at the Resurrection.
To illustrate this, Ibn al-c Arabi often refers to a long hadith found in Muslim.
God will reveal Himself to the various groups of people gathered at the
resurrection in a variety of forms. In each form "He will say to them, ∫ am your
Lord,' and they will reply, 'We seek refuge from you in God."' Finally God will
say to them, "Is there a sign between you and your Lord through which you will
recognize Him?" They will reply in the affirmative, and God will transmute
(tahawwul) Himself into the form by which they recognize Him.33
God's Outward—the One Being manifested within the multiple entities—
undergoes constant transformation not only at the resurrection, but also in this
world, where all things are continuously transformed by the "renewal of creation
at each instant."34 Ibn al-c Arabi sees a reference to this constant renewal in the
Quranic verse, "Each day God is upon a [different] business (shcfn)" (S. 55:29).
God's "day," he says, is the "indivisible instant" (al-zaman al-fard)?5
Since human beings were created "upon the Form of God," they manifest
both the Outward and the Inward. What is important to realize is that in Ibn
al-c Arabi's view, the human manifestation of God follows what has been called
the "law of inverse analogy"; in other words, there will be a reverse relationship
between the two Names, since man is God's mirror image. "The mirror is the
Presence [= ontological level] of Possible Existence (al-imkän), the viewer is
God, and the form reflected within is you" (III 80.17).36 Hence man's outward
reflects God's Inward, his inward God's Outward.
The Prophet said, "God created man upon His own Form." Man
undergoes variegation (tanawwif) in his inward, while he is fixed (thubût)
in his outward. No organ is ever added to his outward manifestation, but
he does not remain in a single state in his inward, so he possesses both
variegation and fixity. But God is described as the "Outward and the

33

I 314 1 (4, 461 12), cf I 305 14 (4, 412 10), II 311 25 For the hadith, see Muslim, al-Sahih,
Kitâb al-îmân, no 302 (Cairo Muhammad CA1I Sabin, 1334/1916), I 114-117
34
On the new creation, see Izutsu, Sufism and Taoism, pp 205-15, also his "The Concept of
Perpetual Creation in Islamic Mysticism and Zen Buddhism," Melanges offerts a Henry Corbin, ed
S H Nasr (Tehran McGill University, Institute of Islamic Studies, 1977), pp 115-48, cf Chittick
md Wilson, Fakhruddin 'Iraqi, pp 81-83, 136-37
35
Concerning the indivisible instant, cf I 292 16 (4, 338 13), II 431 28, III 295 12, see also III
198 32, 224 32, 253 14, 288 16, 470 23
36
The mirror is one of Ibn al-c Arabi's favorite examples for explaining relationships, cf the
beginning of chap 1 of the Fusüs, al-MUjam al-sufi, pp 449-506 See also M Sells, "Ibn c Arabfs
Polished Mirror Perspective Shift and Meaning Event," Studia Islamica, forthcoming

DEATH AND THE WORLD OF IMAGINATION

69

Inward"; His Outward undergoes variegation while His Inward is fixçd. So
God's Inward is the same as man's outward, while God's Outward is the
same as man's inward. Hence man is like a mirror: When you look at your
own form within a mirror and lift up your right hand, your form lifts up its
left hand; your right hand is its left hand, and your left hand its right.
Hence, oh creature, your outward is upon the form of His Name the
Inward, while your inward is His Name the Outward. (IV 135.33)
The mirror reversal between man and God results from the "completeness" of
the corporeal plane of existence. Man's corporeal body displays all God's
Attributes in some manner, including those of both Mercy and Wrath. But in
the next world, once man has left the corporeal plane of existence, the properties
of Mercy and Wrath will become separated to a large degree, as is explained
below; in other words, those existents which manifest Mercy will be placed in
Paradise, while those which manifest Wrath will go into the Fire. This means
that this world and more particularly mankind display both Mercy and Wrath,
thus filling a broader ontological spectrum than either of the two abodes in the
next world. Hence Ibn al-c Arabi writes,
Man's most perfect (akmal) plane is in this world; as for the next world,
every human being of the two groups is divided in half—that is, in his state
(hai), not in his knowledge, since each group has knowledge of the
opposite state. Hence man [in this world] is faithful and infidel at once; he
is felicity and wretchedness, bliss and chastisement, blissful and chastised.
For this reason knowledge in this world is more complete (atamm), but
theophany (tajallì) in the next world is more elevated (cflä). (I 118.10; 2,
221.5)
If man's completeness of state in this world makes him a mirror image of
God, in the next world he loses the completeness that corporeality allows,
though he gains in knowledge and, if he is one of the felicitous, in proximity
(qurb). But what is important to understand here is that in the next world he
will no longer be God's mirror image, since he will no longer exist on the lowest
ontological level, where relationships are reversed. His situation in the next
world can be compared to rays of light in the midst of the air before they are
reflected and reversed. As a result, in the next world man's outward will reflect
God's Outward, his inward God's Inward. Hence his inward will be fixed, while
his outward will undergo constant transmutation (Figure 2).

70

THE MUSLIM WORLD
OUTWARD

OUTWARD

God

Man

a. In this world

b. In the next world

Figure 2. The Relation between God and Man in respect to the Divine Names
"Outward" and "Inward"
Know that in this world God never ceases to manifest Himself to the
hearts of men; the variegated thoughts in their minds derive from the
divine theophany, though only the Men of God are aware of this;
moreover, only they know that the variation of outward forms in this
world and the next in all existents is nothing other than God's variegation,
for He is the Outward, since He is the entity of each thing.37 In the next
world, man's inward will be fixed, for it is identical with his outward form
in this world, the hidden transmutation of which is the "new creation" at
each moment concerning which men are "in doubt" (S. 50:15). In the next
world, man's outward will be like his inward in this world, and the divine
theophany will be actualized for him continuously. Hence in the next
world his outward will be variegated, just as in this world his inward
undergoes variegation in those forms within which the divine theophany
takes place, such that his inward becomes totally colored by this
theophany. In this world there is a correspondence with God at the level of
imagination, but this correspondence will be outward in the next world,
just as it was inward in this world. Hence, in the next world, the property
of imagination will accompany both man and God. (Ill 470.16)

37
This last clause may also be translated, "since He is identical with each thing." However, in
light of the fact that ultimately only "the Entity of God is described by existence" (III 107.28; cf.
note 13), this passage may be taken as a paraphrase of the passage quoted above in which Ibn
al-e Arabi explains the meaning of God's Outwardness (II 93.35). In other contexts Ibn al-c Arabi
speaks of man and the cosmos—or the microcosm and macrocosm—as mirror images; we can
conclude that the tremendous variety of creatures in the macrocosm reflects the variegation of
images in man's inward reality.

DEATH AND THE WORLD OF IMAGINATION

71

In short, the next world "is a domain of rapid excitation (inffàl), containing
no delay whatsoever, just like the inward plane of this world at the level of
thoughts (al-khawätiff (III 223.29).
Ibn al-c Arabi often quotes a Quranic verse in which the people of Paradise
are addressed as follows: "Therein you shall have all that your souls desire, all
that you call for" (S. 41:31). Likewise he refers to a hadith in which God says to
the blessed, "I say to a thing, 'Be!', and it is (cf. S. 16:40; 36:82; etc.); now I have
given to you that you should say 'Be!' and it will be."38 In Ibn al-cArabfs view,
such traditional data can only be understood in the context of the imaginai
nature of paradisial existence, the fact that the outward plane of the next world
corresponds to the mental and imaginai plane in this world. Hence, just as in
this world God gives form in our minds to our thoughts and imaginings, so He
will do the same thing in the next world. But there we will experience our
"thoughts" concretely and "outside" of ourselves at a level of reality far greater
than the corporeal level. Ibn al-c Arabi explains these points as follows:
Know that in this world God brings things into existence for the servant
within the Presence of Imagination. Hence, no thought occurs to the
servant without God's giving it existence within imagination, just as He
gives existence [within the corporeal world] to those possible existents that
He chooses whenever He desires. But within the Presence of Imagination
the servant's will (mash?a) derives from God's Will, since the servant wills
nothing unless God wills it. . . . Some of what the servant wills in this
world occurs in sensory existence; but within imagination, his will's
influence is like God's. Hence God is with the servant within imagination
in everything that the servant wills.
In the same way, in the next world man's will will have an all-embracing
property; for his inward in this world becomes his outward in the next
world. Therefore everything that he desires comes into existence according
to his own will. . . .39 Hence, God follows the servant's desire in this world
at the level of imagination and also in the next world, just as the servant's
will follows God's Will. So God's business (shefn) is to keep watch over the
servant by bringing into existence for him everything he wants in this
world at the level of imagination and in the next world; but the servant
follows God in theophany: God does not reveal Himself in theophany
within a form without the servant's becoming colored by it; so he
undergoes transformation within forms because of God's transformation,
while God undergoes in bestowing existence because of the transformation
38

III 295.16; cf. I 258.22 (4, 144.11), 259.29 (4, 153.1), II 440.35.
As is well-known, Ibn al-'Arabi teaches that the saints may reach a stage where they can
exercise their will—or "spiritual resolve" (himma)—in such a manner that whatever they desire
enters into physical existence (cf. Izutsu, Sufism and Taoism, pp. 275-83; Corbin, Creative
Imagination, pp. 222ff.), but it does not seem to have been pointed out that the saints possess this
supranormal power as a kind of anticipation of their paradisial state.
39

72

THE MUSLIM WORLD
of the servant's will within the Presence of Imagination in this world, and
in all things within the Garden in the next world. (Ill 509.33)40

Man's situation in the Garden depends totally upon his own desires. God's
words become his own: "Our only word to a thing, when We wish it, is to say to
it 'Be!', and it is" (S. 16:40). In effect, man constructs his own Paradise.41 In this
connection Ibn al-c Arabi often refers to the following hadith: "There is a market
in the Garden wherein is no selling or buying, only the forms of men and
women. When a person desires a form, he enters into it." In Ibn al-c Arabi's view,
this hadith illustrates the fact that the inhabitants of Paradise "continue to be
gathered from one form to another, ad infinitum, so that they may know the
Divine Amplitude" (II 628.3).42 The paradisial state is so subtle (lafìf) that man
can exist in one form without this preventing him from existing in other forms
as well.
We enter into any of the Market's forms that we desire, even though we
retain our own form, and none of our family or acquaintances would fail
to recognize us. Yet we know that we have put on a new ontological form,
while retaining our old form. (II 183.22)43

40

If this scheme sounds like a chicken-and-egg sort of situation, this should not be surprising In
essence it seems to be a simplified version of a circular diagram that Ibn al-c Arabi employs to
explain the differences among religions (al-sharät)
a Religions differ only because of the difference in Divine Relations (that is, Divine Names)
b Divine Relations differ only because of the difference in states
c States differ only because of the difference in times
d Times differ only because of the difference in movements
e Movements differ only because of the difference in attentivenesses
f Attentivenesses differ only because of the difference in goals
g Goals differ only because of the difference in theophames
h Theophames differ only because of the difference m religions (I 265 [4, 185])
This whole discussion hinges upon the nature of "receptivity," È e , the relationship between the
receptacle (the entity) and Nondelimited Being Cf note 13, Izutsu, Sufism and Taoism, Ò 118, 159,
et passim
41

Man also constructs his own hell "The People of the Fire conceive no dreadful thought (khafir
khawf) of a chastisement greater than what they are experiencing without that chastisement coming
into existence within them and for them, the chastisement is identical with the actualization of the
thought" (I 259 30, 4, 453 3) Mulla Sadrá teaches that "every human being, whether among the
blessed or the damned, has his own complete and independent world" ( Wisdom of the Throne, Ò
c
165) Here as elsewhere he seems to be indebted to Ibn al- Arabi, who anticipates this teaching at
least implicit'y in many passages (cf III 223 30, where he seems to be referring to it explicitly)
42
Cf II 312 26
43
Cf I 149 12 (2, 353 5), III 518 22ff

DEATH AND THE WORLD OF IMAGINATION

73

Or again:
Man's plane in the next world does not resemble the plane of this world,
even though the two planes share in names and in the form of the person
(al-$ùrat al-shakhçiyya); in the next world's plane spiritual existence (al·
rühäniyyä) dominates over sensory existence (a-fyissiyya). We have tasted
this within the abode of this life, in spite of the solidity (kathäfa) of its
plane: Thus a person's entity can exist in several places [at once]; but the
common people perceive this only in dreams. (I 318.27; 5, 67.13)
The Garden and the Fire
Heaven and hell are similar in certain respects, but profoundly different in
others. Both pertain to the next world, and both involve a double level of
experience: outward and inward, or "bodily" and "spiritual." In insisting on the
bodily resurrection, Ibn al-c Arabi is distancing himself from those philosophers
who held that the souls of the blessed survive only on an "intelligible Çaqlï)"
plane. Such thinkers, says Ibn al-c Arabi, "are ignorant of the fact that there are
two planes: one of the bodies and another of the spirits, the latter being
intelligible; so they affirmed the intelligible plane, but not the sensory" (I 311.23;
4, 448.7). In brief, "The soul is resurrected in the form of its knowledge and the
body in the form of its works" (I 99.20; 2, 123.1)44
Ibn al-cArabi explains that the Divine Perfection demands these two
dimensions—the unseen and the visible—in the next world just as it demands
them in this world:
The combination of intellect and sense perception—of the intelligible
and the sensory—is more tremendous in power and more complete in the
Divine Perfection. Thereby the property of [God's Name] the "Knower of
the Unseen and the Visible" (S. 6:73, etc.) continues in every kind of
possible existent and the property of the Names the "Outward" and the
"Inward" is established in every group. (I 312.4; 4, 451.1)
The profound differences between heaven and hell go back to their archetypes
in divinis, i.e., the Attributes of Mercy (rahma) and Wrath (ghaqlab).45 These
two Attributes provide a key to understanding Ibn al-c Arabi's cosmology, within
the context of which the ontological differences between the Garden and the
Fire become clear.
At the risk of oversimplifying Ibn al-cArabi's cosmologica! scheme, we can

44

Cf. 1317.11 (5,60.6).
As has been mentioned in passing, Ibn al-c Arabi characteristically refers all of his doctrines back
to the Divine Names, since "Every attribute manifested within the cosmos demands a specific
relationship, which is referred to by a Name known to us through the Revelation" (III, 441.35). Cf.
William Chittick, "Ibn al-c Arabi's Myth of the Names," in Islam and Platonism, ed. P. Morewedge,
forthcoming.
45

74

THE MUSLIM WORLD

conceive of it as follows:46 Within the Cloud God creates a supreme Spirit,
known as the "Universal Intellect" and the "Pen," and then by means of the first
a second Spirit, known as the "Universal Soul" and the "Tablet." These two
mark the boundaries of the world of disengaged spirits; they are, on the spiritual
plane, the active and receptive principles of all creation, yang and yin. Next, just
as the Universal Intellect threw down a shadow named the Universal Soul, so
the Soul throws down its own shadow, which is called Nature and which
displays within itself, though it has no actualized existence, four fundamental
ontological tendencies, the four "natures" (al-fabâff): heat, cold, wetness, and
dryness; these reflect four fundamental Divine Attributes: Life, Knowledge,
Will, and Power (the "Four Pillars" of Divinity, al-arkän al-arbcfa).47 Nature in
turn acts upon the Dust—Universal Substance—to produce the Universal Body,
within which become manifest the four natures in the form of all the creatures of
the sensory world, the World of Corporeal Bodies.
The first corporeal creature to become manifest within the Universal Body is
the Throne of God. 48 According to the Qur'ân, "The All-Merciful is seated
upon the Throne" (S. 20:5), and thus the Throne, which embraces the sensory
world, is perceived as a manifestation of pure Mercy. According to the wellknown hadith, the following sentence is inscribed upon the Throne itself: "My
Mercy precedes My Wrath." Since the Throne is sheer Mercy, it cannot be
mixed with Wrath; so this attribute only appears at the next level of sensory
existence, the Footstool, which, according to the Qur'än "encompasses the
heavens and the earth" (S. 2:256). Upon the Footstool God places His two feet,
which are identified as the "Foot of the All-Compeller (qadam al-jabbär)"
(referred to in a hadith) and the "Foot of Firmness" (cf. S. 10:2). According to
Ibn al-c Arabi's interpretation, the pure Mercy of the Throne "becomes divided
at the Footstool into Mercy and Wrath mixed with Mercy" (III 432.14). So "The
Foot of the All-Compeller is nothing but God's Wrath" (III 386.13), which
comes into existence at this level and thus encompasses and contains the heavens
and the earth. "If it were not for the creatures [of the Visible World], God would
not have become wrathful" (III 386.1).49
Everything below the Footstool pertains to the domain in which both Mercy
and Wrath exercise their influence. Ontologically, the descending levels in which
the properties of these two Names are mixed correspond with a progressive
solidification of the cosmos. At the level of the seven spheres the four natures
produce the four elements—fire, air, water, and earth—in their simple,
intelligible form (al-basit al-mdqül.) Then, in conjunction with the earth, the

46
A more balanced description, with diagrams from the Futuhat, is given in Chittick, "Ibn aiArabi and his School "
47
On the nonactualization of Nature, cf III 397 5, 430 10, IV 150 9 On the four fundamental
Names and their relation to the four natures, cf I 293 17 (4, 344 10), II 430 14, III 430 25, the latter
two passages are based on the fact that Power is equivalent to Word (III 441 19) Ibn al-e Arabi also
provides another scheme Knowledge (heat), Will (dryness), Power (wetness), Word (cold), II 667 25
48
I 148 31 (2, 351 8), II 436 6, III 201 2
49
Here al-khalq is used in the sense of the sensory creation that is contrasted with the spiritual
creation, al-amr
c

DEATH AND THE WORLD OF IMAGINATION

75

elements come to exist in their compound (murakkab) forms, that is, as they
appear in the corporeal world. Finally, from the combination of the elements,
the "elemental" (c unfurl) creatures come into existence: minerals, plants, and
animals;50 hence they are the most "solidified" (kathif) and least "subtle" (laflf)
of all sensory beings, the first of which is the Throne, which is "natural" but not
"elemental."
The distinction between natural and elemental is of fundamental importance
and needs to be clarified—though a thorough explanation would require a
separate study. Nature has no existence in itself, yet its properties are manifested
throughout the sensory world, from the Throne down to the earth. However,
certain corporeal bodies are natural without being elemental, as for example the
spheres (including the Throne and the footstool), the lower angels, the mental
faculties, the particular spirits (al-arwäh al-juz*iyya),51 and the simple elements
themselves. By calling certain angels and the mental faculties "corporeal bodies"
(ajsäm), Ibn al-c Arabi is referring to subtle or "imaginai" bodies, which he often
distinguishes from ajsäm by calling them ajsäd.52
In one passage Ibn al-cArabi states that "The Presence of Imagination is
Nature" (III 508.26). At first sight it appears that he means that Nature
corresponds to the level of discontiguous imagination, since Nature exercises its
properties below the Universal Soul, which marV« the lowermost limit of the
World of Disengaged Spirits. But he may also be referring to nondelimited
imagination, since, in clarifying his cosmological scheme, he writes that in truth
Nature exercises its properties in everything other than God, beginning with the
Cloud. The Nature whose properties appear in "transparent corporeal bodies"
(al-ajsäm al-shaffäfa)—such as the Throne—is like the daughter of this supreme
Nature, who is her mother.53 Most probably these two Natures correspond to
the two levels of imagination, nondelimited and discontiguous. Hence, when Ibn
al-c Arabi speaks of corporeal bodies like the Throne that are natural but not
elemental, he seems to be saying that they subsist within the world of
discontiguous imagination.
However, this may be, Ibn al-c Arabi makes clear that the various levels of
Paradise are "located" between the Throne and the Footstool; they are natural
but not elemental. Then the hells are located below the Footstool and extend
down to the "lowest of the low"; they are elemental and hence—in contrast to
the paradises—similar to this world in substance.
The property of the Fire is near to the property of this world, so it is
neither pure chastisement nor pure bliss. That is why God says about hell,
"Therein they neither die nor live" (S. 20:73). (I 294.27; 4, 352.4)54

50

I 293-94 (4, 344-49)
Universal spirits, such as the Intellect, the Soul, and human spirits, are all disengaged and
therefore exist beyond the level of Nature as defined here, from another point of view (see below),
they also can be included among "natural" beings On "natural bodies," see I 261 5 (4, 161 5), II
335 10
52
Cf I 133 13 (2, 284 18), 307 8 (4, 423 1), III 186 28, 389 13
53
III 420 16, cf IV 150 I
54
Cf II 184 1, 244 33 On the location of heaven and hell, see I 123 9 (2, 241 17), 169 9 (3, 95 14),
51

76

THE MUSLIM WORLD

The similarity between this world and hell goes back to the fact that Wrath is
manifested within both, while it has no access to Paradise. Cosmologically this is
expressed by the fact that Paradise lies below the Throne—the locus of God's
Mercy—but above the Footstool, upon which is placed the Foot of the AllCompeller. In other words, Mercy and Wrath are mixed at the elemental level,
but not at the level of those natural corporeal bodies which dwell above the
Footstool.55
If hell exists, it exists for the same reason that this world of ours mixed with
Wrath exists: in order that the properties of the Divine Names may become fully
actualized. Ibn al-cArabi often explains this point by referring to the "two
hands" of God through which man was created (cf. S. 38:75), while "Everything
other than man was created either through the Divine Command or by one
hand" (I 122.13; 2, 237.16). The Qur'än speaks of God's right and left hands and
the fact that the "companions" of the one dwell in the Garden and those of the
other in the Fire (56:7-56). In a hadith, the Prophet explained that God created
two "handfuls (qabdatän)" one for the Fire and one for the Garden. "No one
can protest this," says Ibn al-c Arabi,
since nothing exists there but He. So all things are under the control of His
Names: one handful is under the Names of His affliction, the other under
the Names of His bounties. (I 37.30; 1, 169.12).56
Just as the visible cosmos only came into existence below God's two feet, such
that the properties of Mercy and Wrath became mixed, so also its coming into
existence necessitated the mixture of the two handfuls.
God brought the cosmos into existence to make manifest the authority
of the Names. For, to have "power" without something wherein to exercise
it, "generosity" without gifts, a "provider" without provisions, a "helper"
without someone helped, and "compassion" without objects would mean
that there are realities without effects. Moreover, in this world God made
the cosmos a mixture; He kneaded the two handfuls into dough, and then
He separated out individuals, placing [elements] from the one handful into
the other. . . . Hence the situation became confused, and it is here that the
men of knowledge (al-ulama) become ranked in degrees to the extent that
they can extract the corrupt from the good, and the good from the corrupt.
The ultimate end of all this will be deliverance from this mixture and the
separation of the two handfuls, each withdrawing to its own world. This is
the meaning of the Qur'anic verse, "That God may separate the corrupt

299 20 (4, 380 5), II 440 1, III 442 8 On the fact that the next world is natural rather than elemental,
cf I 276 24 (4, 249 1), II 184 1, on the elemental nature of hell, cf III 244 33
55
It would appear that the natural but non-elemental corporeal bodies that dwell below the
Footstool, such as the lower angels and the mental faculties, manifest both Mercy and Wrath A
great deal of research needs to be carried out before all the subtleties of Ibn al-£Arabrs cosmology
can be clarified
56
Cf 1263 3(4, 173 4)

DEATH AND THE WORLD OF IMAGINATION

77

from the good, and place the corrupt one upon another, and so heap them
all up together, and put them in hell" (S. 8:37). (I 120.15; 2, 229.9)
In eschatological terms, the two handfuls are "the two worlds: the world of
felicity and the world of wretchedness" (III 75.14). However, Ibn al-cArabi
insists that even the people of wretchedness are not cut off from God's Mercy,
since pure Wrath cannot exist; the Foot of the All-Compeller, after all, is a
mixture of Mercy and Wrath, as was mentioned above. The hadith that
mentions the two handfuls places them in the Garden and the Fire, not in bliss
and chastisement. "This is because God placed them in the two abodes to
populate them. Hence, another hadith states, 'When God created the Garden
and the Fire, He said, "To each of you your fill,"' since He filled them with
inhabitants" (III 76.27). But this does not mean that the people of hell will suffer
everlasting torment.
The Limited Duration of Hell's Chastisement
Ibn al-c Arabi's contention that the chastisement of hell will not last forever is
hardly new in Islamic thought; even a majority of exoteric theologians were
forced to conclude the same thing.57 If Ibn al-c Arabi accomplished anything
new, it is to integrate this teaching into a systematic metaphsics and cosmology;
in any case, hell's limited duration is a recurrent theme in his writings.
Ibn al-c Arabi does not deny that the "sinners" (al-mujrimurì)5* will remain in
the Fire "forever," since the text of the Qur*än reads "khälidün flhä" (S. 2:25,
39, 81, 217, etc.). But he points out that the pronoun inßhä ("in it") is always
feminine; in other words, it refers to the feminine "Fire" and never to the
masculine "chastisement" (al-adhäb). Nothing was revealed in the Quinan and
the Hadith that would indicate that the Fire's chastisement lasts forever, though
this is hardly the case with the bliss (ndim) of the Garden. Moreover "God
forgives all sins . . ." (S. 39:53), so nothing can make the chastisement eternal; in
addition it can only be an "appropriate recompense" (jazff wifäq), so a limited
sin could not warrant unlimited punishment.
But again, the primary reason that hell's chastisement must come to an end is
that eventually (bi 'l-mdäl) Mercy will demonstrate its precedence. "Wretchedness
derives from the Divine Wrath, while felicity derives from the Divine GoodPleasure (al-ridä), which is an expansion of Mercy without limit; but Wrath will
be cut off (III 382.35). Ibn al-c Arabi explains the limited nature of Wrath in a
57

Cf Smith and Haddad, The Islamic Understanding of Death and Resurrection, Ò 95
e
Ibn al- Arabi calls the mujrimûn "the people of the Fire, those who are its inhabitants" (ahi
al-nàr alladhina hum ahluhä) in order to distinguish them from others who enter the Fire for a time
and then are removed from it He divides the mujnmun into four distinct and well-defined groups,
the proud (al-mutakabbirûn), the associatore (al-mushrikùn), the atheists (al-muc affila), and the
hypocrites (al-munàfiqûn), and discusses the traditional basis for considering only these four as
permanent inhabitants of hell. Cf. chap. 61, "FÏ marátib ahi al-nàr," I 301-304 (4, 390-405); cf I
314 27(4,467 2)
58

78

THE MUSLIM WORLD

number of contexts; we have already seen how he does this within his
cosmological scheme, where Wrath has no effect above the Footstool. In the
context of metaphysics, he points out that Mercy is an Attribute of God's very
Essence—hence his followers identify it with Sheer Being—but Wrath is an
Attribute necessitated by the existence of the cosmos, while it is nonexistent in
God Himself. As he often remarks, God even has Mercy upon Wrath, by
bestowing existence upon its properties.59
As an intermediate creature—an isthmus—standing between Being and
nothingness, or as a creature in whom the two handfuls are mixed, man is a
locus within which both Mercy and Wrath manifest themselves. The attributes
of Mercy are those which derive from God's Essence and lead back to it, while
the attributes of Wrath relate to the specific properties of the elemental cosmos.
God created the hearts of men as loci for truth and falsehood, faith and
infidelity, knowledge and ignorance. The ultimate end of falsehood,
infidelity, and ignorance is dissolution and disappearance, since they are
properties that have no entity in existence. They are a nonexistence that
has a manifested property and a known form. . . . In contrast faith, truth,
and knowledge are ascribed to something that has existence in its entity,
and that is God. Therefore these properties are preserved in this
Entity. . . ., which is Being Itself, or God, who is named by these Names
and described by these descriptions: He is the Truth, He is the Knowing,
He is the Faithful. . . . God is not named by falsehood, for He possesses
Being; nor is He called ignorant and infidel—far exalted is He above these
names! . . . (These attributes) are accidents possessing no permanence, so
their properties will disappear when they disappear. But the entity that
received them and became described by them is an existent; it must possess
some state by which to be described. Since its wretchedness will have
disappeared with the disappearance of its causes, . . . its opposite will
remain, and that is called felicity. Hence, he who enters the Fire will only
do so in order that his corruption may be negated and his goodness
remain. Once his corruption has gone and his goodness subsists, he will be
called "felicitous." (Ill 417.35)
Ibn al-c Arabi summarizes this argument from a slightly different point of view
as follows:
God created the cosmos in its essence only for felicity; wretchedness
occurs to whom it occurs as an accident, since Sheer Good untouched by
evil is the Being of God, who bestowed existence upon the cosmos; and
nothing emanates from Him except that which corresponds to Him, which
is good alone. (Ill 389.21)
So the ontological "evil" that creatures meet derives from their possibility

59

Cf. Fusüs, p. 177; Ibn at Arabi, p. 223; Izutsu, Sufism and Taoism, p. 117.

DEATH AND THE WORLD OF IMAGINATION

79

(al-imkän)—their ambiguous ontological situation half-way between the Neeessity
of Sheer Being and the impossibility of sheer nothingness. If evil enters the
cosmos, "It only enters it from the direction of the possible existent, not from
that of God" (III 389.25). The side pertaining to evil and wretchedness will
eventually disappear, since it derives from nonexistence; yet the creatures
themselves will never disappear inasmuch as they partake of existence: "The
entities of those essences that enter into existence from nonexistence will never
cease to exist after their existence" (I 312.34; 4, 455.11). In sum, "The cosmos is
the object of Mercy in its very essence; it experiences pain only in what occurs to
it accidentally" (III 207.33).60
The fact that Mercy prevails in the end might suggest that God's Wrath ceases
to exist, although we know that this would contradict Ibn al-cArabi's express
statements concerning the structure of the cosmos: by definition, the Fire is
located below the Footstool, which is the domain within which Wrath has some
effect. Ibn al-c Arabi explains this seeming contradiction by stating that after the
period of the chastisement in the Fire comes to an end,
no chastisement will remain in the Fire except imaginai chastisement
within the Presence of Imagination, in order that the properties of the
Names may subsist. For a Name necessitates only the manifestation of the
property that its reality demands. It does not determine the ontological
level nor the individual [upon whom its property has an effect]; this
determination is the property of the Names "All-Knowing" and "Willing."61
So when the property of [for example] the Avenger becomes manifest
within an imaginai or corporeal body or wherever, its rights are fulfilled by
the manifestation of its property and effectivity. Hence the Divine Names
continue to exercise effectivity and control for all eternity in both heaven
and hell, and their inhabitants never leave the two abodes. (Ill 119.2)
Though the sinners eventually attain to felicity while remaining in the Fire,
one factor continues to demarcate their felicity from that of the inhabitants of
the Garden: They will always remain veiled (mahjùb) from God, while the
felicitous in the Garden will be given vision (rtfyd) of Him. The tradition speaks
of the eight gates of heaven and the seven gates of hell; but, says Ibn al-c Arabi,
"Hell has an eighth gate that is locked and will never be opened: the gate of
being veiled from the vision of God" (I 299.5; 4, 377.14). He explains that after
the chastisement of the inhabitants of hell comes to an end, "The veil will remain
hanging before them so that they may experience bliss." For if God were to
show Himself to them at this point, after the sins they had committed and their
worthiness for punishment, they would be shamed, "and shame is chastise60

Cf. II 486.2; III 328.27, 433.5.
God's Knowledge of the immutable entities determines when and where they will be given
existence; then His Will chooses (tarkih) their existence over their nonexistence. Cf. Chittick, "Ibn
al-1 Arabfs Myth of the Names."
61

80

THE MUSLIM WORLD

ment—but chastisement's period has come to an end" (III 119.5).62 So important
is this distinctive characteristic of hell that Ibn al-cArabi can say, "The next
world possesses two abodes: vision and veil" (II 335.18).
The people of hell will find their bliss in hell itself, for in the last analysis,
felicity is that which is agreeable (mulcPim) with a person's constitution (mizäj).
After Mercy has embraced them, the people of the Fire will find their
joy (ladhdha) from being in the Fire, and they will praise God for their not
being in the Garden. That is because of what is demanded by their
constitution in that state; if they were to enter the Garden, pain would
grasp them and they would suffer. So—if you have understood—bliss is
nothing but the agreeable, and chastisement is nothing but the disagreeable,
whatever it might be. So be wherever you are! If you receive only that
which is agreeable with you, you will be in bliss, but if you receive only
what is disagreeable with your constitution, you will be in chastisement.
The abodes (al-mawäfin) have been made lovable to their inhabitants. For
the People of the Fire, those who are its inhabitants, the Fire is their
abode; from it they were created, and to it they will be returned. And for
the People of the Garden, those who are its inhabitants—from it they were
created and to it they will be returned. The joy of the abode is an intrinsic
attribute of its inhabitants. (IV 14.34)63
The destiny of a given human being depends upon the handful to which he
belonged at his origin. In other terms, Ibn al-c Arabi speaks about the "fixed
entities" (al-cfyän al-thäbita) within God's knowledge, which in turn depend
upon the Names. Each individual human being is a receptacle (qäbil) for
existence; the scope of the receptacle is determined by its preparedness (istfdäd),
and this in turn is determined by the uncreated and eternally fixed entity.64 "God
bestows continuously, and the loci receive in the measure of the realities of their
preparednesses" (I 287.11; 4, 308.8). It is in this context that Ibn al-cArabi can
say that the angels nourish the people of the Garden in the same way that they
nourish the people of the Fire. "In the last analysis, the very thing that causes
bliss causes pain" (I 301.5; 4, 389.3).
Imagination and the Rational Faculty
To bring this brief summary of Ibn al-cArabi's extensive eschatological
teachings to a close, let me recall the point where I began: In Ibn al-cArabi's
view, all the traditional descriptions of the afterlife, no matter how strange they
may appear to the rational mind, can be explained by reference to the power of
imaginalization possessed by the Divine Reality. The Qur'än and Hadith are full

Elsewhere (III 435.32) Ibn al-c Arabi suggests that even the veil may not be absolute
On felicity as the "agreeable," cf II 327 34, 486 4, III 387 23
On the concepts of receptivity and preparedness, cf note 40

DEATH AND THE WORLD OF IMAGINATION

81

of statements about God and the next world that for the most part have either
been accepted on faith or interpreted in accordance with the dictates of reason
and the laws of logic. But Ibn al-c Arabi objects to any interpretation (tifwil) that
strays from the literal meaning, especially by a person claiming faith in Islam;
his interpretation demonstrates that "He has faith in his interpretation, not in
the revelation" (I 218.26; 3, 336.11).
In our eyes this is one of the most wondrous of things. . ..: that a person
should follow (taqlid) his own reason (al-caql) in the knowledge of his
Lord, but not follow his Lord in what He reveals concerning Himself in
His Book and upon the tongue of His Prophet. (I 288.27; 4, 316.12)
All rational interpretations of the type Ibn al-c Arabi is criticizing ignore the
approach which, in his eyes, leads to true knowledge: What appears as
impossible to reason in fact occurs exactly as it is described by scripture within
the world of imagination. Ibn al-c Arabi summarizes his arguments concerning
imagination and its importance for any true understanding of the nature of
existence as follows:
Imagination is the most perfect of worlds. . . . To it belongs true
existence and the ability to control all things. It embodies meanings, and it
makes that which does not subsist in itself subsist in itself. It gives form to
that which has no form and makes the impossible possible. It exercises free
disposal (ta$arruf) in all things, however it likes.
Since imagination has this nondelimitation, though it is a creature
created by God, what do you think of the Creator who created it and gave
it this power? How can you wish to judge that God is delimited
(taqayyudp. Or to say that God cannot perform the impossible? For all the
while you witness in your own self imagination's power over the
impossible, though it is one of God's creatures. You do not doubt the
meanings that it embodies for you and displays as self-subsistent
individuals. In the same way God will bring the works of the children of
Adam—even though these works are accidents—as self-subsistent forms to
be placed in the Balance, that justice may be carried out. He will bring
death—though it is but a relation (nisba), even further than an accident
from being embodied—in the form of a white ram [to be slaughtered on
the Day of Resurrection]65. . . . So where is the judgement of reason and its
corrupt interpretation (tcfwit) in relation to God!?
A similar thing is found in the bliss of the Gardens, that is, the fruits
which are "neither cut off nor forbidden" (S. 56:33). He who has no
knowledge interprets this by relating it to the seasons of the year; fruits are
no longer produced when their time comes to an end, but then they return
in the next year. In contrast, the fruits of the Garden are produced

65
Ibn al-c Arabi often quotes this hadith to support the concept of "embodiment." Cf. I 219.22
(3, 341.6), 294.21 (4, 351.6), 305.2 (4, 410.12), 316.18 (4, 477.2); II 309.15; III 118.27.

82

THE MUSLIM WORLD
constantly without being cut off. This is the extent of his knowledge in this
question. But in our eyes the fruits are as God says, "neither cut off nor
forbidden," because God will give us provision from them, and this is
named "picking" and "eating"; . . . without doubt we will eat of the fruits
of the Garden, "its clusters nigh to gather" (S. 69:23), but the fruit will stay
in its place upon the tree. Its entity will not disappear, since this is the
Abode of Subsistence. . . .
God declared Himself incomparable to the attribute of sleep when He
said, "Slumber seizes Him not, neither sleep" (S. 2:256). He means that the
vision of the isthmuses does not absent Him from gazing upon the world
of sense perception nor upon those meanings that are neither attached to
material substrata nor actualized in the isthmus. . . . In the next world, the
people of paradise will not sleep in the Garden, and nothing of the cosmos
will be absent from them. On the contrary, every world will be witnessed
by them at its own level, while they are not described by sleep.
It is said, "So and so slept and he dreamt such and such," meaning that
he saw something incorrect or false. For knowledge is not milk, nor is the
Qur*än honey, but this is what he dreamed. But when you reach
perfection, you will see knowledge as knowledge in the Presence of
Meanings, while at the same time you will see it as milk in the Presence of
the Isthmus; the two are identical, not different. So realize what I have
taught you, for what I have mentioned will make you happy with an
everlasting happiness!. . . .
Once you have realized what I have indicated in this chapter, you will
understand everything revealed in the Book and the Sunna concerning the
description of God, whether these descriptions are eternal or temporal; you
will realize their truth even though they are rejected by reason with its
proofs—for reason is incapable of this perception. (II 183.8)
State of University of New York
at Stony Brook
Stony Brook, New York

WILLIAM C. CHITTICK

