Ebno'I-'Arabi's Doctrine of the Oneness of Being

SUFI

Ebno'l-'Arabi's Doctrine of the
Oneness of Being
by William C. Chittick

E

bno'l-'Arabi,
known as the
'Greatest Master', was the
most influential of all those
Sufis who employed the language of
philosophy to express the teachings of
Islam.
Born in Murcia in Muslim
Spain in 560/1165, he exhibited his
outstanding spiritual gifts at an early
age. In a frequently quoted passage,
he recalls
his meeting with the
famous philosopher Averroes when
the latter was an old man. Averroes
perceived in Ebno'l-'Arabi, a youth
with only fuzz for a beard, the wisdom
for which he had been searching all
his life. The meeting is highly symbolic in that the works of Averroes
- which were largely forgotten in the
Islamic world itself - became one of
the major factors influencing the West
to move in the direction of a rationalism closed to the intermediate
realms of existence, while Ebn01'Arabi's writings harmonized the rational and spiritual modes of perception and helped keep the minds of
Muslim intellectuals
open to the
luminous presence of the angels and
spirits.
In the
year 597/1200, Ebn01'Arabi was told in a vision to go to
the East. In 599/1202 he performed
the pilgrimage to Mecca, and from
then on he traveled from city to city
in the central Islamic lands, eventually settling in Damascus, where he
died in 638/1240.
He left behind
some 500 works, including
the
enormous Fotul)at al-makkiya (The
Meccan Openings') and a short summary of his teachings which became

6

the most famous

of his books, the
Bezels of
Wisdom').
His numerous students
spread his doctrines throughout the
Islamic world; within two centuries,
there was no expression of Islamic intellectuality untouched by his genius.
He has continued to influence Muslim
intellectuals
down to the present
century, and even today many Muslims consider him the most important
thinker ever produced by Islam.

Fo$U$ al-bekam (The

The Oneness of Being
In the later literature, Ebno1-'Arabi is most often characterized as the
founder of the doctrine of wal)dato'lwojud, the 'Oneness of Being' or the
'Oneness of Existence'. This doctrine
expresses
Islam's basic teaching,
tswhid or the 'affirmation
of God's
Unity', in the ontological language of
philosophy.
Ebno1-'Arabi
himself
never
employs
the
expression
wsbdeto'l-wojud, and it was singled
out as typifying his point of view not
so much because of the content of his
writings, but because of the concerns
of his followers and the direction in
which Islamic thought developed after
him.
Many important students of
Ebno'l-Arabi,
beginning with
his
most influential disciple, Sadro'd-Din
Qonawi (d. 673/1274), tried to bring
the intellectual expression of Sufism
into harmony with Peripatetic philosophy, and wojud or 'existence?
was the primary concern of the philosophers.
Thus the very term
wstuietol-wojud - built from the word

wal)da (derived from the same root
as tawi)id) and from a second word
which delineates the central concern
of philosophy - should alert us to the
fact that we are dealing with a
synthesis of the religious and the
philosophical traditions. But in Ebno'l'Arabi's own works, passages dealing
with wojud - a term which is not
found in the Koran - play a relatively
small role. Like most earlier Sufis
and in contrast to the philosophers
and theologians, he derives the greater
part of his key terminology from the
Koran and the sayings of thc Prophet
(l;adith), and he constantly shows
how these sources of Islam are the
fountainhead of the established sciences, such as jurisprudence, kelsm
or scholastic theology, philosophy, and
grammar.
The history of the term wal;dato1wojud has only recently been investigated.
Preliminary research has
shown that Ebno'l-'Arabi's
disciple
Qonawi uses the term on at least two
occasions in his works, while Qonawi's
disciple Sa'ido'd-Din Farghani (d. 695/
1296) employs it many times in his
two influential commentaries on the
Ta'iyya. of the Arabic poet Ebn01Faredh.
But neither Qonawi nor
Farghani uses the term wslulsto'lwojud in the technical sense which it
gained in later centuries. For them,
the expression does not connote a
whole perspective on the nature of
things but refers instead to the selfevident fact that wojud is a single
reality. At the same time, certain figures peripheral
to Ebno'l-'Arabi's

Issue 4

William C. Chittick

school, such as Ebn Sab'in (d. 669/
1270) in Arabic
and 'Azizo'd-Din
Nasafi (d. before 700/13(0) in Persian, were employing the term to
allude to the world view of the sages
and the Sufis. Then the Hanbalite
jurist Ebn Taymiya (d. 728/1328),
famous for his attacks on all schools
of Islamic intellectuality, seized upon
the term wabdato7-wojud as a synonym for the well-known heresies of
ette1)ad (,unificationism') and bolul
('incarnationism').
From
Ebn
Taymiya's time onward, wa l)dato '1wojud was used more and more commonly to refer to the whole doctrine
taught by Ebno'l-'Arabi and his followers. For jurists like Ebn Taymiya
the expression was a term of blame,
synonymous with 'unbelief and 'heresy', but most Muslim intellectuals
accepted wabdato'l-wojud as a synonym for tewhid in a philosophical and
mystical mode.'
Though Ebno'l-Arabi never employs the expression wehdsto'l-wojud
itself, he frequently makes statements
which approximate it, and wc are certainly justified in claiming that he
supported wshdsto'l-wojud in the literal sense of the term. However, we
cannot claim that 'Oneness of Being'
is itself a sufficient description of his
ontology, since he affirms the 'manyness of reality' with equal vigor.
Hence, we find that in many passages
he refers to wojud in its fullness as
the One/Many (al-wa/;ledo'l-kathir).
Ebno'l-Arabi
employs the term
wojud with a variety of meanings in
different contexts; simply put, wojud
is a single reality which can be
perceived on many different levels,
like its near synonym, 'light' (nur),
which is a Koranic name of God. On
'the highest level, wojud is the absolute and nondelimited reality of God,
the 'Necessary
Being' (wajebo'1wojud) which cannot not exist. On
lower levels, wojud is the underlying
substance of 'everything other than
God' (ma sawa' Allah) - which is
how Muslim thinkers define the
'cosmos'
or 'universe'
(al-'aJam).
Ebno'l-'Arabi
does not attempt to

Winter 1989- 1990

SUFI

!I! i:

I1
~!

~
I!

.'

1

iI

:1 '

I

I

:1

I.

,I·

'1 ;
,

I

:11
.j i

i

I'
1

>'f\' I
:,:'
I'

,.1.

•

:~;
I,

'.

,

"

• 'I

; ;~
:: I
I1 :

I

~;

. (

A cflOgram of Ebno'~'Arabl'stheory of ethical and spiritual development. found in the second volume of
the Fofuhoto'~mokJdyo. 16th century. Courtesy of the Brijish Library (Arabic manuscript. OR 132).

define wojud itself, since in itself it
is indefinable and unknowable.
But
he does provide many analogies
through which we can grasp the nature
of wojud. For example, light is in
itself a single, invisible reality, but
through it, all colors, shapes, and
objects are perceived; in the same
way wojud is a single reality through

which all things come into existence
and are found in the universe, though
in itself it remains invisible and
beyond reach.
In short, if we say that Ebno'l'Arabi believed in wsiuistol-wojud;
this is correct, since he affirms that
wojud is a single reality and that
there cannot be two wojuds. Like

7

SUFI

Ebno'!-'Arabi's Doctrine of the Oneness of Being

others before him, he frequently cosmos, since existence does not istence and the nonexistent things in
glosses the Islamic declaration of belong to it. But each entity has two a wide variety of contexts. Here we
tawl)id - the statement, There is no
states or situations. When an entity can look briefly at two of these exgod but God' - to mean, 'There is is found within the phenomenal world, planations, the first metaphysical and
it displays a certain borrowed exis- the second more cosmological. The
nothing in wojud but God: Nevertheless, Ebnol-'Arabi devotes most of tence, which it gives back to God Koran (57:3) affirms that God is the
when it disappears, as when a man Manifest (a~-~aher) and the Nonhis writings to explaining the reality
manifest (aI-baien). This means that
dies, or a stone turns to dust Nevof manyness or multiplicity (kathra)
within the context of the Divine Unity. ertheless, the reality of the entity what we see manifest before us is
God or wojud. We know that wojud
It would be a great error to suppose never changes through its apparent
existence; it did not exist in the first is one, but in fact we see a cosmos
- as some short-sighted critics have
of infinite multiplicity, not one God.
supposed - that he simply affirms that place - it only borrowed existence
from God for a moment - so it does How then do we account for the mawojud is one and attributes the manyness which we see? Ebno'l-Arabi
nyness we perceive in the world to not cease to exist in the second place.
illusion or human ignorance. Multi- It stays in its original state of 'per- explains that when wojud becomes
manifest in the cosmos, it displays
plicity is almost as 'real' as unity. manence' or 'immutability' (thobut).
But how can we speak of the itself to us within a 'locus of maniHowever, by affmning the 'reality'
immutability of an entity that does not festation' (ma:(,har), which is the
(haqiqa) of multiplicity, Ebno'l-'Arabi
does not mean to imply that multiplic- exist? Briefly stated, Ebno'l-'Arabi cosmos itself; it does not display itself
ity exists in the same sense that God explains these 'immutable entities' (al- as the Nonmanifest, since by definition
a'yano'th-thabeta) as follows: The
wojud as the Nonmanifest is inconexists, since there is only one wojud.
To return to the analogy of light, we 'existence' and 'nonexistence' of the ceivable and unknowable. Moreover,
can affirm the reality of colors with- entities about which we have been
within this one locus of manifestation
out claiming that each color is an speaking pertain to the cosmos, the known as the cosmos, there are many
independently existing thing. Red phenomenal world. But the phe- lesser loci of manifestation, known as
and green exist only through light; so nomenal world is the manifestation of the things or entities found within the
they are one in their luminous sub- the non-phenomenal world, which is cosmos. These loci of manifestation
are nonexistent in themselves, since
stance and two in their specific ultimately wojud itself. In Koranic
terms, God 'creates' the universe and only God has wojud. So what we
realities.
If on the one hand, the universe each thing within it. And God is not perceive is wojud permeated by the
exists through God's wojud, on the only infinite wojud; He is also infinite properties of the entities, which
other hand, the 'things' (shaYJ or and eternal knowledge. He knows all themselves remain immutable in
'entities' ('ayn) found within the uni- things forever, even before He cre- nonexistence. The situation is analoverse
possess their own specific ates them, and He knows them in all gous to what happens when light
.properties. These things are 'other the details which they will manifest passes through a prism: We perceive
than God', and, as we have seen, God during their sojourn in the cosmos. many different colors, but the only
is wojud. It follows that in them- God's knowledge of the things corre- thing that exists is the one light
selves the things do not exist. Ebno'l- sponds precisely to the things as they Hence, says Ebno'l-Arabi, in respect
'Arahi maintains that everything we are in themselves. The 'thing in itself
to Himself God is Nonmanifest, but
perceive in the cosmos is nonexistent is known as the 'reality' (/;Iaqiqa) of in respect to His loci of manifestation
in itself, but existent in some sense the existent thing or its 'immutable He is Manifest. The loci are plural
through the wojud of God. In the entity'. Hence the entities remain for- in themselves, but not in respect to
ever immutable in the knowledge of the wojud which is Manifest within
same way, every color we perceive
is nonexistent in itself, but existent God, which never changes. while in them. Unity lies in their manifestarelation to the cosmos they may be tion - which is wojud - while multithrough the existence of light.
If we ignore the existence of the either existent or nonexistent The plicity lies in their entities. which do
things for a moment, we can ask .things within God's knowledge are not exist in themselves. Hence, God
about the things 'in themselves'. What sometimes called the 'nonexistent ob- is identical with the existence of the
is an entity - a rock, a tree, a human jects of knowledge' (aJ-ma1umato7- things, but He is not identical with the
being, a sun, a world' - in itself, ma'dwna);their plurality cannot bring things.
about plurality in wojud any more
without reference to its existence';
In a context which pays more atEbno'l-'Arabi tells us that no entity than the plurality of our own ideas
tention to the structure of the cosmos,
possesses real existence, so the reality causes our minds to have many parts. Ebno'l-Arabi explains the relationEbno'l-Arabi explains the myste- ship between wojud and the entities
of the entity stays exactly the same,
whether or not it is found in the rious relationship between cosmic ex- in terms of the Breath of the AlI-

8

Issue 4

William C. Chittick

merciful (mfaso'r-Ralpnan).
In Koranic language, God is the All-merciful, and His mercy 'embraces all
things' (7:156).
Ebno'l-Arabi points
out that the only reality which embraces each and every thing in the
cosmos is existence, so existence is
God's mercy, since through it He
brings all things from the state of
nonexistence within His knowledge where they enjoy no bounties whatsoever - to a state of existence within
the world, where they are able to
perceive, enjoy, and experience their
own realities. Building on /)adiths in
which the Prophet refers to the 'breath'
of the All-merciful and Koranic verses
in which God's 'breathing' is mentioned, Ebno'l-'Arabi
compares the
process of creation to the breathing
of a breather. The breath itself is like
the underlying substance within which
all things assume their specific characteristics; through it the 'immutable
entities' (a1-a'yano'th-thabeta) become
'existent
entities'
t el-e'y ano'lmawjuda)
(without
losing
their
immutability in God's knowledge aIlg
without gaining true existence)," In
the same context Ebno'l-Arabi also
refers to many Koranic verses which
mention the creative act of God in
terms of His speech and allude to the
infinite 'words of God'. These words
of God, says Ebno'l-Arabi, are the individual entities or creatures.
When
God exhales the Breath of the AlImerciful, He also speaks. Within the
Breath the whole cosmos takes specific form. Since the words of God
are individual and distinct realities,
multiplicity
is real; but since the
Breath of God is the reality of existence, all things share in that reality
inasmuch as they exist within the cosmos. Words depend absolutely upon
the Breath, but the Breath has no
need for the words; God speaks not
because some external factor forces
Him to speak, but because He is
merciful and generous by nature and
wills to bring creatures into existence.
Hence, absolute wojud displays its
innate qualities of mercy and compassion
through overflowing
and

I
I
r-

Ii
I

i
I
I

Winter 1989- 1990

t

SUFI

bringing the 'other' into existence.
of wojud in itself corresponds to a
If we pursue the analogy of the
certain type of philosophical approach,
divine Breath with the human breath
and although Ebno'l-Arabi does not
a little further, we come across another
neglect this approach, he is far more
primary teaching of Ebno'l-Arabi,
concerned with investigating the selfconcerning which we will have more
revelation of wojud in human lanto say in what follows. Is the breath
guage, that is, the holy scriptures. In
of a human being the same as himself?
practice, the 'holy scriptures' are the
One cannot answer this question
Koran and the Hadith (though not in
simply by saying 'yes' or 'no'. In one
theory, since Ebno'l-Arabi acknowlrespect, the person's breath is not the
edges the validity of the scriptures of
other religions).
Through scripture
same as himself, since he is a human
being and his breath is a breath. But
wojud - God Himself - reveals itself
a human being without breath is a
to man in a linguistic mode in order
corpse, and breath without a human
to inform him of its nature.
This
being is moist air. So, in fact, the
'information' concerning God which
two terms, human being and breath,
we receive through the scriptures is
are somehow inseparable.
10 the
summarized in terms of the names of
same way, the Breath of the A11- God, traditionally
said to number
merciful is the same as God; yet it
ninety-nine. Each name of God menis different from God. Likewise, the
tioned in the Koran and the Hadith
words which become articulated within
tells us something of the ultimate
the Breath are the same as the Breath,
reality of wojud, though that ultimate
yet different.
Hence, there is no
reality in itself can never be known.
absolute identity between an existent
Most of Ebno'l-'Arabi's writings deal
entity and God, nor is there an absolute
with the explication of the Koran and
difference.
The exact relationship
Hadith, since he is constantly conalways remains a mystery,· even
cerned to find the 'divine roots' (a1though we can gain a certain grasp
osulo']-elahiya) or 'divine supports'
of it through investigation and God's
(a1-mostanadato'1-elahiya) of all phenomena in the universe through the
help.
help of scripture. God in Himself often called the 'Essence' (adh-dhat)
Perfect Man: The Ontotranscends phenomena absolutely,
logy of the Divine Names
but there is something about the way
in which God brings the existent
What do we know about wojud
as such? First, we know nothing; or
things into the cosmos which tells us
rather, we know that wojud is indeabout God and makes clear for us the
finable and inconceivable, since we
nature of wojud. On the one hand,
this something is expressed linguistican only know of it what we have of
it in our hands, yet, strictly speaking,
cally by the Koran; on the other, it
we have nothing, since we are nonexis expressed ontologically and episistent. Put otherwise, how can the
temologically
through the universe
words encompass the speaker? How
and our own self-knowledge.
Ebn01'Arabi frequently quotes the Koranic
can a visible calor comprehend the
reality of invisible light? Yet, in spite
verse which tells us to gaze upon the
of this, we can, indeed, know somecosmos and within ourselves in order
to perceive the 'signs' (ayat) of God's
thing of wojud, precisely because we
have a certain knowledge of ourReality (41:53).
What, then, do we know about
selves and the cosmos around us, and
all these realities give us intimations
wojud! We know what the Koran has
told us. Hence we know, for exof the Absolute Reality from which
they have issued forth.
ample, that wojud is Alive, Knowing,
Willing, Powerful, Speaking, GenerAnalyzing the qualities of wojud
ous and Just. These seven Koranic
within the cosmos to grasp the nature

9

SUFI

Ebno'I-'Arobi's Doctrine of the Oneness of Being

then, refer to God on the one hand;
but they also refer to the things or
entities, since, in order to come into
the world, the things must reflect
wojud in some manner, or else they
could not exist in any sense.
For Ebn01-'Arabi,
the divine
names are the bridge between the
Non-phenomenal
and the phenomenal, both epistemologically and ontologically. In other words, without the
divine names and attributes as revealed in scripture, we could have no
certain knowledge of the nature of
wojud.
At the same time, these
names denote the actual reality of
wojud, and hence, they delineate the
modes in which wojud comes to manifest itself through its 'signs: the things
of the cosmos. On the one hand, only
God possesses true life, true knowledge, true will, true power, and so on.
On the other hand, each thing in the
cosmos manifests certain aspects of
God's life, knowledge, will and power
by the very fact that it manifests
wojud. The life which we possess is
not true life, since true life belongs
only to God. But at the same time,
our life does possess a certain reality,
or else we would neither know nor
perceive.
When God grants existence to
the entities, they come into existence
according to their own realities, This
means, for example, that God gives
existence to a particular tree, and it
enters into the cosmos exactly as He
has known it for all eternity, with all
the specific qualities relating to that
particular tree in that particular time
and place.
The immutable entities
cannot be compared to the Platonic
ideas, because the ideas are universals rather than particulars.
But we
can compare the divine names to the
Platonic ideas, since each Koranic
name of God denotes a specific
The opening page from the second volume of the Fotuhato'l-mak/dya, by Ebno'l
ontological attribute in which the
'Arabi, 16th century, Courtesy of the British library (Arabic monuscript, Or 132),
entities share to some degree. Somewhich flow forth from wojud and
times, however, Ebno'l-Arabi declares
names of God are frequently cited as
that God's names are infinite, for
which belong to wojud, but we can
the key attributes upon which all the
other divine names depend. Through
never grasp wojud itself, which traneach entity displays a property of
scends all its attributes while possessthese and other divine names, we can
wojud, thereby signifying wojud and
'naming' it; in this sense each thing
ing each of them fully. These names,
grasp many of the characteristics

10

Issue 4

William C. Chittick

is a name of God; so the names are manifestation for wojud, wojud can
particulars. These two views of the manifest itself in its full splendor only
in a human being. This can easily
divine names led some of Ebno'l-Arbe seen if we look again at the seven
abi's followers to distinguish between
the ninety-nine names of God and the primary names of God referred to
immutable entities by calling the first above. Humans share with animals
the 'universal names of God' and the the fact that they manifest life,
knowledge, will and power.
But
second the 'particular names of God:
According to Ebno'l-Arabi, each human beings can manifest these
existent entity shares in all divine at- attributes with much greater intensity
tributes, since each displays exis- than animals. Who would compare
tence, and existence is God, the the power of an elephant to that of
Essence named by all the names. But a Genghis Khan? Or the knowledge
every entity does not manifest all of a bee to that of Buddha? Moreattributes, and hence the whole cosmos over, only humans can manifest the
remaining three attributes within the
is ranked in degrees of excellence
sensory world. 'Speech' is a specifi(tafar,fhoI) in accordance with the
cally
human quality, while 'generosextent to which the existent entities
ity'
and
'justice' cannot be applied to
display the attributes of God within
animals
except metaphorically.
the universe. Some creatures have
But
not
all human beings employ
a greater life, some a lesser life, and
some seem to have no life whatso- their speech in a manner appropriate
to the full perfection of wojud, and
ever - though the Sufis can perceive
an invisible life even in stones, through few people are generous and just.
Nor do men possess knowledge, will,
the eye of mystical 'unveiling' (kashi).
So also each and every attribute of power, or any other divine attribute
Since people
God manifests itself in varying inten- in equal measure.
sities - knowledge, will, power, actualize the divine attributes and
speech, generosity, justice, mercy, for- manifest them in their lives in varying
giveness, and so on. Each entity has manners, Ebno'l-Arabi distinguishes
five basic categories of human beings:
a specific 'preparedness' (esle'dad)
which allows it to manifest the attrib- unbeliever (kafer), person of faith
(mo men), friend of God (waJi),
utes of wojud to a greater or lesser
degree. A stone manifests power in prophet (nabi), and messenger (raa certain passive way.
A plant suI). He devotes hundreds of pages
manifests traces of life, knowledge, to explaining how different kinds of
will, and active power. An animal people manifest the divine names in
manifests all these attributes with different degrees. Thus, his anthromuch greater intensity. At the top of pology is in fact an ontology, frrmly
the visible hierarchy of existence, based on the Koranic doctrine of
human beings have the potential to God's names and attributes.
It is worth stressing that for Ebno'lmanifest every divine name.
A famous btuiitl: tells us that God 'Arabi, as for most other Muslim
created Adam upon His own form, thinkers, morality and ethics, like anand Ebno'l-Arabi makes much of the thropology, are rooted in ontology. In
fact that here the name 'Allah' is other words, a human being who
employed, since Allah is the 'all-com- wants to actualize his full humanity
prehensive name of God' (el-esmo'imust bring out the divine qualities
jame), to which all the other names which are latent within himself. The
refer. Hence human beings were qualities of a true human being are
created with the potentiality of God's qualities, which is to say that
displaying all names of God, while they belong to wojud itself. These
other creatures in the cosmos can divine qualities are moral qualities in
only manifest some names of God. that they provide the model for every
Though all creatures are loci of proper, compassionate and humane

Winter 1989-1990

SUFI

act. The Koran tells us that God is
Generous, Just, Forgiving, Kind,
Patient, Clement, and so on, and
these are precisely the attributes which
a human being must gain in order to
reach moral and spiritual perfection.
Hence, Ebno'l-Arabi identifies the
Sufi path with the 'assumption of the
character traits of God' (at-takhalloq
be akhliiqe11iih), and he identifies
these character traits with the divine
names. In other words, there are
absolute standards for ethics and social
behavior grounded in the same principles which govern the natural world.
As a result, wojud can find its full
manifestation only in a proper moral
order established among human
beings.
Ebno'l-Arabi connects the full
manifestation of wojud to human
beings most clearly in his famous
doctrine of 'perfect man' (al-cnsano7kiunel), In one respect, perfect man
(who is contrasted with 'animal man',
al-ensano1-l;!ayawan) is the embodiment of every praiseworthy human
quality; he is the exemplar of human
wisdom, compassion, and all moral
and spiritual good. He guides individuals and society to an ideal equilibrium with the ultimate Good. He
represents God among human beings,
leading them to their supreme happiness in the next world. In his human
manifestation he is found in the form
of the prophets and the great friends
of God (akabero1-awjia).
In another respect, perfect man is
the goal of the cosmos, since God
manifests all His attributes only
through perfect man; in him alone
does wojud come to a full flowering.
No creature other than perfect man
possesses the requisite preparedness
(este'dad) to manifest all God's moral
traits within the cosmos. If wojud in
itself is the absolutely non-phenomenal, it only attains to its full manifestation within the phenomenal world
through perfect man, who displays
every name of God in perfect harmony and equilibrium. This is why
Ebno'l-Arabi says that the 'Mohammadan' friends of God - that is, those

11

r
I

SUFI

Ebno'I-'Arabi's Doctrine of the Oneness of Being

'signs' of God which appear in the
cosmos. In fact, says Ebno'l-Arabi,
the theologians based their analysis
of the divine nature on reason (al'aqI), and reason functions such that
it can understand only what God is
not On its own, reason can gain no
positive knowledge of God's attributes.
Hence, the scriptures provide us with
this positive knowledge, and reason
will not go astray if it follows the
scriptures. But most rational thinkers
- theologians in particular - insist
upon interpreting (ta'wil) scripture in
accordance with their own rational
perception of what can be attributed
appropriately to God. As a result,
they refuse to accept the face value
of any description of God which
suggests that He is similar to the
things of the cosmos.
If reason by its very nature wants
to negate attributes from God and
affirm His incomparability, 'imagination' (khayaI) has the power to grasp
God's similarity (tashbih). Here we
cannot begin to describe Ebn01'Arabi's extremely detailed compariIncomparability and
son of the two kinds of knowledge
Similarity
acquired through reason and imaginaOn the one hand wojud in itself tion, but we can summarize his conclusions: Perfect knowledge of God
is unknowablc
and transcends
absolutely the existent and nonexistent must declare God both incomparable
things, which are infinite in number. and similar. God in Himself - absolute
On the other hand, wojud shows itself
wojud - is incomparable with all
through the existent entities and existent things, but God also manithrough the revealed scriptures, so fests the properties of wojud in the
human beings can acquire knowledge cosmos, and in this respect we have
of its qualities. In the terminology to say that God is somehow similar
developed by Islamic scholastic
to the created things.
theology, kelsm, God's unknowability
What, then, is the cosmos? It is
and transcendence are referred to as the 'other', since it is defmed as
everything other than the Essence of
tanzih, or 'incomparability'. In other
words, God cannot be compared with God. But it is not other in every
anything; no existent thing stands on respect, since it is all the words
a par with wojud in itself. Our only articulated within the Breath of the
knowledge about God is that we do All-merciful, and the Breath is
not truly know anything about Him. somehow identical with the Breather.
This position was affirmed by Again, the cosmos is God's self-distheologians long before Ebno'l-Arabi,
closure (tajalll) within His loci of
and he accepts it as true. However, manifestation. Through the cosmos,
he points out that this description of wojud displays its characteristics and
the divine Reality does not provide us properties, that l..-i, its universal and
with a full picture of wojud, since it particular names, both the ninety-nine
does not account satisfactorily for the names of God and the immutable

who have inherited the sciences and
moral traits of Mohammad, the most
perfect of perfect men - possess 'the
station of no station' (maqam la
maqam). In other words, they have
actualized every perfection found in
existence, so they cannot be identified ir a limiting sense with any specific perfection. Other friends of God
are dominated by specific divine
names, or specific perfections of
wojud, such as kriowledge, speech,
generosity, justice, compassion, love,
patience, perserverance, and so on.
But the Muhammadan friends of God
actualize every name and every
perfection; hence, they are dominated
by no name, no perfection, 'no station'. On the contrary, they act in
perfect accordance with the necessities of every situation, since they
manifest the ultimate reality of wojud
itself. Like the divine Essence, they
are unknowable and ungraspable, yet
they overflow with every imaginable
good.

12

enunes. Hence, the Breath of the
All-merciful brings the invisible realities out to the visible plane. In one
sense, the universe is other than God,
since the Essence lies infinitely
beyond it. In another sense, the
universe is identical with God, since
nothing is found within it which does
not name Him. The inexhaustible
words spoken by God are the same
as the Breath, and the Breath is the
same as the All-merciful; so, the
words are the same as the All-merciful. Ebno'l-Arabi constantly moves
back and forth between these two
points of view, that of identity and
difference. He sums up his position
with the deceptively simple statement: 'He/not He' (howa la howa).
Each entity in the cosmos is identical
with wojud and other than wojud at
one and the same time.
The reality of 'He/not He' can be
perceived most clearly through imagination. Ebno'l-Arabi discusses imagination on many levels, and it plays
such an important role in his teachings that he claims no one can gain
any true knowledge without understanding it An imaginal (not 'imaginary') reality is one which dwells in
an intermediate domain between two
other realities, so that we must affirm
and deny it at the same time. One
of the most common examples is a
mirror image. Your reflection in a
mirror acts as a kind of bridge between yourself and the mirror; you
have to affirm that the image is both
yourself and the mirror, and that it is
neither yourself nor the mirror. Likewise, dreams are imaginal realities.
If you see your father in a dream,
you have seen your father and not
your mother or brother; at the same
time, what you have seen is nothing
but your own self. So the imaginal
reality you have perceived is a bridge
or 'isthmus' (barzakh) between yourself and your father. The most succinct
statement you can make about the
dream image is 'he/not he'.
Ebno'l-Arabi perceives imagination on three different cosmic levels.
On the human level, man's world of

Issue 4

SUFI

William C. Chittick

inner experience is imagination. This
is the 'soul' (nafs), which dwells at
an intermediate stage, or 'isthmus',
between the spirit, which according to
the Koran (32:9) derives from God's
Breath, and the body, which God
kneaded from clay. The spirit is one
reality composed of pure light, life,
knowledge and the other divine attributes, while the body is a multiplicity of parts, overcome by darkness,
inanimate matter, ignorance, and the
lack of divine attributes. The soul is
a mixture of the two sides. It is neither pure light nor pure darkness, but
an intermediate stage between light
and darkness.
It possesses every
divine attribute to a certain ambiguous degree.
Each human soul represents a unique mixture of qualities
and a unique possibility of ascension
toward the perfection of 'no station',
where all the divine attributes arc
possessed
in the fullest possible
measure. But each human being may
also descend toward multiplicity and
darkness, thus becoming lost in dispersion and passing into an infrahuman state. The whole intermediate
domain of the soul is one of imagination and ambiguity, mixture and
perplexity.
The only path of safety
within this maze of affirmation and
denial is the route set down by the
prophets.
On a second level, Ebno'l-Arabi
perceives imagination in the macrocosm, the world outside of man. There
are two fundamental created worlds,
the invisible world of spirits and the
visible world of bodies, corresponding
to spirit and body in the microcosm.
The world of spirits is inhabited by
angels, who are said, in the traditional symbolism, to be created from
'light', while the world of bodies is inhabited by animals and humans, whose
visible parts are made of 'clay'.
Between these two worlds stand many
other worlds which combine the
qualities of the two basic worlds and
which are known collectively as the
'World of Imagination'. For example,
the 'jinn' are said to inhabit some of
these intermediary worlds. They are

Winter 1989- 1990

I

I

made of 'fire', which is clearly a
bridge between light and clay. Fire
is luminous like light, yet it cannot do
without fuel from the world of clay.
It tries to ascend to light; yet it is
attached by its root to the world of
darkness.
Angelic beings descend
from the world of light into the world
of imagination and are perceived in
visions by the prophets and the friends
of God.
Here also the prophets
receive the scriptures, which bring together the cognitive luminosity of the
upper world with a linguistic crystallization through which human beings
dominated
by dispersion and darkness can perceive the light of the
spirit.
In a third sense, 'imagination' refers to the greatest of all intermediate realities, which is the whole
cosmos, or the Breath of the Allmerciful. The cosmos stands halfway
between absolute wojud and absolute
nothingness.
Everything that 'exists'
in the universe is He/not He, itself/
not itself. Moreover, this description
applies to the cosmos not only as a
static reality but also as a dynamic
reality. In other words, each moment
is both identical and not identical with
the preceding and following
moments.
Ebno1-'Arabi points to the
infinity of wojud and cites the axiom,
'Self-disclosure never repeats itself,'
since God in His infinite effusion is
under no constraints; hence, no two
things and no two instants are exactly
the same.
This is Ebno'l-Arabi's
famous doctrine of the 'renewal of
creation at each 'instant'. As Ebn01'Arabi writes concerning the cosmos,
Everything other than the Essence of God stands at the station
of transmutation, speedy and slow.
Everything other than the Essence
of God is intervening imagination
and vanishing shadow ...undergoing
transformation from form to form
constantly
and forever.
And
imagination is nothing but this ....
So the cosmos becomes manifest
only within imagination. (Fotul;!at,
vei n, n.d., p. 313)

Wojud is one in its Essence and

many through its names and self-disclosures; it is both incomparable with
all the entities and similar to every
created thing. Wojud finds its most
complete outward expression in perfect man, who manifests all the names
of God in their fullness. Just as God
has two perfections, that of the Essence and that of the names, so also
perfect man has two perfections, that
of his essential reality as the form of
God Himself and that of his accidental manifestations, through which he
displays God's names in particular
contexts.
In respect of the first
perfection, all perfect men are essentially one, and one might speak of 'the
perfect man' as a unique reality or as
the 'logos'. In respect of the second
perfection, each perfect man has a
specific function to play within the
cosmos; so there are many perfect
men fulfilling the roles God has given
to them. In respect of the essential
perfection of the perfect men, the
Koran says that there is no distinction
among God's messengers (2:285), but
in respect of their accidental perfection, it declares that God has ranked
them in degrees of excellence (2:253).
In short, the perfect men are fixed in
their essences, which are not other
than the essence of wojud itself; at
the same time, they undergo constant
transformation and transmutation by
participating in the ceaseless selfdisclosure of God and manifesting the
properties of the divine names in a
never-ending variety of cosmic situations. The heart (qajb) of perfect
man experiences endless fluctuation
(taqallob), since it is the locus within
which he perceives God's self-disclosures, which never repeat themselves.
God created the universe to manifest the fullness of His own nature.
As the famous badith qodsi expresses
it, God says, 'I was a hidden treasure;
so I wanted to be known; hence, I
created the creatures, in order that I
might be known.'
In other words,
through the cosmos, wojud discloses
the infinite possibilities latent within
itself. Yet it manifests itself in its
fullness only through perfect man.

13

SUFI

Ebno'l-Arobl's Doctrine of the Oneness of Being

'No station' is at once every station.
2. Translating the term wojud as 'exissince he alone actualizes every onNot He is He. Oneness becomes
tological quality - every name and
tence' rather than 'Being' or 'finding' (its
manifest in the plurality of man's
attribute of God. Perfect man alone
literal sense) in the context of Ebno'lperfections.
has reached the goal of human life,
'Arabi's writings raises a number of
which is to manifest the divine form
problems, which are discussed in Chittick,
in which man was created.
The Suii Path of Knowledge.
Ebno'l-Arabi devotes most of his
Notes
attention not to ontology but to 'an3. On the history of the term, see Chittick,
thropology', that is, describing the
1. For detailed explanations of the ideas
"Rumi and Wahdat el-wujud', in The
nature of perfect man and the manner
discussed in this paper, see w.e. Chittick,
Heritage of Rumi, edited by Amin Banani
in which human beings can reach
The
Sufi
Path
of
Knowledge:
lbn
sland Georges Sabagh, Cambridge: Camperfection.
The practical sides of
Ali\rabl:S
Metaphysics
of
Imagination,
bridge University Press, forthcoming.
Ebno'l-Arabi's teaching - which are
bany: SUNY Press, 1989.
far more detailed than the theoretical
side which we have been discussing
- describe how a human being can
discipline the intellect and the imagination in order to combine the vision
of incomparability with that of similarity. A mere rational understanding of the reality of He/not He will
not aid a person to ascend to the
world of light. The inward world of
imagination cannot be transformed
by Alex Cowie
into a place of the self-disclosure of
wojud unless we follow the guidance
of those human beings who have
reached perfection before us - the
If you wish
messengers, prophets, and friends of
God.
I will be the voiceless cry
In short, the ultimate reality of
wojud is both infinitely beyond us and
in Your green house of falling stars
ever-present
with us.
In its
incomparability wojud is one with an
I + .il! be the cave
absolute oneness, but in its similarity
it manifests itself through the real
where Your wounded leopard sleeps
plurality which we perceive in the
cosmos.
The Non-phenomenal
reI will be the light of peace
mains forever incomparable, just as
light remains forever light; but the
upon all Your broken fences &
Non-phenomenal brings the phenomethe dancing fish in Your warm rivers
nal into existence through mercy and
compassion toward everything that
has the potential to exist. The cosmos
I will be the softest pillow
in turn displays all the properties of
In Your sweet bed of night
wojud in a differentiated
manner.
Human beings are able to return by
way of their own selves to the Non& You
phenomenal, thereby realizing their
shall be
original state as nonexistent immutable entities; but, by the same token,
the perfect men come to manifest the
my only love
fullness of wojud, since their nonexistent entities were made in the divine
form, which is the form of wojud.

If You Wish

14

Issue 4

