On the Cosmolog o/Dhikr

Chaptu 4

On the CosmologYof Dhikr
William C. Chittick
Let me begin with a prophetic saying that expressessuccinctly the
al-Dunyd
basic Islamic understutrdi.rg of man and the world:
..This world is
Allah'
d,hihr
mal.anatun, ma|anun md, fih6, ittd'
order
accursed; accursed is everything within it, save dhikr Alld'h." In
ro suggest a few of the implications of this saying for the theory and
pru.tf| of d.hikrAltdh,"tie remembrance of God", I shall review the
tasic concept of d,hikras it appears in the Koran and then look at a
few of the teachings of Ibn Arabi (d. 1240 A.D.), one of the greatest
Muslim metaphysicians and cosmologists'1
The Islamic tradition is rooted in knowledge. This rooting is
most evident in the first testimony of faith, 'There is no god but
of
God." This statement is taken as epitomizing the first principle
Islamic faith, which is tawhtd, the assertion of God's unity. However,
even those familiar with Islamic teachings sometimes forget that
tawhtd,has nothing to do with history, because it is simply a statement of the way things are. The more sophisticated of Muslim
thinkers have alwaysmiintained that tawhtdis a universal and atemand
poral truth. To be human is to have an intuition of this truth,
Adam
from
sent,
Lu.ry o.r. of the "124,000 prophets" that God has
his mesdown to Muhammad, came with this truth as the core of
sage.
Tawhid exPressesthe nature of reality' irrespe-ctive of the exissince we
tence of the universe, man' or any other beings' However'
into
takes
do have a world and human beings, the Islamic tradition
account a second fact, that of the human situation. It encapsulates
"heedlessthis situation in the words "forgetfuln ess" (nisy6,n) and
ShartIntroSufsm:.A
1.For moreon d.hikrinthe Islamictradition,seeChittick,,
of
iuction(Oxford:Oneworld,2000), Chapter5' On the life and significance
(Cambridge:
o!
Voyage
The
'Arabi:
Ibn
Addas,
iUn etufi, seeClauJe
\ !ztur7'
IslamicTextssociety,2001).For Ibn Arabi'smeiaphysical-11{,c9smo1og19l
Press'1989)
SU-NY
;;;;hi;gr, seeChitti'ck,TheSufiPath.oflhouledge--(AJ.bany:
of God(Albany:SUNYPress'1998)'
and Chi"ttick,TheSetf-Disclasuri

48

ness" (ghafla). Although people do have an innate intuition of
tawhtd,they do nor necessarilyfind it ready to mind. It may not be
easy for them to bring it from latency to actuality or to voice it in
language and put it into practice. They need the help of the
prophets. With "prophecy", the second principle of Islamic faith,
the perspective shifts from the atemporal to the temporal, from the
eternal to the contingent, from God to history.
The first function of the prophets is to "remind" people of their
own divinely given reality. In speaking of this "reminder", the
euran
employs the word dhihr and several of its derivatives (e.g., d,hikr6,,
tadhktr, tadhkira). Moreover, it calls the human response to this
reminder by the same word dhi,kr.T}rre "reminder" that comes from
the side of God by means of the prophets calls forth *remembrance" from the side of man. The use of the one word for a movement with two directions-frorn the Divine to the human and from
the human to the Divine-is tlpical of the Quran's unitary perspective.Here in fact there is only one motivating force, and that is
the Divine activity that makes manifest the good, the true, and the
beautiful, even if it appears to us as tr,vodifferent movements. Moreover, the Quran also makes it eminently clear that ,.rememf12n6g"-1he human response to reminder-does not mean simply
to acknowledge the truth of tawhid. The word itself also means ,,to
mention". On the human side, dhikr is both the awarenessof God
and the expression of this awareness through language, whether
vocal or silent.
If reminder is the first function of the prophets, their second
function is to provide the insrructions that allow people to live a life
that is pleasing to God. The Quran calls these instructions "guidance" (hudd,). To follow the guidance of the prophets is to
remember God in thought, word, and deed. So, dhi,kristo keep God
in view at all times, places, and activities. Ibn Arabi defines it as alhudAr ma'a'I-madhkilr, "presence with the One Remembered" (fV
36.8).2If we remain absent frorn God in thought, word, or deed, we
have not remembered Him as He should be remembered.
The Quran and the tradition sum up the practical implications
of remembrance with the word 'ibdda, which means worship,
service,and being a servant. This is the most important human task.
2. References are to Ibn Arabi, al-Fufihd,tal-makkiyya,4 volumes (Cairo, 19ll). I
indicate volume number, page nurnber, and line number.

49

William C. Chittick

On the Cosmologo/Dhikr

In the Quran God says,"l created jinnand mankind only to worship
Me" or "to serve Me" (51:56). In other words, God created human
beings so that theywould remember Him and bring themselvesinto
conformity with His Reality. They can do so only by means of right
understanding, right faith, right speech, and right activity. The criterion for "rightness" is the degree to which one understands, acts,
and exists in the presence of God. Being present with God is preciselydhikr Almh, "the remembrance of God".
Islamic faith has three principles, not just two.3 After Divine
unity and prophecy comes ma'dd, the "return" to God, commonly
discussedin terms of death and resurrection. Since everyone must
die and be brought forth in the presence of God, the afterlife is
often called the "compulsory return". But the more sophisticated
theologians, philosophers, and spiritual teachers place greater
stresson the "voluntary return", that is, the fact that our existential
situation demands that we choose freely to return to God here and
now. This existential situation is defined by reality itself, which is primarily God, and secondarily the world and the human self as they
actually are, which is to say, as they disclose the Reality of God. For
those who have eyes to see, the cosmos and the human configuration, by their very nature and their very modality of being, point to
God. And the fact of the repeated prophetic reminders leaves no
excuse for not seeing and not remembering.
To sum up, the general Islamic understanding of the human
situation is that correct knowledge of the world and the human
soul demands that we freely and actively undertake the return to
God. We return to God by remembering Him on every level of our
being. To remember Him is to rnake the fact of His unity, the fact
of His absolute and infinite Realiry the axis of our thought, speech,
and activity. We do so by "worship", which is the appropriate
response to tawhtdand prophecy. Thus the Quran speaks of tawhtd
and worship as the two basic dimensions of every authentic tradition. God says in the Quran, '"We never sent a Messenger before
thee without revealing to him, 'There is no god but I, so worship

The Book of the Soul
A great deal could be said about the various forms that the practice
of dhikr has taken, not only among those commonly known as
"Sufis", but also among Muslims in general.a However, my purpose
here is to review basic Islamic teachings about the universe and the
self in order to suggestnot only why dhikris an efficacious contemplative practice, but also why, in actual fact, there is nothing else
thatwe can do. On close analysis,we see that dhihris the practice of
God Himself and, along with Him, that of all of creation. Unless we
understand this, we will not be able to grasp our human condition
or to take advantage of it while we have it. Having failed to do so,
"this world" will be "accursed" for us. At our inevitable return to
God-when we shall finally recognize with utter certainry that we
can do nothing but remember God-we shall raste the fruit of that
accursedness.
Anyone familiar with the Quran knows that it speaks of God by
detailing His names and activities.In the process,it goes to extraordinary lengths to emphasize that it is God's book, revelation,
speech, and words. It maintains that all revelation to the prophets is
nothing but God's speech, and that God speaksto the prophets so
as to clarify the nature of things and to explain the appropriate
human response. Moreover, it tells us repeatedly that God creates
the world by speaking to it. Just as the Quran and other scriptures
are collections of God's "signs" or "verses" (dydt), so also the whole
universe is a vast collection of God's signs and verses.In effect, God
creates the universe by revealing three books-the universe, the
human self, and scripture. In each, He reveals His signs and writes
out His words.
Once we understand that reality is configured by speech, we
shall also see that the human task is to read and understand what
has been written. Then we can follow the instructions laid out in the
text of scripture, the world, and the soul. The interpretation of the
Quran-which is the foundation and fruit of all the Islamic sciences-has always entailed the simultaneous interpretation of the
universe and the soul. Every Muslim, by accepting the euran as

Me"' (21: 25).
3. For a detailed review of the three principles of faith and their role in formulating the Islamic worldview see Sachiko Murata and William C. Chittick, ?he
Vision of lslam (St Paul: Paragon House, 1994) , pp. 35-264.

50

4' Thewritingsof manyof the earlyorientalistsgivethe impressionthat thepractice of dhikrwasinventedby the sufis,probablyunder rie influenceof ihrisi

tian monasticism or japa yoga.Although-this view has largely been debunked bv
more careful scholarship, it can still be found in the secondary literature.
a,

William C. Chittick

On the Cosmolog o/Dhikr

God's Word, has accepted the responsibility of understanding what
this Word means. The fruit of this understanding redounds on the
soul. Every soul will answer for its own reading, not only of the
books, the universe and the soul.
Quran, but also of the other two
soul itself that reads and underit
is
the
,41d, giu.n the fact that
stands] the book of the soul is the all-important determinant of our
destiny. This helps explain why, in recounting the events that will
take p'laceon the Day of Resurrection, the Quran tells us that every
human being will be addressedby the words, "Read your book! Your
soul suffices you today as a reckoner against you!" (17:14)'
The crux of knowledge, then, is to read and know one's own
soul. The whole trajectory of the voluntary return to God is to learn
how to interpret oneself through understanding the wisdom
present in boih revelation and the cosmos. The return reaches its
iruition on the Day of Resurrection. \Alhat we as human beings
shoul.d,wantto learn is who we are now and who we will be when we
arrive back at the meeting with God. All knowledge should serve
the goal of this knowledge. As Rumi puts it,

God's creation of the universe by speaking to it, he frequently elaborates on the expression "the Breath of the All-Merciful", which he
takes from a prophetic sayrng. According to the Quran, it is God as
the All-Merciful who sits on the Throne. The Throne is typically
understood as the outermost sphere, which embraces the whole
universe in its infinite spatial and temporal expanse. The King "sits
on the Throne" because He is the King and the universe is His
kingdom. He sits on it as the "All-Merciful" because the Divine
mercy-which is the bestowal of the good, the beautiful, and the
true-determines the fundamental nature of the universe. The
Prophet tells us that the inscription on the Throne of God reads,
"My mercy takes precedence over My wrath." Moreover, within the
human microcosm, God's Throne is the heart. It follows that, just as
nothing lies beyond the Throne in the macrocosm but God, so also
nothing is found within the Throne of the microcosm but God.
\Alhen the All-Merciful speaks, He articulates His words in His
Breath, just as we speak by articulating our words in our breath. It
follows that the All-Merciful's "Breath" is the underlying substance
of the universe. It is the page upon which God writes out the book
of the cosmos.
The nature of the Divine words that appear in the Breath is suggested already in the derivation of the word kald,m, "speech". It
comes from kalm, a word that the Arabic dictionaries define asjarh,
which means to cut or wound with a weapon. Jarh in turn is
explained more generally as rneaning ta'thtr, which means to leave
effects and traces (athar). Basing himself on these standard definitions, Ibn Arabi explains that the Divine speech leaves traces in the
undifferentiated and unarticulated divine Breath. Each of these
traces is then a "word" (kakma), that is, a "cut" or an "articulation"
in undifferentiated existence. The Breath itself remains forever
untouched and unarticulated by the words that it pronounces, just
as our breath is unaffected by the words that we speak.
In the eternal now, God speaks one word, and that is the command "Be!" This word gives rise to the beginningless and endless
successionof words and worlds that unfolds in the spiritual and corporeal realms. It is this one word "Be!" that bestows being, so all
things are implicitly contained within it. God directs this one word
toward everything which He wants to bring into existence. As the
Quran puts it, "Our only word to a thing, when We desire it, is to say
to it'Be!', so it comesto be" (16:40). The "things" (ashld) to whom

The spirit of all the sciencesis this, only this:
th'atyou know who you will be on the Day of Resurrection'5
In order to know who one is and who one will be, one must
know one's relation with God, who created man in His own image'
It is clear that the Divine speech creates the world and reveals the
scriprures. It is this same speech that apPears as the distinguishing
feaiure of man, created in God's image. The same speech reveals
to
the words of reminder, guidance, and prayer whereby man is able
is
it
remember his Source and undertake the return journey' And
of the
also this same speech that will be written plainly in the book
then,
condition,
human
The
soul on the Day of Resurrection.
and
do'
demands knowing that everything we understand, speak,
embody is being written and recorded in our own selves'

The Breath of the All-Merciful
the
Ibn Arabi, who is not known for his reticence, explicates
Divineandcosmicspeechinenormousdet ailandinresPect t o
of
pracrically every hurnan possibility. In discussing the implications
5. Rumi, Mathnaui (Nicholson edition) , Book 3, verse 2654'

52

53

William C. Chittick

On theCosmologo/Dhikr

God speaks abide in what Ibn Arabi calls "nonexistence" ('adam),
which is to say that they are nonexistent in themselves,though not
unknown to God. In other terms, "nonexistence" is the realm of the
Divine omniscience. God knows all things and all "entities" (a'yd.n)
for all eternity, but they have no existence of their own before He
tells them to come to be. At that point, they become articulated
within His Breath. Their "being" belongs not to them, but to the
Divine Breath within which they are Pronounced. Ibn Arabi writes,

nor the cosmos is empty for one moment of the inward existence
of bringing to be. Hence he never ceaseslistening, so he never
ceasesbeing silent. It is not possible for him to enter along with
Him in His speech. So, when you hear the servant speaking, that is
the Real's bringing to be within Him. The servanr remains in his
root, silent, standing before Him-high indeed is He! So, nothing
is ever heard but the Real's acts of bringing ro be. Understand this,
for it pertains to the core of true knowledge (III 218.30).

Nothing becomesmanifestin the cosmosexceptfrom the attribute
of speeih. Thus, the All-Merciful turns His facetowardsone of the
entities, and then the individuality that He intends opens up
within the Breath.(II 181'12)
Given that creatures are nothing but words uttered by God, our
knowledge of things is our knowledge of the Divine words. As Ibn
Arabi puts it, "The existence of created being has no root other
than the Divine attribute of speech, for created being knows
nothing of God but His speech, and that is what it hears" (II
g52.14).If creaturesknow nothing but speech,this is becausethere
is nothing else to be known. The speech that they know is the
speech that saysto themselves and to others "Be!" It never ceases
belonging exclusively to God. This is why Ibn Arabi can write that
the true attribute of creation is silence, just as the true attribute of
God is speech. When "speech" is attributed to creation, it is done so
only inaimuch as God has bestowed it, just as,when "being" is attributed to creation, it is done so only inasmuch as God has said "Be!"
to it. Ibn Arabi writes,
God says,'There is nothing that does not glorifr Him in praise"
J7:a4|.. . . We maintain that there is nothing whatsoeverin exisience that is silent.On the contrary,all things are speakingin laudation of God. In the sameway,we maintain that there is nothing
whatsoeverin existencethat speaksin respectof its own entity,on
the contrary, every entity other than God is silent and without
speech. since all things are loci of manifestation lfor God's
fieingl, speechbelongsto [God, who is] the Manifest(II77 '1'3)'
Elsewhere, Ibn Arabi makes the point in somewhat more detail:
The servantis silent and listening perpetually,in all of his states,
whether moving or still, standing or sitting. For_theservanthas
been granted the hearing of the Real'sspeech.He neverceases
hearirig the Real'scommind to come to be, whatevermay be the
states;d guisesin which he is coming to be. Neither the servant

In short, God speaksthrough all things.As speakers,the things
are "signs"or 'Verses"that givevoice to the namesand attributesof
God. They are words pronounced in the All-Merciful Breath.They
appear in three books-the book of the universe,the book of the
soul, and the book of revelation.

I(nowledge of the Names
Islamic theology commonly calls creatures the "acts" (af'AD of God.
Ibn Arabi explains that these acts are nothing but the "traces"
(athar) of God's names, the uestigiaDei. But what about the Divine
names themselves? What exactly are they? Ibn Arabi writes that
when we speak of names (israz)-whether we are talking about God
or creatures-we are speaking about "something that occurs from a
trace, or something from which a trace comes to be" (II 120.13). So
again, a name, like other words, is a "cut" or an "articulation" in the
plain fabric of universal Being.
The ultimate source of all names and all realities is of course the
very Selfhood of God, called the "Essence" (dhdt).In Himself, God
knows everything that will appear in the universe for all eterniry
because all things are simply the traces of His knowledge of His
Essence,which is Infinite and Absolute Being. So, God knows nor
only His own names, but also the names of all things. If He calls
Himself by many names both in the Quran and in other scriptures,
it is because the traces of the names are infinitely diverse. As Ibn
Arabi puts it, "God made the Divine names many only because of
the diversity of the traces that are manifest in created being" ([V

36.le) .
So, from a certain standpoint, the Divine names are the traces of
all the Divine attributes and qualities that become manifest in creation. God names Himself in terms of the creatures, which are, after
all, simply the words that He pronounces. Within the creatures, cer-

55

William C. Chittick

On the Cosmologyo/Dhikr

tain qualities can be discerned, and these can only be the qualities
of their Creator, the one who pronounces the words. The words
express nothing but the Speaker. The Divine Speaker is revealing
Himself through His speech as Merciful, Alive, Knowing, Powerful,
Speaking, and so on down the list of the so-called "ninety-nine
names" of God.
All names, whether of God or of creation, are in the last analysis
traces of the Divine Essence, which is the Absolute and Infinite
Selfhood of the Real. In Itself, the Essence is without trace and
unknowable to any but Itself. Nonetheless, man has been given the
capacity to know all the names-all the traces displayed by the
Essence,traces that are nothing but all things that can enter into
existence. It is this potential omniscience that sets man aPart from
all other creatures. When the Prophet reiterated the Biblical statement, "God created Adam in His own image", he certainly had in
mind the fact that God had given Adam knowledge of all things.
The Quran is explicit on this poinl "He taughtAdam the names, all
of t hem" (2: 31).
Ibn Arabi points out that it is precisely names that make dhikr
possible.This is true not only for man, but also for God. The Quran
often attributes dhikr to God, as in the verse, "Remember Me, and I
will remember you" (2:152). God, after all, knows things through
their "names", which are nothing but their traces in His own omniscience, traces that are commonly called "essences"or "entities". Ibn
Arabi writes:

In the universe as a whole, the names are infinitely differenti
ated, but in the Divine image that is man, they are brought together
in an all-comprehensive epitome. Adam received the all-inclusive
knowledge of the names when God taught it to him, and he was able
to know all the names precisely because he was made in the image
of God, who knows and utters all things. In actual fact, Adam came
to know and understand the names by knowing his own self, made
in God's image. This sort of knowledge does not come by the intermediacy of discursive thought, but rather directly from the nature
of things. Thus, in the following passage,Ibn Arabi refers to it by a
standard Sufi expression for unmediated knowledge, "tasting" (or
"sapience" in the eqrmological sense: dhawq). He writes:

Adam waspreferredover the angelsonly becausehe encompassed
the knowledge of the names.For, were it not for the names,God
would remembernothing, and nothing would rememberGod. So,
God remembersonly through the names,and He is remembered
and praisedonly through the names(II489.21).

God taughtAdamall the namesfrom Adam'sown essencethrough
tasting,for He disclosedHimself to him in His entirety.No name
remainedin the Divine Presencethat did not becomemanifesrto
Adam from himself. From his own essencehe cameto know all the
namesof his Creator(II 120,24).

Achieving ttre Status of Adam
Quranic theology, rooted in words, names, and remembrance,
allows Muslim sagesto understand the human role in the cosmos
largely in terms of the achievement of true knowledge of God. This
is a role that belongs exclusively to human beings, because they
alone were created in God's image, and they alone were given the
potential to know all the names. Ibn Arabi explains this human
uniqueness in many passages.In one of these, he begins by referring to the Quranic verse (2:30) that describes the protest of the
angelswhen God told them that He was going to create Adam as His
"vicegerent" (hhaltfu) in the earth:

In sum, the distinguishing feature of man is knowledge of all the
names, which are the traces of the Divine qualities, or the traces of
the Divine EssenceItself. In the creative act of the eternal now, God
voices the names, and these names aPPear as the creatures in the
All-Merciful Breath. The endless array of creatures other than man
are specific words of God. Every creature has a certain "understanding" of God, but only in respect of the name or names that differentiate it from all other named things. Only man was taught all
the names, making him somehow equivalent to all the creatures.

The angelsjudged that Adam would bring about corruption
becauseof what wasmanifest.in his configuration.They sawthat it
would stand through the diverse,conflicting, and mutually averse
natures.They knew that the tracesof these roots must become
manifestin him who possessed
this configuration. However,if they
had known Adam's nonmanifestdimension,which is the realityof
the imagein which God createdhim, they would have seenthemselvesasa part of Adam's creation.

56

57

The angels were ignorant of the Divine names that Adam
obtained when his all-comprehensiveness
was unveiled to him.

Willi.am C. Chktick

On the Cosrnologo/Dhikr

When Aciamsawhis own essence,he came to know his ground in
all things and from all things. For the whole cosmosis the differentiation of Adam, and Adam is the all-comprehensivebook. In
relation to the cosmoshe is like the spirit in relation to the body.

Quranic verse that statesGod's purpose in creating rnan: "r created
jinnand mankind only to worship Me."As the prophet's companion
Ibn Abbas already explained, "to worship Me" (ya ,budttni) means
"to know Me" (ya 'rifunA.
Especiallysignificant here is this word "know,', which also means
"to rerognize". The Arabic word implies rhar this knowledge is
the
recovery of a misplaced, innate knowledge. In other words, we
come to remember what we have forgotten. It is this same knowledge that is mentioned in the famous saying attributed ro the
Prophet, constantly quoted in Sufi texts, ',He who knows himself
knows his Lord"; or "He who recognizes himself recognizes his
Lord". In other words, he who recognizes himself for the creature
of God that he actually is will recognize His Lord for the God that
He actually is. The two verbal nouns deriving frorn this verbma rifah and 'irfdn-are frequently translated as "gnosis". Both are
used to designate unmediated knowledge of God.
In one passage,Ibn Arabi explains the purpose of creation as
the "worship" that is "recognition" or "gnosis". He points out that
human beings are the means whereby this purpose is achieved:
Human.beingsare intended by the existenceof the world by the
secondintention, not the first intention. As for the first intention,
what wasintended by the creationof the world wasthe worshipof
God, I mean, worship through recognition I'irfa"l of the perfection of exisrencethat is achievedby contingentthings (fV t5.6).

Thus, man is the spirit of the cosmos,and the cosmosis the
body.Through both together the cosmosis the macro'anthropos
al-ka6.r),so long asman iswithin it. But, if you look at the
lal-ins6,n
cosmosalone,without man, you will find that it is like a body,proportioned and made ready,but without a spirit.The perfection of
ihe cosmosthrough man is like the perfection of the body through
the spirit (ll 67.25).6
Although man was created as the perfection of the cosmos,or as
the active spirit that governs the world's recePtive body, any given
individual does not necessarily live up to the human role. Clearly,
the whole point of the prophetic messagesis to remind people that
they need to exert their own efforts in order to achieve the perfection of the Divine image that is their birthright. Moreover, given
that they cannot see things as they are without Divine help, they
need prophetic instructions in order to exert themselvescorrectly'
Ibn Arabi calls those who do achieve the fullness of human
stature "perfect man" (al-insdn al-kdmil).The historical examples of
those who reached this status are provided by the prophets and
some of the saints. However this may be, the fact remains that most
people remain at the level of what he calls "animal man" (al-insdn
at-hayawd,n).He reserves the attribute "perfect" precisely for the
greatest of all human beings. He tells us, for example, that in every
other sort of creature in the universe, some are "complete" (td'rnm),
but none are perfect. "Nothing is perfect savethrough this perfect,
human configuration. \Ahen he is not perfect, he is the animal
human, named by the definition 'rational animal' lhayawd'nndtiqT"

(rv 75.7).

In short, the only creature-the only contingent thing-that
can recognize God in the fullness of His reality and that can know
Him in all His names is man. In one of the many passagesin which
he sums up the significance of human existence, Ibn Arabi writes as
follows:

6. Ibn Arabi makes the same basic points, though in rather convoluted and
obscure language, at the beginning of the chapter on Adam in his famous
book, Fzsr?sal-hikam, 'The Bezels of Wisdom".

Sincecreation hasmany levels,and since the most perfect level is
occupiedby man, eachtind within the cosmosis a part with regard
to the-perfection of man. Even animal man is a part of peifect
man. So, every knowledge of God belonging to a part of the
cosmosis a partial knowledge,except in the caseof man, for his
knowledgeof God is the knowledgeof God possessed
by all the
cosmos.This knowledge of God is a universalknowledge ['llm
kullfl, though nor a knowledge of all ['ilm kull]. Were it i knowledge of all, he would not havebeen commandedto say,*My Lord,
increaseme in knowledge!"[20:114].Do you think thar fthe
knowledgehe is commandedto seek]is knowled.ge
through other
than God?No, by God, it is knowledgethrough God!

5B

59

Perfect human beings actualize God's goal in creating the universe. That goal is explained mythically in the famous hadtth, "I was
a hidden treasure, and I desired to be known, so I created the creatures that I might be known." Only human beings can know God in
the fullness of His divinity, because only they were created in His
total image. Indeed, this knowledge of God is demanded by the

William C. Chittick

On the Cosmologl o/Dhikr

So, He created perfect man in His image, and through the
image He gave him the ability to have all of His names ascribed to
him, one by one, or in groups, though all the names together are
not ascribed to him in a single word-thereby the Lord is distinguished from the perfect servant. Hence there is none of the most
beautiful n2mss-2nd all of God's names are most beautiful-by
which the perfect servant is not called, just as he calls his Master by
t hem ( I I I 409. 16).

God in its own specific mode of being. Each creature has a status
determined by the manner in which God has articulated it as a word
in His Breath. However, man has no specific mode of being,
because his awareness and consciousness have no inner limits. Only
he is a global image of the All-Knowing and the All-Aware. In effect,
man has the potential to be the outward image of the All-Merciful
Breath itself, the manifestation
of all of Being and of all of the
Divine names and attributes.
Man's distinctive status means that only he can fulfill the final
purpose of creation, which is for God to be worshiped and served
not simply in the passive way that all creatures serve Him, but also
in the active way achieved by full consciousness of the Hidden Treasure and the free acceptance of everything that this demands. This
is why, according to Ibn Arabi, man's function as vicegerent of God
fulfills the creative process and achieves its purpose. So central is
the human role that, if it were not fulfilled, the world would simply
disintegrate.

The House of God
In the diverse creatures of the cosmos other than man-on whatever level they may dwell, from spiritual and angelic to corporeal
and sensory-the traces of God's names and attributes are externalized as the specific and unique characteristics of each thing.
Every creature in the universe "knows" God in a specific, differentiated, and determined way, defined by the attributes that the thing
displays,or by the "word" that it embodies; each thing gives news of
God and displays His signs through occupying its specific niche in
the never-repeated speech of God that is the universe.
In contrast, in the multileveled reality that is the human self, the
traces of God's names and attributes are relatively internalized. The
traces extend from the corporeal to the spiritual realm, and they
circle around their Ka'bah,which is the heart, the luminous center
of the being, the spirit that God blew into Adam at his crearion.
Man alone is given the potential to know God in a global, synthetic
manner, becauseman alone is created in the image not of one or of
several specific names, but in the image of the all-comprehensive
name Allah, which designatesGod as such, in both His absoluteness
and His infiniry His Essenceand His attributes, His incomparability
and His similarity, His transcendence and His immanence.
If the fullness of ibd,da-"worship" and "5s1yi6g"-i5 to
remember God in a manner appropriate to His total reality, it is
obvious that only man, made in God's image, can be a "servant"
('abfi of God. Nonetheless, in a narrower sense, 'ibdda simply
means serving God's purposes, and in this sense everything worships God, becausea contingent being can do nothing but serve the
Absolute Being from which it draws its entire self. As the Quran puts
it, "None is there in the heavensand the earth that comes not to the
Nl-merciful as a servant" (19:93). Each thing worships and serves

50

God made this earth a place for the vicegerency. Hence it is the
abode of His kingdom and the site of His deputy, who becomes
manifest through the properties of His names. So, from the earth
He created us. Within it He gave us residence, whether alive or
dead. And from it He will bring us forth through the Uprising in
the last configuration. Thus, worship never leaves us wherever we
may be, in this world and the afterworld, for, even though the
afterworld is not an abode of freligious] prescription ltakltfl, itis
an abode of worship.
Among us, whoever ceaselesslywitnessesthat for which he was
created in this world and the next is the perfect servant, the
intended goal of the cosmos, and the deputy of the whole cosmos.
Were all the cosmos-the high of it and the low of it-to be heedless of God's remembrance for a single moment, and were this servant to remember Him, he would take the place of the whole
cosmos through that remembrance, and the existence of the
cosmos would be preserved through him. However, if the human
servantwere to be heedlessof remembrance, the cosmos could not
take his place in that. That of it which is empty of the human being
who remembers would go to ruin. The Prophet said, "The Hour
will not come as long as there remains in the earth someone who
is saying 'Allah, Allah"' (III 248.12).
To review my main points, the worldview of Islam depicts God,
the universe, man, and prophecy in terms of words and speech. The
all
three principles of faith-unity,
prophecy, and the Return-are

51

WiIIiam C. Chittick

On the Cosmohgyo/Dhikr

understood in terms of God's names and naming. Man's task is to
respond to his situation by remembering the names of things*that
is, the real and actual names of things, which are the things inasmuch as they designate the Divine Realiry or inasmuch as they are
articulations of the Divine Speech.
This human task can be accomplished only in the "heart", v
word that designatesthe unlimited realm of human awarenessand
consciousness.The heart alone, among all created things, is given
the capacity to encompassGod. As the famous extra-Quranic Divine
sayrngputs it, "My heavens and My earth embrace Me not, but the
heart of My believing servant does embrace Me." To remember God
fully and actually is to find Him sitting within the heart, which is His
Throne in the microcosm. As Ibn Arabi writes,

It is only this sort of knowledge that allows man to see that everything in this world is accursed if he does not see it as displaying the
Real, and that he himself is accursed to the extent that he ioei not
know that things do in fact display the Real. once we see the world
for what it is, we see rhat it is nothing but dhikr Ail6.h-a reminder
of God, a mention of God, a remembrance of God. Our response to
the world can only be to follow its lead-to mention and to
remember God. "Everything is accursed," says the hadtth, "except
dhikr Alld'h." But euerythingisd,hikrAild,h,so nothingis accursed. The
alchemy of d,hikr transmutes the accursed into the blersed. The
place of that dhikr, where God becomes truly present and man
becomes truly blessed,is the heart.
Let me leave you with this bit of advice from Ibn Arabi:
Th€ grearestsin is what bringsabout the d.eathof the heart. It dies
only-bynot knowing God. This is what is named ,.ignorance,'.
For
the heart is the house that God has chosenfor Aimself in this
human configuration.But such a personhasmisappropriatedthe
house, coming betweenit and its Owner.
. A-pergonlike that is the one who mostwrongshimself, for he
has deprived himself of the good that wourd hive come to him
from the owner of the house-had he left the houseto Him. This
is the deprivationof ignorance(III 179.6).

God took the heart of His servantasa house,for He made it the
locusof knowledgeof Him-the knowledgethat is gnosis['irfan],
not theory lnazarf. He defendedthe housewith zealandjealousy,
lestit be a locusfor others.
Inescapably,the Real becomes
The servant is all-comprehensive.
manifestto the servantin sundry forms, or in the form of everything, for the servantis the locus for the knowledgeof all things.
And there is no locus of knowledge except the heart. But the Real
isjealous of His servant'sheart, lest anything other than his Lord
be within it. Therefore He showedthe heart that He is the form of
everything and identical with everything,for the servant'sheart
embraceseverything.The reasonfor this is that everythingis Real,
but the Real.Whoeverknowsthe
becausenothing embraces.things
Real in respectof His Realnesshasknown everything.
However,someonewho knowsa thing doesnot therebyknow the
Real,nor [does he know it] in reality.The servantwho supposes
that he knowsa thingdoesnot in fact know it, for if he did know it,
he would know that it is the Real.Thus, as long as he does not
know that it is the Real,we sayconcerninghim that he doesnot
knowit (N 7.7).
Knowledge of things as they actually are can only come through
knowing them as disclosures of the Real, as signs and traces displapng God's names and attributes. This is not a theoretical sort of
knowledge, but a knowledge of recognition and gnosis. It is to gain
a true vision of the Divine omnipresence, the fact that, as the Quran
puts it, '"V\rhereveryou turn, there is the face of God" (2:115). Such
knowledge comes byway of dhikr, which is al-hudfi,rma'a'l-madhkilr,
"presence with the One Remembered".

62

53

Paths to the Heart
Sufism and the Christian East
O 2002 World Wisdom, Inc.

Contents
All rights reserved.
No part of this book may be used or reproduced
in any manner without written permission,
except in critical articles and reviews.

F oreword

......\

Dimensions of the Heart
1. How Do We Enter the Heart?
Kallistos Ware
2. St Seraphim of Sarov in Sufic Perspective

......t

GrayHenry
3. The Heart of the Faithful is the Throne of
the All-Merciful
Sqyed Hossein Nasr

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication

Data

Paths to the heart : Sufism and the Christian East / edited by James S. Cutsinger.
(Perennial philosophy series)
p. cm. Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 0-941532-43-7(alk. paper)
Eastern Church. 2. Orthodox Eastern Church1. Islam-Relations-Orthodox
4. Christianity and other religionsRelations-Islam. 3. Islam-Relations-Christianity.
Islam. I. Cutsinger,James S., 1951 IL Series.
8P172.5.O77 P38 2002
267.2'7-dc2r
2002005226

Cover art courtesy of the following:
"Ascent of the Prophet Muhammad" (OR2265.f.195r)
by permission of the British Library.
'Virgin of the Sign" by the hand of T. Anne Mancuso.
Printed on acid-free paper in Canada
For information addressWorld Wisdom, Inc.
P.O. Box 2682, Bloomington, Indiana 47 402-2682
www.worldwisdom.com

The Path of Remembrance
4. On the Cosmology of Dhikr
WiIIiam C. Chittick
5. Presence,Participation, Performance: The
Remembrance of God in the Early Hesychast Fathers . . (
Vincent Rossi
6. Paths of Continuity: Contemporary Witnesses of
t heHesychast Experience
. . . . . . . 1.
Chryssaagis
John
Toward an Esoteric Ecumenism
7. The Metaphysics of Interfaith Dialogue:
Sufi Perspectives on the Universality of the
. . . . 1,
Q uranicMessage
Reza Shah-Kazmi
8. A Unity with Distinctions: Parallels in the
Thought of St Gregory Palamas and Ibn Arabi . . . . . . 11
Paer Samsel
9. Hesychia:An Orthodox Opening to Esoteric
Ecumenism
. . . . . . . . 2:
S.
Cutsingn
James
Conclusions
l0. T helongW ayHome
. . . . . . 21
Huston Smith
11. Panel Discussion
. . . .21
Cont ribut ors. . .

. . . . . 2'

