The

Power

Proportional

Harmonies

Gyorgy

Doczi

of

in

Limits

Nature,

Art

&

Architecture

Digitized

by

the
in

Internet

Archive

2013

http://archive.org/details/poweroflimitsproOOgyor

The
Proportional

Power
Harmonies

in

of
Nature,

Limits
Art

and

Gyorgy

1985

Shambhala

Boston

&

London

Architecture

Doczi

SlIAMlillAlA i'UlM l( A 1 U )NS. IN( ,
1 lurti> uliui.ll I l.ill
Vin M.iss.K luisctts Aw nuc
liosiou. M.iss.u luisctt-, n21 1 S
r I'Wl In ( ivori^N I
All rights r(.si.r\L-d
I )istril->utiti 111 iIk- United Slates by Kaiidom House
.uul in Cukk!,! In K.iikIoiu House ot C Canada Ltd
I'mitcd 111 the United Slates of Ainenea

|n ') S (ivori;v.
l.il'i.iry
ii;- (.'iiin;rc>.v C,\im/<h;/»h,' I'l I'lil'ludlioii Diild
Doe/i,
I he power ot Imuls
liibliograpliy: p
2.
AesthetKs.
I htle

3. I'ropiirtion.

4. Nature (Aesiheties)

7(i()M 77-';iiSH3
«4l)f)2 (Kandoin
BH3nl.c:
ISBN
(i-,VM-735Ht)-3
Ht)use)
ISBN (i-s7773-U)3-4 (pbk.)
Copy tJiiot: llollmd D liiiiinioiul: tic>i<^>it>: //.jcc/ lUiiliol
proilinluni in,uhi\^tr Janus M (iiiiiian prodiinuni .;rfi.</.
Iit\i l'arn;tio-Lff. ;m<Ji-u/) /.ic.i M.illlu ws

Contents

Prct.KC \ 11
Ac'kiu>\\ Icd^cmcnls
1 . Dincr^v

ix

in I^hmts

1

f I ';//(/(';/'>' on ilic ihIihhc 4; I L}rinonii'< of iimsw iUid orowth S
2.

Dincrgy

in the Odtts

14

1 1 '(/;■/) (///(/ u'ooj \(y. I Liiuh aud wheels l*-)
3.

Dincrgy

in the Arts

oi Living

25

I iinoihic tiiiil iiiitiii'^ildc piirtniis 25; ( )iir ilnicroic cfidoifiiicm 27
4. Timeless

Patterns

ot Sharing

29

B^l<i^ iirts of shiirnio 29; (Cosmic orilcr and uilc}ulric striidurcs 3<S;
Rliydii}! (///(/ liiiinioiiions sluirnio 49
5. The

Anatomy

ot Sharing

53

shells, c hillis, ciiihs iiihl jishcs 53; 1 )iiiosiiur, froo aiul horse (A:
Slhiriiio: the ihitiire oj nature 74
6. Order

and

Freedom

in Nciture

79

Or^iinie iiiui inoroiinit jhitteriis 79; I roin beetles to hntterflies 86;
I luiihiii luiriiioiiies 93
7. Hellas

and

Haiku

104

Miiii the ineiisuie 104; Meiisuriiio the iiniin\isuriihle 113;
rhe {iretUness ol little thiiios 123
8. Wisdom

and

Knowledo;e

127

luisleni dihl \\ estern arts oj /;r///i^' 127; Whole, hell diiJ holy 133
Ap}X'iuliccs
142
Ncucs
144
red Its 146
Index 148

In memory

of Sven Ivar Lind

Preface

why do <ipplc hlossdius .ilvv.ivs have tivi- petals' Oiilv thilcirt-ii .isk such questions. Adults pa\little attention to such things, t.ikmg them tor grantetl, like the tact that we use onlv as nianv
numbers as we can count on our ten tingers. When we look tleeplv into the p.itterns ot .in apple
blossom, ,1 se.ishell, or .1 swinging pendulum, however, we chsct>ver a pertection, an incredible
order, that awakens in us a sense ot awe that we knew as children. Something reveals itselt th.it
is infinitely greater th.in we .ire .uid yet part ot us; the limitless emerges trom limits.
This book scarciies tor some ot the basic pattern-torming processes that, operating within
strict limits, create limitless varieties ot shapes and h.irmonies. It is an interdisciplin.irv venture
into the no-man's-l.ind between the borders ot science, .irt, philosophv, .ind religion, .in area
th.it has been largelv ilisreg.irded in recent vears bec.iuse its contents are mt.mgible. This area,
however, bears investigation, since the powers th.it sh.ipe our lives and our v. dues have their
source here.
As Rene Dubos points out in .S'l) Hu))hin An .iiuDhil. this .ige ot attluence .uid technological
achievement is also an age ot .mxiety .md desp.ur. I r.iditional stici.il and religious v.dues have
eroded to the point where lite i>tten seems to have lost its me.ming. Whv isn't the h.irmonx' that
is apparent in natural torms .1 more powerful force in our social forms? I'erh.ips it is because, in
our fascination with our powers of invention and .ichievement, we h.ive lost sight ot the power
of limits. Yet now we .ire forced to cimfront the limits ot the e.irth's resources, .md the need to
limit over-population, big government, big business. ,ind big l.ibor. In .ill re.ilms ot our experience, we are finding the need to rediscover prt^per proportions. The proportuMis ot nature,
art, and architecture can help us in this effort, tor these proportions .ire sh.ired limitatu>ns that
cre.ite h.irmonious rel.itionships out of differences. Thus thev te.ich us th.it limitations are not
just restrictive, but they .ilso .ire cre.itive.
It is not an accident that an .irchitect should be writing such a b^x^k. for it is the business of
architects to work with proptirtions. This architect is old. It took him .1 lifetime to attempt to
answer the questions he .isked .is .1 child. These .mswers m.iv not s<Uist\- the experts, and the\'
won't still the curiosity of .1 single child, but thev might le.id t^t further, perh.ips mc>re fruitful
questii>ns .ibout the puzzles .iiul be.iuties hidden in the patterns ,uid proportions of this world.
Civorgv Hoczi
St'iUtlc, 11 \}.<hni\^i,vi

Acknowledgments

I Ills hodk (.iHild not li.ivc been completed v\ ithoiit the patient — .imi at times ncn-so-paticnt —
but .ilwavs taitlitullv sustaiiu'd suppi->rt ot niv witc. Manv iuIuts also helped me: chief amoni:
these were my brother and daughter, as well as members ot the Art and Music Department ot
the Seattle I'ublic Library, (ierald Dotson. Marilvn West. Regina Hugo. David and .Miriam
Yost. David Idmlinson, Dr. Werner ,ind .Margit Wemgarten. Dr. Richard .M Hraun. Donald
Cxillins, Hri.in Brewer, Rabbi (i>seph Samuels, [ohn A. S.mtord. |ohn Fuller and the statr ot
Shambhala Publications, headed bv Samuel Bercholz.
Research tor this book was greatly benctlted by access to collections in various departments
oi the University ot Washington, Se.ittle, granted bv Dr. Daniel O. (iraney in liuilogical
Structures and by Dr. [ohn Edwards in Entoniolc^gy, and by access to the collection at the
Thomas Burke Memorial Museum ot the University, granted by Don Coburn, senuir restorer
ot prehistoric skeletons, by liill I iolni, curatc^r ot Northwest Coast Indian Art, and bv .issistant
director Robert Free.
My study ot aquatic .inimals at the Se.ittle Aqu.irium was greatlv t.icilitated bv general
curator Dr. )ohn W. Nightingale, antl my study ot tishes ot Canadian I'acitic waters was aided
by the courtesy ot the Canadian Minister ot Supply and Services. Protessor Donald ]. Borror,
his ci)-authors, and their publishers helped by permitting me to use their illustrations in A i'wLi
(Hiicic to the Insects, Houghton and Mittlin Co., and An Introduction to Insects, Holt, Rinehart and
Winston, as models tor mv own proportion, il drawings. Fom Cole ot the Boeing C'ompanv's
public relations department provided me with dimensioned drawings ot the 747. To all ot these,
and to many other helpers — here unn.imed — mv sincere gratitude. For errors and mistakes
which, in spite ot all this good help, might have crept into the book, I alone am responsible.

hik;. ! ^ Center ot .1 J.ll^v

CHAPTER

I

1:

Dinergy

in

Plants

It IS s.irI th.it tlu' Biultlh.i oiuf g.ivc .i scrniDii without s.iving .i woni; he. mtTclv held up a
Hovvcr to Ills IistfiuTs. This w.is thr fannnis "f-loucr St-rnioi). ' .i scrnioii in the l.inu'uaec nt
patterns, the silent language of flowers W'h.it does the pattern of a (lower speak about'
It we look eK>sel\- at a flower, aiul likewise at (uher n.itural and man-niade creations, ue find
a unity and .in order coinnion to .ill ot them. This order can he seen in certain proportions
which appe.ir ag.iin and .igain, .ind also in the similarlv dvnamic wav all things gnnv or are
m.ide — bv .1 union ot ccnnplenient.irv opposites.
! he discipline inherent in the proportions and patterns ot natur.ii phemmien.i. <ind manifest
m the most .igeless and h.irmonious works ot man, .ire evidence ot the rel.itedness of all things.
It IS through the limits ot discipline that we can glimpse .md take part in the harmonv ot the
cosmos — both in the phvsR.il workl .ind in mir w.iv ot life. Perh.ips the message ot the Flower
Sermon h.id to do with hiiw the living p.itterns ot the flower mirror truths relev.uit to ,ill form^
oflite.
r.ike for instance a daisy, (tig. 1) I he pattern .it its center is shown in figure 2. The florets
that make up this pattern — here represented bv circles — grow at the meeting points of two sets
of spirals, which move in opposite directions, one clockwise, the other ctninterclockwisc. (See
diagram at center.)
Here two ot the spir.ils h.ive been recimstructed with the help ot a series of concentric
circles, at distances growing .ilong a logarithmic sc.ile, and a series of straight lines radiating
from the center. It we connect the consecutive meeting points ot these two sets ot oppcising
lines, we c.in see the d.iisy's growth spirals. T hese spir.ils .ire logarithmic .uid also equiangul.ir.
since the .ingle they describe with the radii remains alw.ivs the same. Hiis is illustr.ited bv the
diagram at the right, which shows that segments representing consecutive st.iges of grtnvth can
be rotated .iround the center until tliev completeK' overl.ip, like a folded tan, proving that old
and new stages ot growth .dl sh.ire the same angles .md the s.inie proportion.

DIM lU.V IN I'l .■W is 1

B
Fii; 3 1 lu- nolJcn section in ont.- ot the daisy's spir.ils
H.uh st.ik;c- ot growth shares the same proportions (see
shaded trianijles at right).

lust what this proportion is can be seen from Hgure 3, showing the unfolding of one of these
spirals (diagr.ini at left). As the spiral untolds from the daisy's center, the order of growth,
measured along equidistant radii marked E,F,G,H,I,J, increases at the same rate. This can be
seen from the triangul.ir diagram, where parts ot old and new growth increments ot each stage,
marked in the lett diagram by bars, consecutive numbers and also A's and B's, have been lined
up along vertical lines. All points where A's and B's meet in the triangular diagram tall upon
the s.ime slanting line, which meets the vertical scales at distances measuring 5 and 8 respective! v. The ratios between these two numbers approximate some remarkably reciprocal features: 5divided by 8 approximates 0.6 (0.625); 8 divided by 5+8 or 13 also approximates 0.6
(0.615). Conversely, 8 divided by 5 is 1.6, and 13 divided by 8 again approximates 1.6 (1.625),
the latter two ratios being the same as the tormer ones with 1 or unity added.
Expressed in equatit)n torm: A:B = B:(A+B). This is the tormula ot the celebrated j^oUen
section, a uniquely reciprocal relationship between two unequal parts ot a whole, in which the
stnall part stands in the same proportion to the Lir'^e part as the lar^e part stands to the whole.
The term i^ohien section derives trom the uniqueness as well as the distinctive value attributed to this proportional relationship. On any given line there is only one point that will bisect it
into twi> unequal parts in this uniquely reciprocal fashion, and this one point is called the point
of golden section. The complete reciprcK'ity ot this proportion strikes us as particularly harmonious and pleasing, <i tact that has been prtiven bv many scientific experiments since the end of

1 HI Ptn\ 1 R CM I IMll s

A

A
i (■••)

\\
\

\

tin- last crntiirv.' I'rfkrciit c- for this proportion is .iKii .ipparcnt m the tciultiKA' of p.ipcr
st.iiKl.inls to approximate it or its niiiltiplcs. iiulikhnii the sizes of paper nione\ . checks, aiul
c reilit cards.Figure 4 shows a sii-c ailed x'<'/'/c" rccldfi'^lc of S^H proportions; it also shows a line bisec ted b\'
the golden section into parts A=.S and B=H, with similar arcs above and below the line emphasizing the reciprocity of these relationships.
This rec iproc itv is also illustrated bv one of the c lassic.il construc tions o\ the golden section,
with the help of a sc|u.ire inscribed into a semicirc le (fig. .S). A circle drawn from the center of

the sc]uare"s base touching the opposite corners of the scjuare i radius r) will produce the golden
section's proportunis along l"n)th sides of the extended baseline.
If" the st]U.ire"s sides are 1 unit long, then e.ich of' the ex'
a iII be (».61H unit long and the
1 X ().6IS rect.uigles on either side of" the scju.ire will ; „
n rectangles. Each ot these
combined with the scju.ire form a larger golden rectangle, 1 x l.f)lH. These larger rectangles
\

-0 62^ ,-a:/i-0.€,l^ «:?=/6^ li:B=lbZ
Fig. 4. Approxmi.iiuni ot .i guklcii rctt.mgic (5 ^ H).

.md the smaller ones ,ire e.ich other's recipriK ,ils. in the sense th.tt the l.irger side of the small
ones and the sm.dler side of the large ones .ire the s.ime. The total length of these reciprocal
golden rcct.nigles is 2.2.^6 units, this number being identic.il with \ 5 .
It has often been demonstrated that the golden sectuMi's proportions are frequent in patterns
of organic growth, particularly between neighboring old <uid new increments. I his is the
reason why the biologist W.iddingtim proposed to call this proportion the rt'Liit'Jm'<<

P.itterns generated by spir.ds moving in opposite directums .ire frec]uent in nature, as we shall
nci}ilihor<.^
see. Here they cdncern us as special instances of a more gener.il pattern-fornung process: the
union of complementary opposites. Sun and moon, m.de <nid female, positive and negative
electricity, Yin .uul Yang — the union oi opposites h.is been since ancient times an import. mt
concept in mvthologies and mystery religions. The two p.irts of the golden section s proportions are unec]U.il: one is sm.dler, the other l.irger. Thev .ire often referred tci as nuihn and hw/^t
Minor and m.iji^ here .ire oppcisites united in .i h.irmoiuous proportion. I he process itself bv
which the d.iisy's h.irmonuuis p.ittern w.is reconstructed is likeu ise .i joining of complement.ir\oppiisites — str.iight r.idii .ind rot.iting circles.
M.mv terms refer to .ispects of the p.ittern-forming process of rhe union of opposites. but
strangelv enough none expresses its ijci/criJfiVc power. Polarity refers to opposites but withiuit the
indication th.it something new is being born. Diuiliiy .ind Juhoiomy indicate division, but do not
me.m jcMuing. Syiicr'^y indicates joining and cooperation, but does not refer specificallv to
Since there is no .ulec]u.ite single word tor this universal p.ittern-creating process, a new
opposites.
word, diiicri^y, is proposed. Diiicr^y is m.ide up of twci Crreek words: Jui — "across, through,
opposite:" <uid "energy." In the d.iisv this dmergic energy is the cre.itive energy organic
growth. I'o wh.it extent cnher pLmts show dmergic p.ittern torm.itions sh.dl be our next
cimcern.

Fig. 5. C^l.issic.il eonstructioii ot the goklc-ti section, vvilli
square within semicircle. Rect.ingles 1 ^ It 61H .itul
1 X 1.618 are reciprocal golden rectangles.
PlNl 1U;V IN 1>I .AiN ! S .-^

Windows

on the infinite

The center ot the suntlower (tig. 6) is also composed of florets, which eventually turn to
seeds, and they also grow along logarithmic, equiangular spirals, moving in opposite directions,
which are loined dinergically as in the daisy. In the drawing ot the model small pyramids approximate the shapes of the seeds. I he spirals which are tormed by this seed pattern are detailed intigure 7. Diagram a shows that spirals A and B are the outlines of the seeds and C and
D <ire their diagonals.
It one toUows the ditterent curvatures ot these spirals through the squares tormed bv the
radiating and rotating sets ot lines in diagram a, one can see that spiral A moves trom one circle
to the next as well as trom one radius to the next within a single row ot squares. We will call
this a curvature ot 1:1 , signifying that the rotational and the radiational components of growth
are equal. Spiral B moves through two squares while reaching trom one radius to the next,
crossing two circles: a curvature ot 1:2. In a similar manner one can say that spiral C has a
curvature ot 3:1, while spiral D approximates 5:1.
In spite ot their ditterences in curvature, all ot these spirals share the qualities ot being
logarithmic and equiangular, through all stages ot growth. Such stages are shown in diagram b
marked upon each spiral by lower-case letters. The spiral diagram c at the right shows, on the
example ot spiral type C, hcnv succeeding segments ot growth, which tollow each other in
cyclic order, can be tolded upon each other tan-like, as in the daisy. This demonstrates that they
are ot the same shape even though different in size, sharing the same proportional rate ot
growth. That this rate is again the rate ot the golden section is shown by diagram d.
I il; 6 Siintlinvc'r .iiul iiiodel o{ seed pattern.

Fig. 7. Typical spirals ot the sutitlower's seed pattern.
4

rut Ptn\ hK Of- 1 1.MITS

The nuinlxTs si^niK ing iic-iuhbonim nUi .iiul new st.i^fs ^'t erowili pr*'Vf N' Ih- nu-iubcrs ^'t .i
st>-c".illcJ sufnifuifion scru's, in u liii li c.il li luinibcr is the sum ihc o prc\ iou^ -uirs: 1 . 2. 3. ^.
13, 21. 34, 35, S^;, 144. 233, 377. etc. This is the t.niious lih.'tuh^i mmc.. atu-r the nKkn.inu- .'i
l.con.irclo ot l^is.i who intrtuliucd it mu^ luiropc .ihout er^ht huiulrcJ ve.irs ,id^\ to'jcthcr v. ith
[ iiiRlii-Ar-ihu nunuT.iK aiul tlu- dec imal system. An\- number in this series JiviJeJ hv the
tollowmg one approxim.ites (1.618 . . . aiul .in\' number (.livkieil b\- the previous one approximates 1.61S .... these bein^ the characteristic proportional rates between minor aiul niaji^r
parts of the gi^lden sectUMi. In liter. iture this rate is trequentb,' reterreJ to with the dreek letter

J J in / 1. ^ ?i ■i^ B 1 0 *j

Fit^. 8. CAMiipurcr priiu-out ot goKlcii section s
</> ratui and Fibon.icc i sctk-s.

phi (0).
The three diUs attcr the luiinbcrs indicate th.it these mimherv are "■irratumal, m> called
beciuse thev can ou\\ he approximated, never expressed tulK' m .i fraction. One cm keep
dividing anv ot the neighboring minibers — .itter 13 — witlnnit ever reaching an end. An IH.M
computer inice priiduced 40110 digits ot this number at which point it was stopped without
reaching a rational number. The computer printout in figure S was stopped at the forty-fifth
place after the decimal ptunt.
It h.is been recorded that the Pvthagoreans of ancient (Ireece. w ho are credited with ha\ ing
discovereil in the sixth centurv B.C^ the infinite n.iture ot irr<ituMial numbers, were puzzled,
frightened and filled with awe upon their discoverv and tried to keep it a secret, proscribing the
death penalty for tln^se who would d.ire to divulge it. Legend h.is it th<it a violator of this
prohibitii>n, who escaped to sea, drowned there. His de.ith w.is attributed to divine punishment.
The numbers of the Fibonacci series curiousK- re.ippear in the total number of the sunflower's spirals. The model in figure fi w.is made friMti a sunflower head th.it had .>4 and 53 spir.ds;
34:55 = 0.6181818 .... Suntlmvers with 89 and 144. and with 144 and 233 opposite spirals have
also been reported; 89:144 = 0.6180555 . . . ; 144:2.V> = 0.61802.57 ....
One does nor have to tear vengeful deities ti.> feel something like awe .it such unexpected
precision in .i p.ittern ot n.itur.il gnnvth. It seems unre.ison.ible to believe that the number ot
seeds m .i sunflmver is preord. lined, vet something like that is exactlv what h.ippens. lrration.il
numbers <ire not unre.isonable; thev .ire on\\ hcyonJ re.ison, in the sense that thev .ire bevond the
gr.isp of \vlu>le numbers. Thev .ire infinite .ind int.ingible. In p.itterns of organic growth the
irr.ituMi.il f/) r.itui ot the golden sectuMi reve.ils th.it there is indeed .m infinite ,ind int.mgible side
to our world.
V'c) sec (I world in ii {^nun of fdiul
and liciivi'ii in a ii'ilJ flotccr.
hold iiijnnty in the pahn oj your luind
and ctorntty in

hour.— ' W illi.im Blake

niNl Ho')' IN m A.M s .s

Fig. Id Apple blosscnns, apples and pears. ,ind tlovver ot loganberry bush.

Every daisy and sunnowcr is a window on the nitinite, as are apple blossoms and the flowers
of other trees and bushes bearing edible truits. These grow according to the pattern ot the
pentagon and its extension, the pentagonal star or pentagram, (tig. 9) in which neighboring
lines relate to each other in the dinergic golden relations ot neighbors. Apples and pears, when
cut through their girth, reveal the pentagonal star pattern in their seed structure, inherited
tr(Mn their original flower pattern, (tig. 10)
Each ot the triangles in the pentagonal star have two equal sides that relate to the third side
as 8 does to 5. or as 1.618 relates to 1 ... . These reciprocal relationships can be seen when the
pentagram is combined with the golden section's construction, as in figure 11, creating a \/ 5
rectangle, consisting of reciprocal golden rectangles. The smaller rectangle's sides are identical
with the sides of the pentagram's triangle.

(> rm- i>o\\ hK oi I

IS

The sitli's oT tlu- rii^lu-,inglc-cl t ri.iiigic . ten ot wliii. li luAi up the- pciit.iL'dn. .iKo .ippr. >>; im.itc
tin- Jiiu-rgif goLk-ii rrl.itKms ot iK-iglih(irs. As shown w ithin thi- ptnt.iL'"n.<l s-.ir. these Mi.ies
.ipproxuu.itc 4-, .iikI 3-unit le ngths, .inJ 3 ,iik1 5 are nciehhornie nu-iiilxTs ot the }-ihi>n.ict i
scries (3:5 = II. f)). This 3-4-n triangle is .it tunes reterrinl to as the I'yrlur^ tcjh .'rij»;-/( . lx-i.ause it
ilhistrates the Pythagorean theorem (the sc|u.ire ot the hvpoteniise ot a right triangle is equal to
tlie sum o[ the squ.ires oi the other two sules). This triangle is trequentK' touiul in plant
patterns, as figure 12 shows.
The pentagonal star was the saereJ emblem ot the Pythagorean fellowship, which consisted
of men and WHimeii living in eommuiiities and abstaining from all lu.xuries. dedicated to a life of

moder.ition and the pr.ictice of' hciling. The Pvthagore.ins applicil the letters of the name
"Hygcia." the goddess tif hcaling. to the tips ot their s.icrcd emblem. The ti ve-piunted st.ir has
rcmamcd ,i universal symbol of' good portent, .ippcaring in the national flags of man\-

Fig. 12. Pytliagorc.in

triangle in pi.iiits.

countries.''
I'he pentagon and pentagram, like all patterns, are defined bv their limits. Incorporated in
the harmonious patterns of' fruits and flowers, thev e.xemplifv an epigram attributed to
Pythagor.is, that limit '^trc:^ joTDi to the liuiitlfss. This is the power of limits.

niNtRtA' IN PL .^NTS

Harmonies

of music and growth

Bv lhirt>ioiiy we generally mean a titting, orderly and pleasant joining ot diversities, which in
themselves may harbor many contrasts. In this sense, harmonv is a dinergic relationship, in
which ditterent and otten contrasting elements complement each other by joining. That such
dinergic jtiining is at the heart ot all harmonies is suggested bv the origin ot the word harmony,
from the Clreek lhn»io<, to )oin.
The concept ot harmonv also goes back to Pvthagoras. who according to legend discovered it
while listening to the sound ot hammering that came trom ditterent anvils in a smith's shop.
This observation guided him by analogv to other instruments, such as the vibrating strings ot a
Ivre. He tound that two strings sound most pleasant together when they are equal, or when one
is plucked at 1 2. 2 3, or 3/4 ot the other's length: in other words, when the length ot the
plucked strings rel.itc in proportions expressible m the smallest whole numbers: 1, 2, 3. 4.
(t"ig. 131
The 1:1 proportion, which is identitv. is called unison. The 1:2 proportion, which produces
the same sound as the tull string, onlv at a higher pitch, is called the oaave because it reaches
through all eight intervals ot the scale (the eight white kevs ot the kevboard). The Greeks
called this proportion duipcison: Jui. "through, " pason. trom pas or pan meaning "all." The
pleasant sound ot the 2:3 proportion was called Jtapenic (penta, "tive"), today called the fi'ff/i,
reaching through tive intervals. The consonance ot the 3:4 proportion was called Jiatessaron
{tcssarcs. "tour"), or the tounh.
The 2:3 = 0.666 proporticm ot diapente is a close approximation ot the golden section's
(I.61S . . . ratio. Diatessaron is identical with the 3:4 proportion ot the Pythagorean triangle.
Diapason, the octave, has the 1:2 = 0.5 proportion ot a rectangle composed ot two equal
squares, having a diagonal ot \ 5 length, which is the joint length ot two reciprocal golden
rectangles, (tig. 14)

l)l/K^CKS(yy\, - of I ■.'2,- rr,mpa>^*'. -. : A t-tct .i y-^^ e.

Fig. 14. Visu.il cquiv.ik-nts of IN ilLigoriMn music ,il
h.iriiioiiK's .nul coiistriK tiKii nt the ^dklcu \ci lion.

niNMU.N 1\ PI AN I s ')

6/8

? .-3 = 0 (,66
d . 0.048

Pursuing further the role ot dinergy in musical harmonies, we find the 1:2, 2:3 and 3:4
proportions reappearing in the tirst and strongest overtones, also called partials or harmonics,
which reverberate within every musical sound, blending with its fundamental tone, as if
additional, invisible strings were being plucked simultaneously, accompanying and complementing the fundamental. It is this dinergic joining ot harmonics with the fundamental that
gives musical sounds their fullness, vitality and beauty — referred to as timbre — and distinguishes
them trom mere noise, which lacks such dinergic harmony ot ditterent sounds. This dinergic
harmony can be represented graphically, as in tigure 15 where the vibrating string diagrams of
tigure 13 have been combined. (The small ditterence between the fitth's 2:3 = 0.666 ratio and
the exact ratio ot the golden section, 0.618:1 = 0.618, is 0.48, marked d in the drawing.) This
kind ot diagram, borrowed trom the dinergic harmonies ot vibrating strings, shall be used
throughout this book to illustrate instances ot similarly harmonious proportions.
Looking at the pattern of the keyboard in tigure 16, we recognize its harmonious, golden
proportions: there are 8 white keys, there are 5 black keys, and these black keys are in groups of
2's and 3's. The series 2:3:5:8 is, ot course, the beginning ot the Fibonacci series, the ratios ot
these numbers all gravitating toward the irrational and pertectly reciprocal 0.618 ratio ot the

Fig 15 H.irmoiuc overtones of vibrating
string .iiui the golJcn section.

golden section.
Our Western diatonic scales and chords are yet turther instances ot the 1:2, 2:3, and 3:4
proportions in the dinergy ot musical harmonies. The two chiet modes ot Western scales, the
minor (considered to be the sad one) and the major (associated with brightness) differ trom
each other only in the length ot steps between certain ot their intervals, just as the minor and
major parts ot the golden section ditter trom each other only in their lengths. And just as the
joining ot minor and major parts delights us in the visual harmonies ot the golden section, so the
joining ot minor and major scales, called tnodulanons, enchant us when we hear them in the
movement ot chords and melodies.
Every one ot the minor and major scales has its own variants, or degrees — so-called dominants and subdominants — with their own sets ot chords, and the relationship ot these to their
tonic counterparts again tollows the abtn-e proportums. Dominants start and end on the tltth

lU THE POWER OF LIMl

Fig. 17. H.iniionuHis proportions ot .1 liLic Icif.
interval \vom the kc\iiotr (the first note ot the sc.ile). .ukI suhJoniinants st.irt and end on the
tourth interval.
It would go beyond the limits ot this present.ition — .md also hevond the limits ot the author's
expertise — to ilelve into turther details c^t dinergv and analogies ot visual proportions m
musical harmonies. However, one more instance slunild be mentioned: counterpeiiiu. In counterpoint, the dinergic )oining ot two or nu-ire ditterent, often contrarv nuisica! lines unite and
complement e.ich other while preserving their own identities, much like dinergicallv loined
spir.ils create visible h.irmonies m the daisv and the sunflower.''
l et us now look further into plant growth m the light ot what we've seen about music. d
harmony. Figure 17 is .1 rubbing taken tnun the b.ick side of a lilac le.it. ni.igram B shows that
the distances between the starring points ot the veins along the imdrib group themselves in a
h.irnn-mic order, like org. in pipes. I'he dist.mces between consecutive veins marked 1 to \0 m
diagr.im C form .1 simil.ir series. I hese distances .ind their groupings h.ive been lined up hv
neighboring p.urs in di.igram D. Their proportion.d rel.itionships t.ill within the narrow limits
ot the golden sectuMi's proportional rate (t.618 . . . .ipproxim.ited hv 5:8 = ().62.S (dash-dotted
line) and the .^:4 = 0.75 proportum of the pent.igiMi.d P\ thagore.ui 3-4-.^ tri.mgle. correspiMidmg
to the diapente and the di.itess.iron music.il h.irmonies.
These rel.itionships reveal growth patterns that .ire h.irmonious and dmergic in the sense that
all the minors ,ind m.ijors (large .iiid sm.ill veins .md br.inches) unite with their neighbors in
propiirtions limited to r<itu'>s ot the s.ime sm.ill whole numbers which create the root harmonies
ot music. Simil.irlv dmergic and h.irmonious growth processes can be observed in the shaping ot
le.ives tnher th.m the lil.ic.
niNER(;v IN l'L.^^■ls n

B Bloodleaf plant
hig. 18. Kccoiistriit tioii of leaf outlines.
12 / THE POWER OF LIMITS

In figure IH the outlines oi <i random selection ot leaves were reconstructed with the dinergic
method ot combined radiatnig and rotating lines. It one looks at these patterns not .is still
pictures but as traces ot" the dinergic process which brought them into being, then the outlines
ot these leaves become their story, recorded m the silent huiguage ot patterns.
The outlines ot" the rhododendron leaf (A) start trom the stem at the center with two rising
circles, moving trom one radius to the next. This pace increases to three circles at midspan,
only to slow down again to two, winding up with approximately 1 1/3 at the tip ot the leat.
This is the lite story ot the lanceolate leat pattern.
The rounded or orbiculate leaf of the bloodleaf plant (B) is produced by a ditterent pattern.
The contour starts bv crossing tive circles while moving trom the tirst radius to the second, and
this rhythm gradually decreases to three, then to two circles, tinally slowing down to one <n
maturation.
The two halves ot the begonia leat (C) develop at ditterent rates, making it characteristically
asymmetrical. Yet other varieties ot harmonious patterns are created by diverse rates ot
development in the quinquefoliolate leat ot the Japanese maple (D), the lobed leaves ot pelargonium (E), and the Concord grape leaf (F). In these latter two patterns, only the enveloping
outlines have been reconstructed, though the component details could very likely be drawn in a
similar manner. Finally, the cordate leaf of the lilac (G) starts by moving through tour circles
withm the span ot the tirst two radii, then it slows down to three, to two, and to one, only to
take a last heroic spurt, rising three circles betore the end.
These are just a tew examples ot leat outlines, tracing pattern-torming processes similar to
those that shape daisies, suntlowers, the tlowers ot edible truits, and musical harmonies. They
indicate that the same dinergic harmonies that delight our eyes in the shape ot leaves and
tlowers also enchant our ears in the chords and melodies ot music.
This chapter has ranged tar and wide in the pursuit ot dinergy, the energy-creating process
that transforms discrepancies into harmonies by allowing ditterences to complement each
other. Dinergy accomplishes this through the power of certain proportions, analogous to
musical and root harmonies, well-known since antiquity, chiet among them being the golden
section.
The power ot the golden section to create harmony arises trom its unique capacity to unite
the ditterent parts ot a whole so that each preserves its own identity, and yet blends into the
greater pattern ot a single whole. The golden section's ratio is an irrational, intinite number
which can only be approximated, yet such approximations are possible even within the limits ot
small whole numbers. This recognition tilled the ancient Pythagoreans with awe: they sensed in
it the secret power ot a cosmic order. It gave rise to their beliet in the mvstical power ot
numbers. It also led to their endeavors to realize the harmonies ot such proportions in the
patterns ot daily lite, thereby elevating lite to an art.

DINERGY IN PLANTS / \^

CHAPTER

2:

Dinergy

in

the

Crafts

Orb-wcaving spiders construct their webs by starting with str.iight threads that come together
m a center. Then they spin spiral strands around the straight ones, rotating ni ever wider orbits.

l it; T' I )iiicr i;ii. coiisiruc tioii ot ^pl^k■r u cb
H'lniiii; r.nlKitiiii4, Ntr.nuht Iiik s \k\i\\ nn.itmi;
spiral ones.

(Hg. 19)
Basket weavers work in a similarly dinergic pattern. First, a number of firm strands — the
warp — are bound together at one pomt which shall become the center ot the basket, (tig. 20)
Then flexible strands — the wett — are passed over and under the warp strands in a rotating
fashion. In coil-binding, a firm but flexible coil takes the place ot the straight warp, and it is
sewn together along radiant lines with thin wett material, threaded through a needle, (fig. 21)
Because of the dinergic nature of the work process, one can easily reconstruct basket outlines
the same wav we reconstructed leaf outlines <ind the spirals oi the sunflower and daisv.
Two basketry hats (tig. 22) woven by American Indian people of the Pacific Northwest have
been reconstructed in figure 23. The shaded triangles show successive stages ot the dinergic
work process, as they indicated successive stages of growth m the plant. The centers of the two
spirals that make up the curved outline are not located ,it random. In shape A these centers
ccMucide with the center of the hat's crown. In shape B they are at golden section points within
tw(^ squares over the hat, identical with the two squares that enclose the hat itself. (See golden
section constructions and wave diagrams.)
One might be tempted to attribute such hidden order to chance, but the frequency of such
chance order is extraordinarv. Fourteen samples ot such h.its were measured in the Thomas
Burke Memorial Museum of the University of Washington, eight ot the concave type A and six
of the convex tvpe B, and all show, in varying degrees and in different ways, close approximations to the proportions ot the golden sectitMi and \.o the Pythagorean triangle's proportions,
corresponding to the musical harmonies ot titth-diapente and tourth-diatessaron, respectively.
The propcirtional pattern of the concave hats ( tvpe A) wm-en out ot cedar bark and beargrass
bv Makah Indian women, and common among other Nootka people, shows further variations
i>f golden dinergv. Figure 24 demonstrates four tit these relationships with constructions of the

Fill 2l». niiitTk^v of basket uoavmii [-irm straiijlit
str.iiuis ot Warp support tlcxiblc spiral strands ot
wctt
cod. NOPJp

tic. 21, ("oil biiKliiii:. m wIikH both wctt and
warp arc tlcxiblc The wctt binding is scvv ii along
radiating lines around the warp, which takes the
form o[ a spiral i oil
14

lHh 1'0\X1-.K Oh 1 l.MI I s

Fig. 22. A. CAincavc hat woven of cedar bark and
ticarcr.iss bv the Makah and other Nootka peoples.

B. Cxinvcx hat woven trom spruce roots,
popular with Tlingit, Haida and Kwakiutl peoples.

Fig. 24. Proportional aii.iKsiv
ot baskctr\- li.it sliapcs ot
the comavo t\ pf A.

/
i

/

)i ■■'II «)

>;

golden section .iround one of the tallest and one of the lowest of these hats. The
overall shape ot the taller hat tits neatly into a single golden rectangle (1-2-3-4)
while the short hat approximates two such rectangles (5-6-7-8 and 6-7-9-10).
For each of the eight type-A hats measured, the proportional relation of neighboring parts A and B was tabulated (see chart at bottom ot tig. 24). The closeness
of these proportions to those of the golden section is again demonstrated by
classical golden section constructions around the shapes. The differences between
actual and theoretically exact logarithmic ratios are so small they had to be
exaggerated to be visible.
Figure 25 shows two typical examples of the convex type-B hat, woven out of
spruce roots and popular with Tlingit, Haida, and Kwakiutl people. Three of each
type were measured. The shallow hats tend to approximate golden proportions,
and the tall ones tend to show the 3:4 proportions of the Pythagorean triangle.
This can be seen from the dash-dotted lines connecting opposite ends of the top
and bottom diameters. In the shallow types, these lines coincide with the diagonals of a golden rectangle, whde m the tall ones they are identical with the
longest side (hypotenuse) of the Pythagorean triangle. The accuracy of these
proportions can be appreciated from the tabulation and diagram, as well as from
the constructicMi oi the gc^lden section above the shallow hat.
To make the harmonies of these patterns more visible, these two shapes are also
shown in their correspondence to the pentagonal star, the taller shape fitting
ne.itly into the Py tli.igore.in triangles within the central pentagon, and the shal\ow shapes aligning with the triangles at the tips of the pentagram.
The lines of these hats suggest the sinuous energy of the drawn bow as well as
the graceful curves o{ flower and leaf outlines. These harmonious and dinergic
proportions emerge as naturally from the hands of these preliterate basket weavers as bows bend and phmts grow. And basket weaving is not the only craft for
which this holds true.

Warp and woof
The weaving of fabrics is as dinergic a process as the weaving of baskets, with the
difference that in f.ibric, both warp and woof move along straight lines, crossing each other, the threads ot the warp being held evenly within a frame, while
the threads of the woof are laced over and under them. (See diagram in fig. 26)
Weavers belonging to different cultures show the preference for simple harmonious proportions that basketmakers do. An East Prussian carpet reveals the
proportuMis of a golden rectangle in its overall shape (fig. 26) as does the Mexican
wtwen pattern in its repeated diamond shapes, (fig. 27)
Proportional
onvc-x
type B. analysis ot basketry hats

The niasrcrtully woven ceremonial hlanketsot Northwest Atnericaii Indian people show the
same preference in overall sh.ipe, as well ,is in the ,irtR ul.ition ot the (.lesiun. earned through
consistently even to minute details. Figure 2H shows golden section constructums drawn around
a Chilk.it blanket. These priiportions relate the short sides to halt the width, as well as to the
middle height, the latter two dimensions usu.illy being equal in these blankets. The minute
difference between exact (/) ratios and the .ictual ratios in this bl.mket are again marked with d.

> i

The blanket's short sides .illow it to be wrapped convenientK- around the bodv. but the
dimensions of the sides .ire never arbitr.iry. The seventeen s.imples ex.imined all .ipproximate
these same proportions.

I I/ 11

Fig. 26. Pe.is.int c.irpct irom E.istfrii l^r

The pictorial pattern of these bl.inkets i-.ften .irticul.ites .is a wider centr.d p.mel flanked bv
two narrower. Literal ones, <is in this s.imple. i he gtilden section construction .ibove the blanket
shows that the width of these unequal neighboring elements — D and E — are alsci in golden
relationship, containing the overall sh.ipe within twH> reciprocal golden rectangles (1-2-3-4 .md
\ \
3-4-5-6), jointly producing the familiar s/ 5 rectangle.

Fig. 2S. Woven c:hilk.it bl.uikct.

/

/

/

/

/

X /
/

/ /
/ /
/ /
/ /
/
/

1

\ \
\ \
\ \
\ \
\ \
\ \
\ \

/'

/

\ \

Fig. 27. Woven Mexicin p.ittcrii.

niNI IU;>' l\ I IIH CR.M-l s 1"

1.618

_ 1 6ie

l ii; 2'^ Proportions ot ovoids iii Nortliwcst liuli.m .irt ot I'.S.
Siiiiilar proportu>ns cxtciul lo details, such as the eyes and eye-like ovoids, which are
characteristic features ot Northwest American Indian art. Exceptions to these proportions
occur when designs are adjusted to till the space available.''
In tigure 29, a "salmontrout's head" design (A) is shown to be contained within a \/5'
rectangle (corresponding to the music.d h.irinony ot octave or diapason) and consisting of two
reciprocal golden rectangles, the larger one ot which contains the eye. The typical eye design
(B) .dso shares the same relationships both in the shape ot the inner ovoid, which represents the
white ot the eye, and in the size ot the ins. Variations ot inner ovoid elaborations also reveal a
preterence tor the golden relations ot neighbors, as in details C, E, F, G, J, and K. Two
variations — D and H — combine a squ.ire with two Pythagorean 3:4 triangles.
Hands

and wheels

A potter "s hands press the clay toward the center ot the wheel upc>n which the clay is placed,
while the wheel is turning around, thus providing the dinergy that shapes the vessel. Figure 30
IH

IHh I'OWHU Ol 1 IMlls

Tig. M). 1 utig C lui.ui Li-LnKui V
(Sung ilyii.is'tv, %l)-127';).
shows ,1 C^hiiK-sc Lunii C'lni.in ccLiclon vase
trom the time oi the Sung clvnastv (96(1-1279
A.D.)- Ill figure 31, the (Uithncs ot this graceful shape h.ive been derived with the dinergie
method used e.irher tor the reconstruction of
plant shapes. This deriv.ition shows th.it the
centers ot the tour log.irithmic spirals that
make up the initlines are located at the ci'>rners
ot two rect.ingles closely approximating golden prtiportions, (7.1:1 1 .5 = ().617r = ().61H...).
Even withcHit knowing these numerical relationships, the similaritv ot these contours to
leat outlines would suggest the relatedness ot
this sh.ipe to p.itterns eit iirganic growth. This
suggestion is verified hv the wave di.igrams
and the graph, which record how the propiirtional rel.itionships between the main features
appro.xim.ite musical root h.irmonies.
The entire shape is contained in a rect.ingle
consisting ot a square — which encomp.isses
bulk and base — and two gcilden rect.ingles.
the heights ot which correspond to the height
of the slender neck. These proportional h.irmonies .ire shared alsii between the height ot
the upper p.irt ot the v.ise (G) and the height
and girth ot the bulky body (D); between the
latter and the height (E); .md between the
diameters ot brim (B) and b.ise (C). (See diagrams 1,2, ^.) The ciMitr.ist between slender
neck and broad base, between narrow top .md
wide girth, could hardlv be greater. Yet these
contr.istmg elements .ire united in gr.icetul
harmonv. bv sh.iring the dmergic relations ot
neighbcMs.
DINFRC.V IN THF CR.^Frs m

:r.sh'-\ch<Tn} ;*t/iir '-(rlit^ Ser^n (/^^(^ )s>it?iv Hint
Yt^cuiA\ /rir<pniiimis - both CAffvtg -'ec^W i wtd-fk^Jr-^e<-y. i\(aJ i*/rj- bcil,tj. j^^ifhi MweJl
Intyutt^i cia-mt'S>li^ oj ntA^fi bet!. ■

Fig. 32. l^incrgn Jcnvation and proportions of Attic .imphor.i (f)tli (.cntury B.C.

20

THE POWER Of 1 I.MI I S

It we move from the China oi Sung times to CIreece in the sixth century B.C., we tind the
same dinergic work processes creating dinergic proportional relationships in the masterpieces
of classical Greek pottery. An Attic amphora depicting the legend of Hercules and Pholus
is outlined in figure 32. The dinergic derivations of the shape show that two centers of the
logarithmic spirals are in the upper corners of the golden rectangle which contains the whole
shape, while the lower spirals' centers are at golden section points along the diagonals within
the two halves of this rectangle. Furthermore, these two lower centers are at the very tips of
a pentagonal star which touches the two sides and the base of the enveloping golden rectangle.
The golden section's constructions show how closely the main neighboring elements of this
design approximate reciprocally shared golden proportions. In diagram 1, this relationship is
shown to exist between height of head (A), height of central picture-band (B), and total height
of the vessel (E). Diagram 2 and wave diagram 4 show the same relationship shared between
shoulder width (G) and diameters of neck (H) and girth (D). (Differences between actual and
theoretical 4> ratios are indicated with d.)
Wave diagram 3 illustrates yet further harmonious proportions in this amphora. Golden
relations approximating the musical harmony of fifth-diapente exist also between diameter of
brim (F), height of head (A), and height of bulk (C). The octave-diapason relation shows up in
the location of girth (K) at half the total height (E); it is also approximately by the diameter of
the base (J) being half the diameter of the girth (D).
Such consistency of proportional relations in classical Greek pottery was demonstrated in
great detail by the American scholar Jay Hambidge in the early 1920s.* This book is very much
indebted to Hambidge 's pioneering work. Since the 1920s, however, much archeological and
ethnographic research has shown that such proportions were not restricted to the classical
Greeks and their Egyptian teachers, as Hambidge thought, believing their advanced arithmetic
and geometrical knowledge to be the source of these proportions. To our earlier examples from
other cultures, let us now add some pottery unearthed from graves and other excavations
dating back to the Cretan and Mycenaean cultures of the late Bronze age, which preceded the
flourishing of classical Greek arithmetic and geometry by about a thousand years.
Figure 33 is a Cretan krater which is contained in two sets of reciprcical golden rectangles,
totaling
a length
\/~5 smaller
, as if these
rectangles
had been jointly
aroundhead,
the and
longitudinal
axis
of the
vessel. ofThe
of the
golden rectangles
containsrotated
shoulders,
handles,
while the larger ones correspond to the bulk of the body. In addition, the width of the opening
(A) and the total height (B) share the same golden relation of neighbors.
The Cretan amphora in figure 34, unearthed from a grave, is contained in a golden rectangle
(Q X R), within which shoulders, head, and handles fit into reciprocal golden rectangle Q x S.
The proportions of two reciprocal golden rectangles exist in the relation of brim (W) to shoulders (V) to girth (Q); it also exists in the relation of base (U) to its recesses (T) to girth (G).
Figure 35 shows a Minoan kantharos contained in a single golden rectangle, F x G. The
width of the handles (M) relates to the distance between them (N) as the sides of two reciprocal
golden rectangles do: 0.618 and 1.618. Golden dinergic relations are also shared between the
width of base (R) and its distance from edge (P); between the height of handles (H) and the
height of body (J); between body height (J) and the total height including handles (F); between
the upper and lower parts of the body (K and L); and between the lower part's height (L) and
the height of the entire vessel (F).
DINERGY IN THE CRAFTS / 21

Figure 36 is an exquisite earthenware pot from Aconia Pueblo. The shape is a popular one
with Zuni <uk1 Pueblo people and is made m ditterent sizes and proportions. The outlines of
three ot these — number 3 being the vessel pictured — are .shown superimposed over each other
m figure 37. Dotted lines indicate the two golden rectangles (ot various sizes) into which all ot
these shapes tend to tit, as it such rectangles had been rotated along the axis of each vessel, as in
the C'retan krater in tigure 33. This supports the beliet ot psychologists John Benjatield and
(".itherine Davis that "the (iolden Section is <in important regulating principle at least in some
ot folk art."''
tt)rms
r.ibulation
and graph demonstrate that here too, as in the inher vessels we examined,
harmony is created by a conscious or unconscious tendency to unite the diverse elements ot the

f ig. .V). I-.artlifiiw.irc pot trom Acoill.i I'ucbk

shape, through shared proportions, ranging trom the 0.5 and 0.75 rates and gravitating — scissor
tashiiMi — around 0.618, these three proportions corresponding to basic musical root harmonies.
In tigure 38 the AccMiia pot number 3 has been rendered in more detail by dinergic derivation
ot its outline (lett). The centers ot the logarithmic spirals constituting the outline tall along the
diagonals ot the golden rectangles which contain this outline. The triangular diagram, which
includes the rhythmic wave diagrams ot some ot the proportions investigated, reveals at a
glance the harmony created by the unity ot minor and major parts, .ichieved by their shared
proportional limitations.
These curved diagrams are like graphic images ot a reciprocal echo in which the whole
reverberates the call ot every part and every part resptinds to the call ot the whole. In another
sense, this di.igram expresses the dance-like rhythm ot the whole design, which is set swinging
by the h.irmonious dinergy ot the work process as well as by the golden dinergy ot its
proportuMis.

22

IHt I'OW 1 U 0\ 1 1,\U 1 s

\,

This exquisite vessel is created by diiieriiiL pattemjormin^ processes unfolding upon three difjerent U'vels.
The first level is the dinergic work process itself, demonstrated below as a union of rotating and radiatim> ii'orh
components, i^eneratuii,^ the spiral outline. The second
level oj dinergy is in the j^olden proportional ''relations
of neiifhhors" lined up in the triani^ular diai^ram at the
ri^ht. The arcs have been added to emphasize the
rhythmic harmony which unites all small and lari^e elements ofthe desi^in in dance-like dmerciy. Two nearperject "relations of neii^hbors" are shown above and
below the vessel. The third level of diner^iy is the
painted pattern; a remarkable combination ofrectangular spirals,
moving in opposite directiotis, in ^-.^
and out, up and down, ric^ht
and left.

\\ \ \

\\ \ \
\\ ^\\
\
\

"d' 0-12.

\

\

\
\

\
\
\
\

\ \
\ \

Fig. 38. Dinergic derivation and proportions of
earthenware pot number 3 (in fig. 37). Rectangular
spiral decoration (A) unites movements in opposite
directions: right and leh, up and down, in and out.
Simplified version (B) is similar to "meander" motif
found m many cultures.

\ \
\

\
\ \
\
DINERGY IN THE CRAFTS / 2,^

When one looks closer at the t.iscinating painted pattern of this vessel, one becomes aware ot
yet another level ot dmergic pattern ttirination. The nitricatelv woven zig-zag lines, which all
move m different directions — in and out, up and down, right and left — are all parts of one
single line, like vines growing from one stem. One element of this pattern is shown at the left in
simplified detail (A and B). Similar meandering patterns symbolizing dinergic unity occur in
the art of manv cultures, in countless varieties, a simple version of which (C) can be seen at the
base of the Attic amphora, figure 32.
This threefold dinergv ot painted pattern, proportions, and work process convevs a strong
sense oi oneness between the Indians and all that exists around them, expressed by the Oglala
Sioux sage Black Elk in the following way: "We know that we are related and one with all
things of the heaven and the earth . . . the morningstar and the dawn which comes with it, the
moon of the night and the stars ot the heavens. . . . Onlv the ignorant person . . . sees many
is re.illv one.""'
where
This there
basic belief throws light upon the dignity which a work ot pottery such as this c^ne
radiates. In the eyes ot the people who make and use such earthenware pots, these are not
merely dispensable utensils, leather, each ot these pots is felt to have a lite and a spirit ot its
own, similar to its maker's, and consequently these pots are made and used with the respect
accorded to a living being. Anthropological research since the end of the last century refers to
this belief as animism. According to anthropologist F. H. Crushing: "The noise made by a pot
when struck or when simmering on the fire is supposed to be the voice of an as.sociated being
That [the being departs when the pot is broken] is argued from the fact that vessel when
cracked or fragmentary never resounds as it did when whole.""
We may smile at such beliefs, thinking them to be antiquated, naive, and unscientific.
Nevertheless, there is an element of truth here. There is a wholeness in which everybody and
everything is related, just as the diversities of these patterns are related. All people and all
things are indeed neighbors.

24

THE POW ER OF LIMI I s

CHAPTER

3:

Dinergy

in

the

Arts

of

Livin!

Tangible and intangible patterns
The dinergic nature ot symbols, bridging the gap between tangible and intangible patterns, was
brietly touched upon earlier. Here it may be pointed out that the word syinhol reve.ds its own

Fig. 39. I'olytK'siati spir.il tattoo.
New Zealand.

dinergic origin, since it comes from the union ot two Greek words: sun, "together," and hallcin,
"to throw," like hall which also comes trom the latter root.
The first symbol we examined was the pentagram, a tangible pattern that helped the
Pythagoreans grasp the intangible realities ot harmony and health. The tact that the pentagram
is still used as a symbol of good portent shows that the dinergy of certain symbols is both
timeless and universal. C. G. Jung called such symbols archetypal, and he devoted a lifetime to
the study of their central importance in shaping patterns of human behavior.
Because harmonious patterns created out of tangible materials are readily completed, whereas the intangible patterns of the arts ot living are constantly in the making, one could perhaps
look upon the harmonious patterns of the arts and crafts as symbols, metaphors and models of
similarly harmonious behavior patterns yet to be created in the arts ot living.
It was suggested earlier how the interrelatednes ot diverse elements in a Pueblo pot expresses
the Indians' unity with nature. The same unity is expressed by the Mai>ris e>f Polynesia in their
concepts of )}ia)ia and tapu, the latter being a variant ot tahoo. The noted Danish anthropologist

)C=i
m

40. Hopi niothcr-earth symbol.

Kaj Birket-Smith describes the experience of mana as a strong feeling that "life is unity, in
which not only gods, but also things, which to us are lifeless have a part." Mana is thus a direct
experience ot "the sacred force that permeates existence." Tapu is the Maoris' word for their
sacred responsibility to comply with mana; a supreme law.''
Mana and tapu are expressions of the Maoris' sense of relatedness and oneness with the
universe around them, and just as the American Indians express this feeling with spiral patterns,
so do the Maoris. Everywhere in Maori art spirals abound. They <ire carved into wood and
stone, painted, and even tattooed on the body in the hope that the mana power attributed to
these symbols will save their wearers trom trouble and untimely death, (fig. 39)
Among American Indians, it is not only the Pueblo people who use spiral patterns. Thev can
also be found engraved into the rocks in seme ot the oldest continuous human habitations in
America, the villages of Oraibi and Shipaluovi, as well as in the ruins ot Casa Grande, near
Florence, Arizona, (fig. 40) The Hopi Indians refer to these patterns as Mother Earth symbols,
as I'apu'at (mother and child), or as symbols of emergence and rebirth. Anthropologists report
that similar symbolic meaning is attached to the same symbols by many other Indian people all
over the Americas.'-*
Identical spiral patterns have been discovered in many other parts of the world, dating from
prehistoric times. On the Mediterranean island of Crete, a 300()-year-old coin (fig. 41) shows

Fig. 41. Coin trom Knossos, Crete.

exactly the same spiral as the American Tapu 'at, but in Crete this pattern represented the
famous palace of the Minoan kings, the Labyrinth. Legend says that the Labyrinth was once the
lair ot the Minotaur, a mythical beast, halt bull and half man, which was a symbol of fertility.
PINEIU.Y IN THE ARTS OF LIVING / 25

Hii; 44 R.im ccrcmoiiv or "Free ot
Lite"
p.uiimig bv W'.iluingvvctnb.il .ihcr
.irtisc.rock
/inib.ilnvc
2(1

I llt^ I'OW lrK Ot 1 IMI I S

An apparently universal symbol of tcrtilitv is the snake, whose coiled body may very well
have contributed to the creation of archaic spiral patterns. The snake lends itselt to this
symbolic role alsc^ because it strikes erect— a reminder of phallic power. The Great Mother
goddess of Crete and her priestesses are frequently represented holding snakes. (tig. 42)
Hermes or Mercurv, messenger of the Greek and Roman gods, had two snakes winding
arenmd his magic wand, the caduceus, tool of his he.iling power, and even today professions
connected with healing use this dinergic symbol as their emblem, (fig. 43) Hermes was also the
guide t)f the departed to the afterworld. and the intertwined spiraling snakes ot his magic wand
may also symbolize the intertwined mystery ot lite and death.
The intangible dinergy of lite and death— interwoven with fertility— also appears in the
tribal art of the Wahungwe people of Zimbabwe. Figure 44 is a drawing made from a tribal
artist's painting, showing a tree rising from the dead body of a woman into the sky, where a
goddess and a giant snake cause fertilizing ram to gush torth om of the roots of the tree. In the
a
biblical creation story, woman, tree, serpent, and fertility are likewise intertwined, but here
evil.
and
good
tiirther intangible dinergy enters: the knowledge ot

Fig. 4.S. IVchisturic spir.il mazes at New (ir.inge, Ireland.
Threshold stone, /c//, has reliet c.irved into vv.ill. rii;/;f.
Intertwined spiral mazes from Neolithic times, identical with the Cretan Labyrinth, the
Maori tattoo and the American Indian Tapu'at, are carved into the rocks ot barrow tombs in
New Grange, Ireland, (tig. 45) These double spirals have been interpreted as symbols ot death
and rebirth, because as one tollows the line coiling inward, one tinds another line coming out in
the opposite direction, suggesting both burial in the tomb and emergence trom the womb: the
and death.'"*
ot litedouble
dinergy
The same
spiral design .shows up with remarkable clarity carved into stone balls
which have been unearthed near prehistoric passage graves at Glas Towie, Scotland, (tig. 46)
As anthropologist Loren Eisley has written, "Neanderthal man had, we now know atter long
digging, his own srnall dreams and kindnesses. He had buried his dead with otterings — there
were evidences that they had been laid, in some instances, upon beds ot wild tlowers."'''
The double spirals ot prehistoric graves are witness to the kindness as well as to the creative
concerns ot our prehistoric ancestors. These patterns reveal the energy-creating power ot
symbols suggested by the word dinergy. The tangible unity ot the dinergic spiral lines brings
home the realization that death and lite are in some mysterious and untathomable way interlocked. The sense ot awe that tollows this realization sparks new energy trom the embers ot

Our
grief.dinergic endowment
One can tind dinergic spirals much closer at hand than in prehistoric tombs — tor instance, in
the minute whorls ot our tingertips. (tig. 47) Dinergy is also evident in many other patterns o{
our physical and mental constitution.
We have two eyes and we see two images, which are united in the brain into a single,
three-dimensional sterec^scopic vision. We have two ears, receiving signals trom two opposite
directions, which are transmitted through the spiral-shaped cochlea ot the inner ear to unite in
the brain as stereophonic sound, (tig. 48)
The entire nervous system is a dinergic double structure, consisting of peripheral and central
component systems, again united by the brain. The brain itselt consists ot two hemispheres,
their integration being pertormed by centrally located organs within the brain. The bold and
extraordinary theory ot Julian Jaynes traces the origin as well as the present-day problems of
consciousness to a breakdown in the double structure of our minds.
Is It pure coincidence that on the molecular level the joint three-dimensional spiral pattern of
the double helix — matching the double snakes ot Hermes' magic wand — was tound a few years
i)inerc;y in the arts of livinc; / 27

ago to be the true shape ot the DNA molecule, which contains within its miniature coded
pattern the master plan of the entire future development of livmg organisms? (fig. 49) It was
discovered even more recently that some of the most mmute and important elements within
living cell structures (such as red and white blood corpuscles) group themselves in double spiral
patterns. The cores of these microtubules, referred to as axonemes and seen here enlarged in the
electron micrograph, figure 50, are a faithful match to the double spirals of prehistoric tombs,
the tattoos of the Maoris, and the Mother Earth patterns of the American Indians.
Whatever else there may be behnid such "coincidences," it is hard to avoid the conclusion
that we are lookmg at one of nature's most basic pattern-forming processes, here referred to as
dmergy. Seeing the hidden and harmonious order built into body and mind, as it is built into
every flower and leaf, mirrored by the crafts, and echoed by music, one wonders at the origin
of the disharmony and disorder that mars our civilization.
Indeed, our fascination with so-called "primitive" cultures appears to spring from our
longing for the lost dinergic relatedness which was once ours, when we ourselves were still
"primitives." Of course, we very much need science and technology, but we do not need the
fragmentation and separation that have come with the differentiations of our civilization.
Perhaps the disharmonies and disorders are with us not because our culture has grown up, but
because we have not yet grown up. Western civilization is still in its adolescence. Our violences
and worries may be but growing pains.
We do not have to go back to preliterate tribal cultures to find true dinergic relatedness to
nature and the universe. St. Francis of Assisi, in one of his famous canticles, addresses the Sun,
Air, Fire, Wind, and Water as his brothers; he sings about .Moon and Stars as his sisters and he
praises the Earth as his mother.'^
A sense of our dinergic relatedness to the mysteries of this universe and our participation in
its mana has inspired many scientists. Albert Einstein wrote: "Enough for me the mystery of
the eternity of life and the inkling of the marvelous structure of reality, together with the
single-hearted endeavor to comprehend a portion, be it ever so tiny, of the reason that manifests itself in nature."'*
The psychologist William James saw the essence of true religion as "the belief that there is
an unseen order, and that our supreme good lies in harmoniously adjusting thereto."'' Another
psychologist, Abraham H. Maslow, refers to the "peak experience" as "a clear perception that
the universe is all of a piece and that . . . one is part of it, one belongs in it. " From this follows a
sense that "the sacred is in the ordinary . . . that it is to be found in one's daily life, in one's
neighbors, friends and family, in one's backyard. . . . To be looking elsewhere for miracles is to
me a sure sign of ignorance that cvcrythtmi is miraculous. "-'^

Fig. 50. Axonciiie, the core ot a single
axopoJ, ^lK>\vn in cros.s-section. Enlarged 90,(XX) diameters.

J
28

rut: I'cnx KK ^

i :mi > ^

CHAPTER

4: Timeless

Patterns

of

Sharim

Basic arts of sharing
Sharing is not only a basic pattern-torming process and an art; it is also a condition ot lite. With
every breath ot air, with every sip ot water or bite ot nourishment, we share the resources ot
the earth. In The World As I See It, Albert Einstein says: "A hundred times every day I remind
myselt that my inner and outer lite depend on the labours ot other men, living and dead, and
that 1 must exert myselt in order to give in the same measure as I have received and am still
receiving."-^' This is the reciprocal sharing ot the Golden Rule and ot the golden section.
Betore we share in the labors ot others we share communications with them. Speech is one ot
our oldest means ot communication, a basic art through which we share our teelings, our needs,
and our thoughts with others. The development ot speech goes back perhaps a million vears, so
we don't know much about its beginnings. But the discovery that many languages have a
common origin (such as the Indo-European rc^ot language, now lost, atter having given birth to
many modern languages) gives us a glimpse ot the beginnings ot the art ot sharing through
speech. The word mother, which is similar in many languages, has been traced back to the >}ia
sound uttered by all babies.
Even the art ot thinking originates in sharing through talk. As Don Miguel de Unamuno says:
"To think is to talk to oneselt and each one ot us talks with himselt thanks to our having had to
talk with one another. Thought is inward language and the inward language originates in the
outward. Hence it results that reason is social and common."-We share communication also without words, using the silent speech ot body language. We
all know that a triendly smile, a trown, a shaking ot the head or a handshake at times tells more
than many words can.
The philosopher Susan Langcr speaks movingly about the ettect ot sharing the experience ot
touch and discovering thereby the shared meaning ot words, quoting a tamous passage trom
Helen Keller's autobiography, where she describes how her teacher took her to a well. "Someone was drawing water and my teacher placed my hand under the spout. As the cool stre.mi
gushed over my hand she spelled into the other the word water, tirst slowly, than rapidly. I stood
still, my whc^le attention tixed upon the motion ot her tingers. Suddenly I telt a misty consciou.sness as ot something torgotten . . . and somehow the mystery ot language was revealed to
me. I knew then that w-a-t-e-r meant the wondertul, cool something that was tlowing over my
hand. That living word awakened my soul, gave it light, hope, joy, set it tree!"'^
Both teaching and learning are essentially experiences ot sharing. Good teachers have the
Fig. 51. Marching hunters or w.irriors. Atter
prehistoric cave painting at C^asulla Ciorge,
Spanish Levant.

magic capacity to share themselves and their devotion to their subject with their students. "The
greatness ot teachers is not measured by how much they know, but bv how much they share,"
said the Reverend Jesse Jackson at a conterence dealing with violence in our cities.
Children learn what they see around them. It they see mostly egoism, thev learn to be
egoists. It they see sharing, they learn how to share, and — since learning is sharing — they learn
to read, write and count in the bargain.
Shared human enterprises have always tound expression m shared bodv movements, as tigure
51, a drawing atter a prehistoric painting, illustrates. Here early hunters ox warriors are seen
riMF.I.F.SS I'ATTEKNS OF SHARINC. - 24

V)

1 HF I'OW I-K Oi 1 iMI 1 s

Fig. S3. D.incing aps.iras (hcivciilv nvmplis) frimi Incli.m tcmpk- triczc (I2th-I3tli cc-nturics A.D.).
raising their bows and arrows as they stride in danee-like gestures toward their shared enterprise. Even thousands ot years hiter, just by looking .it them one can teel the ni.m.i-like energy
emanating from their shared movements.
In a Greek cup pamting from the si.xth century B.C., we see dancers all enthusiasticallv
dancing the same dance as they circle around the hero Hercules, who struggles with a sea
monster, (fig. 52) Hnthusiiisni is a word that means literally "god within," (in Greek, cn, "in"
and theos, "god"). Enthusiasm is sharing in an energy that is conceived ot as divine, as mana.
We Hnd movements expressing similarly shared religious emotions in countless other sacred
dances, such as the dance of apsaras (semi-divine beings) in an Indian temple carving, (tig. .S3)
We all become enthusiastic when we dance. With or without beliet in divine beings, the
mana ot shared rhythms carries us in the waves ot the dance, (tig. ,S4)

Fig. 54. Bulgarian folk dancers
TIMELESS PAITERNS OF SIIARINC, / M

One kind of body language leaves visible traces: writing. The art of writing is a form ot
communication that developed from patterns to which shared meanings were attributed. For
instance, zig-zag lines found side bv side with spiral patterns engraved in the walls of the
prehistoric passage graves of New Cirange, Ireland are looked upon by scholars as the first
representations oi water, believed to signify the earliest form of the letter M.^^ (figs. 55, 61)
In tribal cultures where writing has not yet developed, simple geometric patterns are used to
share ideas. The anthropologist Franz Boas writes: "It is remarkable that in the art of many
tribes the world over, ornament that appears to us purely formal is associated with meanings
Cieometrical patterns of the Brazilian Indians represent fish, bats, bees and other animals,
although the triangles and diamonds of which they consist bear no apparent relation to these
animal forms. -'^ (fig. 56)
Even highly complex geographic information is at times passed along within tribal cultures
bv such pattern-images. The p.itterns on <i rawiiide bag made by North American Arapaho
Indians (fig. 57) are said to represent a village surrounded by mountains (double frame), dotted
with lakes (squares in frame), tents (dark triangles) and a buffalo path running right through
the center (dotted line).
Sometimes long stories are shared by members ot a tribe, with the help of a single pattern.
For instance, the painted Zuni bowl in figure 58 narrates the story of "Cloud Alone": "When a
person does not go to the dances, when they dance for rain, after her death she goes to the
Sacred Lake and when all the spirits of the other dead people come back to Zuni to make rain,
she cannot go but must wait alone, like a single little cloud left in the sky after the storm clouds
have blown over. She just sits and waits all alone, always looking and looking in all directions,
waiting for somebody to come. That is why we put eyes looking out in all directions."-'

Fig. 56. (leonu-trR patterns
ni.ulc bv Br.i7ili,iii liuli.ins. Top
design represents b.its. bottom
Jesipn respresents bees.

when in the course ot historical development large urban population centers .irose, as in
Mesopotamia, Egypt and Chma, such commonly used patterns gradually developed nito writing. The cuneiform writing of the Sumerians was impressed intt) clay tablets with wedgeshaped tools, (tig 59) The Egyptians' written signs, called hieroiilyphs (tig. 60), were carved mto
stone or written on papyrus rolls. To the ancients, writing was a sacred art guarded bv priests
and scribes.

Fig. 59. Sumerian cuneiform mcdicdl text.

Fig. 6(1. Egyptian hieroglyphs from 12th dynasty (1991-17S6 B.C:.).
TIMFI-ESS PATTERNS OF SHARINCi / .y

For us, writing has bcccmif so coninionpl.icc th.it It has lost its sacred character, as
with dancing. Wc tind it hard to imagine
what owx ancestors might have felt when they
tirst experienced the pt)wer ot writmg. The

a
Utbreu)

1

M
7

V

<

surcK' magical that a man long vanished from
the land ot the living could still speak from a
clav t.iblet or a papyrus roll. Words thus
H

A
cdpha.

V
J

A

S

A

X

6

/

M

ynouJM.

&

o

anthropologist
Childein has
said: "The
immortalizationClordon
ot a word
writing
must
have seemed a supernatural process; it was

N

N

n

T

T

n

E

E

n

P

o

0

Owx own
traced back to
ot mana."-*
a kmdbeen
possess have
must letters
spoken
Rom.m and CJreek prototypes, which in turn
originated trom still earlier proto-semitic
images representing simil.ir sounds, as figure
61 illustrates.

Fig. 61. Origin ot sumc letter patterns.

V)

I 111 l'l>\\ I R C11 LIMll^

(?)

X

f

hn£

~i

1

'-1

Ill C^hiii.t the patterns ot writing never
turnetJ inti) signs scninds as thev did in the
West. Instead, the signs ot Cdimese writing
retain to this day the rudiments cit the basic
patterns trmn which they originated, with <ui
ide.i attached Xvi each, which is why thev are
called idcoi^nuHs. In figure 62 <i tew Chinese
ideograms .ire shown (in scjuare frames),
together with the basic image-patterns from
which they originated (in round frames).
Even it one does not understand the meaning ot a foreign written language, one can
still share its rhythms, which reveal its unique
character. The rhythm ot Chinese writing —
archaic as well as modern — moves with seemingly effortless grace (tigs. 63, 64). The

t
tf
' rtHSu It,

Fig. 62. Devclo

pnicnt ot C'hincst

' idcogr.ims. Ear ly tonus arc- iii Lin.1 CN, current torn IS arc in squares

Fig. 63. Chinese writing trom bronze
casting (1 1 th century B.C.).

Fig. 64. Poem by Emperor Hui-tsung.
TIMELESS PATTERNS OF SHARINCi / ,VS

viun^

iiw^'^?^ •n^J'AJ^ni r^v^ivl

Fig. 63 Hc'hri vv writing triMii Dc.iJ So Scrolls.

hit;, (if). Rom.ui izr.ittitii troni I'onipcn
Hebrew writing ot the Dead Sea st rolls (tig. 65) proceeds in a steadfast walk, as it it contirmed
the firophet's words, "What doth the Lord require ot thee but to do justly and ... to walk
humbly with thy CJod?"-'' In the Roman grattlto scratched into a Poinpeian wall (tig. 66) we
recognize a tamiliar nervousness that reminds us ot our own hurried longhand. The rhythm of
Arabic dances with dignity (tig. 67), while the rhythm ot one ot the first Gutenberg bibles
storms heavenward like the steeples ot the Gothic town where it was printed (fig. 68).

Fig. 67. Ar-ibk writing.

The rhythms ot writing are created by the same pattern-torming process of sharing that
creates rhythms ot dance, music and speech. Movements shared make dance, patterns shared
make writing, and sounds shared make music and speech. It is also through a sharing process
that we comprehend numbers. The tact that we all have ten tingers allows us to count the tirst
ten numbers on our two h.mds. From ten, numbering becomes a rhythmically recurrent process:
the tens make hundreds, the hundreds make thousands, and so on.
The ancients used the proportions ot the human body tor measuring short distances. For
instance, the length ot a man's forearm with the hand outstretched was called a cuhit, which had

.Vi HIE Ptnx HK (.^F LIMIIS

Cocllm

several variants. The Egyptians had a smaller cubit, which consisted ot six "handbreadths" and
a larger one, the Royal Cubit, which was seven handbreadths. (Hg. 69) The Egyptian "hand"
was made up ot the dimensions of tour "fingers" or "digits." A further measure, the "fist,"
equaling one and a third handbreadths, was used by the Egyptian master-budders and craftsmen
to establish the square grids used for the proportioning of their royal statuary. Many unfinished
Egyptian sculptures have been found which have such grids, used by the artists and workmen.
The rhythmic wave diagram in figure 69 reveals how the main proportions of this figure share
the harmonious proportions approximating the root harmonies of music.
The Roman cubit consisted of two feet, each foot measuring twelve uhcuu'; this is the word

obrulirliolqrauftafujialrare.flDu^
ramfq; tft
otnre fuauitati^:^ ait

from which our word ituli comes. Six feet made up the jatlioni, which corresponded to a man's
outstretched arms, from fingertip to fingertip, (fig. 70)

aU £u.|)lcquarn ultra malfDiram

fit

propttr Ipi'eo. ^)nifui< ml cr rogitaro
liunmni tt]2Dio m aialii proiui runt
ah aDolfftma Fua. Ifloii igimr ultra
nrrcuria onumu amumm
uiunitrm
uait fm ruutho Difto- ttrrt fnunitio-i
mriTm-FaguD i rftuo-cftao i l]imip^tDirononrequitrrmt.vl ? 8
enfDijrirq^, truo iioc
nuo^ Di^t aD £oa.l£ ctfntt i niftipli
mmiui

i replrtt ttrra-^i ttrro2 utflxr ar

tmuo2 fit Fuji diM ni'alia tmt-i fupcr
nmnro uoluaco di nli uuiunfio que
moimu

fug terra. ftuanropirrto ma

nonuanui

16

utftrt traD iti lut-tr onme

Fig. 68.
Lines t'roiii
Clutcnbcrg IJiblc (14.S2-1456) .md
view
ot Cokigne
in 141)0.

ifz^of- = % SnctM. CiUtdt - 3 so tun es ■'
ingCi/M.c c^myMl-. Xi\A run* 2:j= o-iee
0.6
Fig. 70. Greek metmlogical relief. Distance from
fingertip to fingertip is a \athom; tontprint above
figure indicates basic measure.

5:9=0.625
8:|3'0.&15
g-.lk"

\

Fig. 69. Egyptian measures and proportions. Each squ.ire
oi grid is a list, corresponding to one-third of a foot.

i.b/8 = iiui(>eM.i( =
TIMELESS PATTERNS OF SHARINC, / M

Fig. 72. Swedish rock engravings ot ships and swords
(ca. B.c:.).
As rhc nicasuriDg ot length was liiikcil to the proportions ot the human body, so the
measuring ot tunc became based upon the durations observed in the rhymically occurring
movements ot the heavenlv bodies. These observations led to the realization that there exists a
heavenlv or cosmic t>rder, to which human lite is related, and upon which it depends, this order
m.initesting itselt in the movements iit the stars and in the recurring patterns of the calendar.

Cosmic order and calendric structures
There are manv indications that prehistoric people caretully observed the nK^vements ot heavenlv bodies. In Scandinavian rock engravings trom prehistoric times we see boats and sunwheels, with the spokes pointing in the directions ot the compass, (fig. 71) There are also
c\)ncentric circular skv patterns, one with a sword pointing towards it, apparently referring to
a constellation which the early Vikings might have used as a navigational guide, (tig. 72) In
another Swedish rock engraving, something like a giant's or a god's tootprint is seen over the
sunwheel, and below it is a tigure with crescent-shaped headgear, perhaps a shaman, imperson.iting the "man in the nKHMi," dancing in the tlaming tootsteps ot the sun. (tig. 7.3)
Whatever the interpretation ot such mythological patterns might be, they testity to early
observations ot the skv, which brought along better orientation in time and space.
Archeological and astn-)nomical research has established that the large stone monuments
which were built acrt>ss Northern Europe about 3500 years ago served as giant compasses,

['ig- 73. Swedish ruck engravings o[ .i
deitv or sh.im.iii, with toinprint and
sunwheel (ea i;>n(i 1V( ' i

3s

1 HH POW 1-H Ot 1

1s

calendars, and computers ot seasonal patterns, as well as sacred precincts for religious rituals.^''
The most tamous ot these megaliths is Stonehenge. on the Salisbury Plain in England, built in
stages trom the twentieth to the si.xteenth centuries B.C^ (tig. 74)
A pl.ui of Stonehenge III indicates how the exact time ot midsummer sunrise was established
(tig. 7.5), by sighting the disk ot the rising sun between adjacent tall stone markers, called Sarsen
Stoiu'<. directlv on top of what is referred to as the Ht-ehfom. (fig. 76) The horizontal projections
(azimuthal directions) oi the midwinter and midsummer risings and settings of the sun and the
moon established with modern scientitic instruments corroborate the astronomical accuracy of
Stonehenge. (tig. 77)

\^

■<•
[0.GI8)

(1.0)

■ >-"

\
\
\

:
:
;
■\
\
::
- '
X
' \.

\\
/

.
Stonehenge.
Fig. 74.

\:

stunts—^
K&plaxe^ simi:

SM/ns&t
■yyiiSiu/ywwiMi.
yvimviAAAe.

Heelstone
Fig. 76.
framed in
archway at
Stonehenge.

^6 55
midwinter

CP

MOONStT^
SUNSE T
^
MIOWiNMidsummer
TER

Minr.uMMrR
SUNfll Of
MIDW NT ER
MOONRISE

Fig. 75. Ahgnments tor
Stonehenge III. Sarsen
Circle's diameter and width
ot Bluestone Trihthon
Horseshoe are in golden
section relationship.
MIDSUMMER
MOOnsET
Fig. 77. Horizontal projections ofsightlmes (azimuthal
directions) ot rising and setting ot sun and moon at
solstice and ecjuinox tor the latitude ot Stonehenge.

. MIDSUMMER
MiDWIN
SUNRISEfER
\
\MIDSUMMER
\
MOONRlse
\
MOONRISe
TIMELESS PATTERNS OF SHARINC; / ,W

lu--d, s tunc

It seems to have escaped notice sc^ tar that the architecture ot Stonehenge shares the proportions ot the golden section and ot the FVthagorean triangle. The classical construction of the
golden section applied to plan 111 ot Stonehenge (tig. 75) reveals that a golden relationship
exists between the width ot the Bluestone Trilithon Horseshoe and the diameter ot the Sarsen
C'ircle, (1:0.618 = 1.618). The same proportional construction applied to the plan ot stage I
sht)ws that the rectangle tormed by the Statuin Stones approximates the \/ 5 rectangle, made up
ot two reciprcK'al golden rectangles, (tig. 78) The astronomer Clerald S. Hawkins, upon whose
investigations the present analysis is based, believes that the Station Stone Rectangle was
Ira/nit.

"immensely significant . . . historically, geometrically, ritualistically and astronomically.""
Geometric analysis with the help ot center lines ct piers and diagonals also shows that the
proportions of the Sarsen archways come as close to the relationships ot the 3-4-5 triangle as
figure 79 indicates. Recalling that the 3:4 proportion corresponds to the musical harmony ot
diatessaron, the golden section ccirrespimds to the diapente, and the corresponds to the
diap.ison, the phr.ise "music ot the spheres" t.ikes on new meaning.

i'2,236 - m

94
(10)

(1.0)

^ (o.&jsi^ PiofoxiuyyuAl
[1. 61%)

Fig. 78, Plan ot StiHiclR-tigc I. ahovf. with propurtions o\
Station Slum.- Kci. taiigic- pr<>|ct tc-d, hfL'ic, show ing its
approximation ot the v B rectangle.

3

4(1 TUt POW ! K Ol LIMITS

Some ot the same harmonious proportions can be hnunl ui a structure built about KKHI ve.irs
before Stonehenge — the Great Pyramid ot Egypt. Figure 80 shows that the central height
(apothem) ot any side triangle rehites to halt the base in the proportUMi.il ratio ot the golden
section. In cubits: Vi base = 220; apothem = 356; 356:220 = 1.618.'>As may be recalled, the 3-4-5-triangle also approximates the golden ratio between its 5-unit
side and the 3-unit base. (5:3 = 1.666...). For the Egyptians, the 3-4-5 triangle was ot vital
importance. Their tields h.id to be surveyed yearly, because ot inundations by the Nile, and this
triangle served as their surveying tool. A rope with knots at twelve equal distances, held <it the
third and eighth knots with the ends brought together, pri)duced the angle needed tor surveving. This is why the 3-4-5 triangle is also reterred to as the ropeflrctclicr's truvii^lf or the }:<^Ypthi)i
triiiiK^Ic. The close relationship between the ropestretcher's triangle and the golden rectangle is
illustrated in figure 81.

Fig. 81. Relationship between .'^-4-5 triangle
(ropestretcher's triangle) and golden rectangle.

half baif : ka^'nt - diMt<s[>juni- jov-ityi
iM. uUnJa: 220 ■ 280 * 0,736
i/nfeet: 380- 492 - (3.786
tiaij base : Ofotkevn- - dicip€/nte -ft-ffn

kaLj bast. : fvUl bast = dta^cwcm - octavf
lA^eet . 390 74« =i ^ '^

Fig. 80. (Ire. It Pyranikl ot ( "lieops .it (lizeh. Ooss sec tion shows
th.it .ipothem .lud halt the h.ise are in golden section rel.itionship.
TIMELfcSS I'A I TERNS c)F SHARINc; / 41

Explorations h.ivc demonstrated that the Great
Pyramid was not only a royal tomb, but was also a
giant almanac "by means of which the length of the
year, including its awkward 0.2422 fraction of a day
could be measured as accurately as with a modern
telesctipe ... It also has been shown to be a theodolite,
an instrument ior surveying, that is precise, simple,
and virtually indestructible."" As a compass, it is so
finely oriented that modern compasses are adjusted to
it, not vice versa. The astronomer Richard A. Proctor

hii; Hi. I'ass.ims in tin- (lrc.it I'yr.iiiud, perhaps used .is
nbscrs .itioii slots t(i miMsiirc the suh's lu iglit on tlu- shortest
,inJ loiim-si il.u s ot till- \ cMr.

estim.ited, at the turn ot the century, that the sun's
height at its equinoxes as well as certain key stars and
constellatu)ns could be sighted and aligned very accurately through the huge, graduated slots which were
built into the bculy ot the pyramid. Proctor speculates
that the truncated top surface of the pyramid before
its completiiMi ct)uld have been u.sed as an astrononucal and .istrological observation platform high over
the (iizeh plateau, with a view commanding the entire
compass. (tig. 82)

In Mexico around 300 A.I)., similar huge pyramidal
structures were built to serve both religious and astrontimical purposes, and they display basic proportional
patterns similar to the Clreat Pyranud of Egypt and
Stonehenge.
The Pv ramids ot the Sun and the Moon in Teotihuacan ne.ir Mexico C]ity once tormed the heart of a splendid metropolitan civilization, (fig. 83) Figure 84 shows
how the t>utlines ot the Pyramid of the Sun are contained within two sets of 5:8 and 3:4 triangles. Other

t ig, S.V I'M.iniul ot tin- .Moon, iilnnr.
.mJ tlu- l'\ r.iniiJ ot tin.- Sun, heloii'.
I cotiluMi. .m. .Mc xK o
— ■:= '-i-^U,
o.ejg -L
III-. l i
II?'.
■ fl

f'lg S4 J l(.\.itioii ,inJ
[Toportioii.il .m.iK sis of the
I'vr.mikl ot tl)f Sun.
111 l\>\\ hR 111 1 I.\11 1 s

75

2 25

Mexican pyramids also fit into the 3:4 triangle's outlines, as can be seen from drawings
representing elevations ot two at them: the Pyramid oi Niches in El Tajin, and Castillo in
Chichen Itza. (Hgs. 85, 86) In addition, in El Tajin the golden section's proportions are approximated bya progressive series of relationships between cardinal dimensions, as indicated by the
golden section constructions and wave diagram. In the Castillo, the main elements of the

Fig. 86. Chichen Itza: Castillo. Section and plan.

structure fit into a series of \/~5 rectangles (composed of two reciprocal golden rectangles) as
the constructions superimposed over the elevation demonstrate. All these proportional relationships echo the root harmonies of music. The architect Manuel Amabilis Dominguez in 1930
discovered a prevalence of pentagonal proportions, and thus of the golden section, in many
Mexican monuments.
Volumes have been written about the calcndric significance of these
pyramids. Apparently, in certain cases, even the number of structural or decorative elements
correspond to the number of days in certain important cycles of time, and each stone had
calendrical importance: in the Castillo the number of steps, and in the Tajin the number of
niches, is 365, the number of days in the solar year.
TIMELESS PATTERNS OF SHARING / 43

44

THF POW tR Of- LIMITS

Fig. 90. Ziggur.it of Babylon. Reconstruction by L.C. Stecchini.
Observation of the heavens tor clues to seasonal changes was also a major function ot some ot
the world's oldest calendrical structures, the Ziggurats oi Mesopotamia. According to Sir
Leonard Woolley, who excavated the large Ziggurat ot Ur, built by the Sumerians near today's
Baghdad, the word ::i<i(^urat meant "hill ot heaven" or "mountain ot god." (tig. 87) Sir Leonard,
whose reconstruction ot the Ur Ziggurat is shown in tigure 88, suggests that these huge
stairways with processionals ascending and descendmg them might have had to do with Jacob's
tamous dream m the Bible: "and behold a ladder set upon the earth, and the top ot it reached to
heaven, and behold the angels ot God ascending and descending on it."^''
The priests ot the ziggurats were also astrologers and astronomers who calculated the
movements ot planets, the sun and the moon, and established a lunar calendar tor predicting
seasonal changes, tloods, sowing and harvesting times, and so on.
The most tamous ziggurat was the Tower ot Babel in Babylon, with its legendary hanging
gardens ot Semiramis. (tig. 89) Livio Catullo Stecchini reconstructed the basic outlines ot the
Fig. 91. Assyrian b.is relict ot ziggur.it (7th century B.C.).

Ziggurat ot Babylon on the basis ot a cuneitorm text, the so-called Smith Tablet." The outlines
ot this reconstruction are shown in tigure 90. Constructions ot the golden section and Pythagorean triangle reveal correspondences to the tourth-diatessaron and titth-diapente root harmonies ot music. An Assyrian bas reliet trom the seventh century B.C. shows similar proportions,
(tig. 91)
TIMELESS PA ETERNS t)F SHARINc; / 4S

4h

THH Pcn\H< Oh 1 IMI I S

Figures 92 and 93 are the author's proportional studies ot the Ur Ziggurat. b<ised upon Sir
Leonard Woolley's excavations and ot King Ur Nainniu's reconstruction trom around the
twenty-second century B.C. (The age ot the earlier ziggurats buried below the present ruins
can only be guessed at; they could have been built as much as lOOO years earlier.) These
proportional analyses indicate that the terraces and temple which make up this great structure
share the proportions ot the golden section and the Pythagorean triangle.

TIMELESS PATTERNS OF SHARINC; / 47

15

16

18

19

20

Fig. 94. Comparison of cosmic
and biological rhythmic patterns.
4S

IMF POWKR CIH I I.MI I S

Rhythm

and harmonious

sharing

Calendric architecture revealed rhythmic patterns characteristic ot the caleiidric changes
themselves — the wanings and waxings ot the moon, the rhythms oi ebbs and tides, or menstrual
cycles ot the temale body.
The circular pattern in Hgure 94 represents a page ot the calendar tor May 1976. Every
square represents a day's record ot the ebbs and tides ot the Pacitic Ocean in Seattle, Washington. Fluctuations within the major rhythm are caused by the joint gravitational pull ot the
moon and the sun, the tormer benig the stronger one because ot its relative
closeness to the earth.
On a miniature scale, the wave patterns ot this cosmic rhythm are shared by our heartbeat, as
electrocardiogram B in tigure 94 indicates. Our brain waves are turther variations ot these
rhythms, depending upon our condition — light sleep, deep sleep, sweating, or the mental
disturbances called petit Dial <md (^rand nial, tor instance.
Our breathing has a similarly dinergic wave pattern: it is an ongoing rhythm ot inhaling and
exhaling, and similar tluctuations characterize the physical and mental cycles called biorhytliDis.
Our "inner clocks" allow us to register our own rhythmic patterns ot time, called circtuiian
rhythms. Air travelers become aware ot their circadian rhythms when crossing time zones:
their own inner time and outer, calendric time temporarily get out ot step.
By attaching pens to a pendulum and to a tuning tork, and by registering the pens' traces on
rolling paper, the mathematical physicist Sir james Jeans proved that weight and sound share
the same rhythmical, harmonious wave patterns, called sine curres, or simple luiniionuiil curves. ''^
(fig. 95)

Fig. 95. Simple harmonic patterns created by pendulum, /c/f, and tuning tork, r/i;/;f.

TIMEL ESS PATTERNS OF SHARINC; / 49

)i (

-/Avt ' f-fs''',

I ' 1 ,AMr,'-,rn;or-\ 'J' jit; :

II

-/"fJ
I

'^'ifJ ^ /'^
1
I

^27
T

5« ")
I

'"97 700
I
1

I

1

1

\

I

i

III

II

I

~0-i
\

X\

A

A

A

G

/\

A

A

B

A

A

A

A

A

C

D

E

F

&

52g

594

660

/04

79Z

A

A

A
B

Sot. f JO

, :^i::>riOM$ ft c ifcc-'^o

^30 1,056
]')()

r .x'

J
- ^-'-^

1

yUjfi

1

A

CO

/OO
■■)

40-J

l it; '^(), ( oi rcspoiulclK I' Ix tu ccil
DiusK.il soiiiiJv .ind colors

S(i

I MF POW l R 0\ 1 IMI i s

C

Light, color and sound also share the same wave patterns. What is more, they share the same
vibration rates, as J. Dauven proved in 1970 (see figure 96.)'*'* Diagram A is a composite oi both
vibrations; sound frequencies (the number ot vibrations per second) are shown with a dashdotted line, and color frequencies are shown with a solid line. The closeness of the two lines
indicates that the experience of harmonious rhythms is shared by the eye and the ear, even
though one registers it as color, the other as sound. The shared harmonies of colors and musical
chords are shown in diagram B. Here the double 3-4-5 triangles indicate the tonic chord A
minor (A-C-E), corresponding to indigo-green-orange on the color wheel, which might be
seen when an orange tree is in fruit and the leaves cast dark blue shadows. The tonic chord G
major
(G-B-D) corresponds to violet-blue-yellow, the colors of an iris or violet under a sunny
blue sky.
The essence of all vibration and rhythm is a sharing of diversities — weak and strong, in and
out, up and down, back and forth — at recurrent time intervals. This holds as true for the tides
of the ocean as for our heartbeat; for light, weight and sound as for patterns of plant growth.
If we compare our reconstructions of leaf outlines with so-called isocandle light distribution
patterns of lighting fixtures, as in figure 97, we see definite correspondences. The intensities of
light are measured and charted in these diagrams along radiating rays emanating in straight
lines from the center of the fixtures, spreading in ever wider orbits, represented by concentric
circles. This pattern is thus as dinergic in origin as the growth pattern of leaves or flowers,
created by radiational and rotational growth components.

TIMELESS PATTERNS (W SHARINc; / =-1

5_

A row ot suntlowcr seeds along spiral D iii hgure 7 shcnvs that the diagonal length ot the
seeds group themselves in harmonica! series represented by vertical bars in diagram 2 ot figure
9H. This pattern is similar to that ot the lilac leaf (tig. 17) and the cumulative length ot
K-J
neighboring groups ot seeds — represented by the upper and the lower b.irs. All share the same
gt)lden 5:8 relationship, approximating the musical root harmony ot titth-diapente. (tig. 98,
diagram 3)
('ountmg the number ot seeds in neighboring groups, as shown by the bars, we get:

O-N

Z-F

H-G

5
5

6

5
7

5
8

M-L
5
9

1
1

1
1.2

1
1.4

1
1.6

1

Y-H

_5_
10
1
1

etc. Divided bv 5 =

etc.

1.8

Such a series is referred to in algebra as a hamionic pro^resiion, a concept that plays an important
role, tor instance, in the mathematical interpretation ot sounds. A harmonic progression is
defined as a series of fractitms in which the nominator remains 1 while all neighboring denominators share the same difference, m this case 0.2. Put another way, a harmonic progression
consists ot the reciprocals of an arithmetical series. Recalling that in the Fibonacci series the
difference between neighboring numbers also approxim.ites the same ratio — 0 moving one
w.iy and \/(i> moving the other way — we see that the Fibonacci series is a truly harmonic
These few random examples illustrate that <ill rhythmic vibration is essentially harmonious
progression.
sharing. Since this sh.iring is universally present in musical sound, color, light and weight,
p.itterns of plant grow^th, ebbs, tides and calendric rhythms, as well as in our own biorhythms,
breathing, and heartbe.it, we can speak ot it as a basic pattern-forming process. In the next
chapter we will look into the role this pattern-forming process plays in shaping the anatomy of
animals.
hig. Diagr.tnis iit a row ot suntlovvcr sfcilv, along
spir.il D in fig. 7. 1. Rhythm ot golden relations between
neighbt>ring groups ot seeds; 2. diagram ot harmonic
seed series; 3. prevalence ot golden section proportions.

.S2

I HF. POWER or- LI.V1I I S

5: The

CHAPTER

of

Anatomy

Sharin

Shells, clams, crabs and fishes

The shapes of shells have been the suhject of many studies which show that their harmonious
A logashapes unfold in logarithmic spirals characterized by the golden section's proportions.
rithmic spiral typical of shell growth, figure 99. shows that each consecutive stage ot growth is
encompassed by a golden rectangle which is by a square larger than the previous one, a pattern
Hambidge called the pattern of "whirling squares."-*" One can trace this "whirl" by
which Jay the
following
table below:
golden rectangles
() 1 2 3
12

4 5

2

4

6 7

4

6

8 9

+ squares
+ () 3 4 5

= golden rectangles:
= 12
4 5

+ 1
+ 2
+4

=

2

4

6 7

=

4

6

8 9

=

6

8 10 11 etc.

5 6 7
7 8 9
9 10 11

The harmony of the Fibonacci series is present in this shell curvature, as the equidistant radii
in figure 100 illustrate.

THE ANATOMY OF SHARING / 53

That even widely differing shell shapes share the proportions ot golden dinergy can be seen
by comparing, for instance, the Atlantic sundial {Architectonica nohilis) (fig. 101) — which is
103) perfectly circular — with a delicate variety of abalone {Haliotis asinitia) (fig. 102) which is
almost
elongated like a donkey's ear; (asininus means "donkey" in Latin). Successive stages of growth
in the abalone — measured along neighbormg, equidistant radii — are Fibonacci numbers, (tig.

Fig. ini. Atlantic sumiial

Fig. 11)2. Abalone {Halioiis
iisiiuihi). The shape above
the (Jotted line is reconstructed inFig. 103.

Fig. 10.^ i:)inergic
reconsiriu tuMi o\ abalone
shell's outline

.S4 THE POWI R OF 1 IMITS

]

In the Atlantic sundial, bcc.iuse ot its nearly circular shape, it is easy to measure successive
increments ot growth projected along one of the radii, marked a to 1 in figure 104. The
reconstructions — by the same dinergic method ot combined radial and rotation.il grtnvth
increments as used earlier for the reconstructions of daisy, sunflower and leaf outlines — reveal
that the difference between the curvatures is only in the tempo, or rate of unfolding. The
sundial's spiral moves with relative slowness between consecutive circles. It crawls through not
less than 20 radii, or squares, before reaching from one circle to the next: a proportion of 20:1
between radial and rotational growth. The abalone takes only four to five radii or squares to
move from one circle to the next: a proportion of 4 or 5:1 . Constructions of the golden section
at the right of figure 104 prove that the proportions of neighboring whorl-widths are the
golden ones: all the shaded rectangles — width and length of which correspond to the width of
neighboring whorls — are golden rectangles. The harmony created by this relationship is illustrated also by the organ-pipe-like bars, indicating the cumulative length of successivelv widening whorls. This sharing of the same proportional limitations throughout the entire growth
process is also expressed by a series ot equations all equaling (f).

I HE ANATOMY OF SHARING / 55

Fig. IDS. Dil.itc'd whflk ipcuion diLi

Ot course, shells grow in all three dimensions ot space sinuiltaneously. In the abalone,
however, and in the sundial, development in
the third dunension ot depth is relatively
small. In shells that have greater depth, this
development also shares the proportions of
golden dinergy, as can be seen, for mstance, in
the dilated whelk of New Zealand {Penion dilatiitus), figure 105. The wave diagram at the
left indicates how all neighboring whorls
share the same golden relationships. The long
equation series at the bottom ot the drawing
T !

expresses the same thing. The right-hand diagram hirnishes constructions of the golden
section as in the previous example.
A side view ot the bear's paw clam (tig.
106) illustrates the marvelous precision of
dinergic sharing between the two opposite
valves interlocking and complementing each
other. Reconstructions ot the basic outlines
reveal that the harmony ot this lovely shape
shares the same golden dinergies as so many
earlier examples ot organic growth.

Fig. 106. Bear's p.nv clarn [Htppopuf
hippopm).
reconstruction
ot central nincrgic
spiral, upper
diagram,
And cross section, lower duii^niw% / THF. POWER OF Ll.MlTS

Fig. 107. Proportional harmonies ot Dungenes crab (Cancer maj^isier).

In crustaceans we again find golden dinergic relations shared by all neighboring parts ot the
anatomy. The carapace of a typical Dungeness crab, from the Northwest Pacific coast of the
U.S., fits into a golden rectangle as drawing A of figure 107 shows. The length of neighboring
parts of the pincers and legs (C) in relation to each other (table B) fluctuates between visual
equivalents ot the three musical root harmonies of 0.75, fourth-diatessaron; 0.618, fifthdiapente; and 0.5, octave-diapason (D). The wave diagrams of pincer and legs (E) show the
harmonious rhythm created between all these differently sized members by their shared proportional relationships.
THE ANATOMY OF SHARING / 57

U.235 = /J
'5 4/8

/.6;e

f-ig, I(»S. Sli.irc\l [H(>]>oriions ot fish.
SS

mi- l'(,n\ 1 K OV 1 IMI 1 s

« 6/e

<f> =1. 618

/.O

A study ot a variety ot tish shapes reveals
similar rhythniie harmonies resulting from
similarly shared proportional limits. The proportional analysis ot ten ditterent. randomly
chosen fish trom the Pacific waters ot Can.ida

III, rtri i^p^'

ZJ

Cr/Xco Svt/ifpe TofL

demonstrates that their basic outlines — and
frequently also the detailed articulations ot
their bcxlies — share in a variety ot ways both
the proportions ot the golden section and ot
the 3-4-5 triangle. The pictures ot each ot the
ten tish in figure 108 illustrate how the outlines fit into golden rectangles, their multiples
and reciprocals, at times combined with
squares. In many instances, the mouth is at the
golden section point c^t the body's height, as in
the Coho salmon (1), quillback rockfish (2),
calico surf perch (7), and opah (10). The lower
row of fish shows how a series of double 3-4-5
triangles can be fitted into the outlines trom
mouth to tail.

3^
O 6 '8

IHE ANA I t^MY OF SHARlNCi / 59

..V

(2)

7A loi - 0.7?,

f;:99 - a-?
i2:;q = 0.63

24.31; 0/7

3j:5o = 0.62 ,~

t.' 5/ = 0 77

S )

3-; «2= c.fj

1

^4

'7^'^

fJott:
c
Sef. i-i^i-i'ciU SCcJ.es (tlrtrt K —
40..
o.eo
0.15 -A) .72

osr

lO 7 7

0 6/

nfiK- kaperM(OGz

:7 w
60

THE POWER OV Ll.MlTS

,

^4)

(15.

(16

{17

(18) "D

67:96=
The combined three-unit length ot such 34-5 triangulation diagrams, representing vertical body height, constitute true harmonic
progressicws, shown in figure 109 tor the coho
salmon, curltin sole. Pacific pompano, calico
surfperch, and ribbon barracudina. The harmonies ofthese rhythms likewise approximate
the root harmonies of music, as wave diagrams and graphs show.

Ribbon

E>(vviOiCAAdjLria.

THE ANATOMY OF SHAHINC / M

Even in the third dimension (it thickness, tish tend to partake ot the golden section's proportions, asthree typical transverse sections in figure 110 illustrate.
I he s.uiie proportional limits prevail in the shapes ot skates and stingrays, as illustrated by
figure 111. ( he ni.un bodies ot the deep-sea sk.ite (1), black skate (2), longnose skate (3), and
starrv skate (4), are each encompassed by two golden rectangles, while the big skate's body (5)
tits into a single golden rectangle. The greatest width ot the bodies invariably tallies with the
g(.)lden sectu>n point ot the height.

ivYuVA c^doses file

of ih :.hApe ^

Ac Ut^'.'Jt of the pAyTth IS WjvkU.
i.htue Itnjt-i of-c ^ elite i\ K ct-«A\*)le-

f it;. 11(1 Proportions ot transverse sections ot hsh.
I Hh l>cn\ 1 H 0\ 1 IMlIs

(4 ;O
2 O

20

1.0

/o
h'^A^i Lpl.es L^f joldCit yictun (flfJ -BTAhxm
\ht shafej: of- skate:^ 0^io{.'^^. JuU widHt

<li iirr'rith. L' L/Hitined
I'eUvffn hvn (if.'IdrtA Irrl^imi. poi't^fJ:

I J Deep-sea Skdtt

I'll '>Ujri^<jf a ppvcJLP^ iu Ojrim/ eufcfdi »ij
7n ■ 6 0 C C^, 6<-P,

j^it

T

Y
y
A

]A-tB
Ll
'^uj Skcd-t

K St

Fig. 111. Proportums ot skates and stingrays.
THE ANATOMY OF SHARINC / 63

The length oi the tail shares the same proportional limits in a variety of ways outlined in the
drawings. In the deep-sea skate, the tail is as long as one oi the golden rectangles encompassing
the body plus a reciprt>c.il tin.iling . In the black skate, the length ot the tail and the height
ot the body are about equ<d. The tails ot the longnose skate and the starry skate correspond to
the sht)rter side ot a golden rectangle, the longer side ot which equals the width ot the body.
Two \^ rectangles encompass the entire shape ot the big skate, trom end ot tail to tip ot snout.
The two stingrays in figure 111 displ.iv a preference tc>r the 3-4-5 triangle's proportional
limits. The main body outlines ot the stingray (6) ,ire encompassed by two sets ot reciprocal
3-4-5 triangles: OCD, OCF, OED, OEF; the full width corresponds to the joint side ot these
two sets ot tri. ingles and the length ot the tail doubles the height ot the body. The pelagic
stingray's body (7) fits into .i rectangle composed ot two 3-4-5 triangles and its tail's length is
the same as the body's width.
Let us now move up the eviilutionary l.idder trom the denizens ot the deep to the vertebrates
of dry land, starting with .i prehistiiric giant reptile.

Dinosaur, frog and horse
The skeleton ot the gi.iiit reptile allosaurus, a tierce c.irniyorous dinosaur that lived about 140
million years ago, was unearthed m Ut.ih and recently was reassembled at the Thomas Burke
MenK>ri.il .Museum of the University ot Washington, .Seattle. Figure 112 shows the complete
skeleton, which the author had the privilege to measure. As in earlier examples, a wave
diagram illustrates the articulation ot this huge bt)dy along the vertebral column into skull,
neck, trunk, sacrum and tail corresponding to the musical root harmonies ot fifth-diapente and
tourth-di.itessaron. Point A, where the sacrum and the first tail vertebra meet, is the golden
section point along the full length ot the skeleton, relating the tail to the rest of the body
similarly .is the trunk relates to skull plus neck, and neck relates to skull, the latter's length and
height again sharing the same relationship. The tabulation shows how these relationships
fluctuate around the 0.75 ratio ot the Pythagorean triangle, and the golden section's 0.618 ratio.
The 1ength ot sacrum and trunk are in <i reciprocal golden relationship (within a fractional
difference, marked d), as the construction ot two reciprocal golden rectangles over dorsal and
sacral vertebrae indicates.
rut- t>o\\ 1 u o\ I iMi IS

100
ICQ
Z9j
cm 100 50 go 7(5 & 50 40 io 2b lO 0

50

^^0
4cc

Fig. 112. Dinergic reconstruction of allosaurus.
THH ANATOMY OF .SHARING 65

Every single vertebra shares the same proportumal rel.itionships that unite the whole body, and everv one does it in .1
different way, appropriate to its station within the whole body
and to its specific function, ,is shown by figure 113. Thus the
sacral vertebrae (3) are the strongest and most massive since thev
act as fulcrum, balancing the enormous weights of' trunk and
head on one side and the huge tail on the other. The caudal
vertebrae (4 and 5) are the most slender since thev support onlv
themselves. The laterally protruding process bones of the dorsal
vertebrae (2) are much heavier than those of the tail, since thev
help to carry the weight of the trunk and the head. The cervical
vertebrae (1) are the most complex ones: not only do thev carry
the weight of the huge head, but they also accommodate its
turning in every direction.
The wave diagrams reveal that the rhythmic unity of these
delicately sculptured shapes is based on a sharing of golden relations between many diverse neighboring parts. For instance, the
round hole of the nerve channel is always very near the golden
section point of the total height; the lateral protrusions of process
bones and the vertical extension of the spine tend to share this
relationship with the proportions of the bulky round bone at the
base, called the body. The tabulation shows again that, while none
of these relationships is mathematically perfect, the general tendency of approximations is unmistakable.

113. Proportions ot vertebrae ot ailosaurus.

THH ANATOMY OF SHARINc; / 67

Details oi hindleg and toot (Hg. 114), as
well as trontleg and loot (lig. 115), show the
same kind ot rhythmic sharing of the narrow
range ol proportional limitations between
small and large bones as we observed withm
the vertebrae and the major articulations ot
the whole body.

JO

All neighboring bones share proportional
Hmitations corresponding to the musical root
harmonies ot the tourth and the titth, as the
graphs and wave diagrams indicate. Even the
small coracoid bone at the shoulder shares
golden proportions between its width and
length. Furthermore, all joints — shoulder,
elbow, wrist, hip, knee, ankle, as well as the
minute joints ot the phalanges in hands and
teet — torm harmonious series which also
share these same proportional limitations.
toes fplxaianfiei\
X i^hu.r^h let not irionO-^
Fig. 114. I'rdporiioiis ot limdleg
aiu! toot ot .illosaurus.

68

I HE K>\\ i-.K Of- Ll.Vin S

The three pairs oi bt^nes which constitute the pelvic girdle ot the allosaurus (tig. 1 16) are ot
particular interest: each ot these pairs is totally ditterent troni the others, each serving a
different tunction, yet they too are shaped and related to each other by the same proportions
that shape and unite the rest ot the body. The illium tits into a single golden rectangle, the
ischium into two golden rectangles, and the pubic bone into two reciprocal golden rectangles.
As far as their relations to each other are concerned, the length ot both pubic bone and ischium
tend to torm with the width ot the illium turther golden, dinergic and reciprocal relations ot
neighbors.

ililwwv

-~ 'J

:0 -

10

30

Fo

SO

70 ,:n.

Hie ro-j. \ti\
0. 750

0150 ■
0GI8
the J^fti\
Fig. 116. Proportions ot pelvic
girdle ot allosaurus.

rv/cUtcms betw. fhc rkme baizes

iScJvuwn.
pidruL barie.

THE ANATO.MY OF SHARINC / 69

f-ri)in this extinct giant reptile, let us now turn to a small amphibian that is still with us: the
trog. When the skeleton oi a trog (Hg. 117) is straightened out and the length ot the bones are
projected upon the central axis of the body, as shown in figure 118, the length of the bones
show harmonically diminishing series as they move away from the pelvis. The top of the pelvis
is the center ot a series of circles which widen at .1 h.irmoniouslv diminishing rate and all joints
appe.ir to be located upon these circles.
The bar diagram at the right and the wave diagrams at the left show the harmonious nature
ot these series, giving a graphic image ot the pulsations ot growth, as they emanate from the
pelvic center, very much like light vibrations r.idiating from the center ot a lamp in the
isocmdle diagrams ot figure 97.
The gr.iph shows, m the familiar manner, hmv all shared proportit)n<il limitations approximate the three root h.irmi>nies oi music. The central wave diagram gives the relationships
between the extremities .md the trunk, while the diagram at the left reveals how these very
same proptirtional Hmit.itiiMis also exist between the length ot the skull, the spine, the pelvis,
and the greatly extended jumping legs and feet.

I-ig, 1 17, I-rog ski-li-ton.

skipping severed rungs on the evolutionary ladder, we will now examine the skeleton ot a
horse. (Hg. 119) Even in this reassembled state, the grace ot its gallop is delightful. Figure 120
reveals some ot the secrets ot this grace — the proportional harmony that unites the diversities
within the bone structure.
One aspect ot this proportional relationship is between the skull and vertebral column on one
side and the extremities on the other, (tig. 120) Lined up with their length-dimensions along
their longitudinal axes, the parts ot this anatomical structure show shared relationships
between: skull and phalanges; neck and metatarsal-metacarpal bones; trunk and shinboneforearm; and sacrum-tail and upper arm-thighbone.
The dimensioned wave diagrams turther illustrate how these diverse articulations approximate musical root harmonies, as the graph demonstrates.

Fig 1 1'^ f li^rsc -.kclctoii
IHh [>0\\ f\K 0\ 1 IMI I s

'

-./irf/:!,!
V itfinnt.

tot-

hole.

0.75"

Fig. 120. Proportions ot horse skeleton.
THl ANA rOMY Oi- SllAHINc; / 7}

Wc have seen several examples deimnistr.itmg the important role that shared proportional
rel.itionships play in the .matomy oi .inim.ils. We shall end this chapter by attempting to show
that such sharing is not limited lo the proportional relationships ot physical anatomy, but
extends also to the social relationships ot animals, thus supporting our view that sharing is
indeed one ot the basic pattern-torming processes ot nature.

Sharing: the nature of nature
Sh.iring <is ,1 pattern-tt)rming process is so basic in animal lite that it is hard to select a tew
examples — suited to the limited scope ot this presentation — without neglecting many more
ecjually signiticant ones. Perhaps one could start with the sharing ot parental care.
rhe Russian naturalist Peter Kropotkin, in his book Mutual Aid mentions that the lapwing
{I'aiu'llus i'ijh(7/h.s) "has well merited the name 'good mother' which the Greeks gave it, tor it
never tails to protect other aquatic birds trom the attacks ot their enemies."'" This brave bird is
known tor sharing the plight ot its tellows by teigning a wound, thereby luring attackers away
trom a threatened nest. It accomplishes this by crying and tlying with peculiarly flapping wings

ig 121 Htklv l.iiinu.ii;f lit .1 <.iog D.irwiii s illustr.itioii
t lu>slilit\ . .j/n'i'i-. .nil! JfV(itu>n, hfbif

(thus the name "lapwing").
The lapwing's ingenious body language matches countless other examples ot sharing by way
ot body language among animals. Darwin observed that dogs express their feelings ot hostility
or friendship through body movements, as illustrated in figure 121.
From the researches ot von Frisch and cithers we know that bees share detailed communications about food sources by using the body language ot dance, (fig. 122) A round dance is
performed to convey that food is ne.irby (A). If the tood is farther away, the dance is in a
figure-eight pattern (B), and vigorous tail-wagging is added (C). Such dancing not only shares
intc^rmation: the dancer also shares energy and excitement, which induces fellow bees to swarm
out and get the tood, upon which their life depends.
Mating dances ot cranes and other birds are well known. But birds have also been reported to
dance and sing in concert tor no other apparent reason than shared delight, as W. H. Hudson
observed in his book Wituralist on the La Plata, about his travels in South America, before the
turn ot the centur\'. He remarked that he occasionally "saw a whole plain covered with an
endless flock ot Chakars {Chaum chavama). . . . Suddenly the entire multitude of birds covering
the marsh tor miles burst forth in a tremendous evening song ... it was a concert well worth

^ //jA'ri". flrf.s fT»v.

,-...>v4 ^An^f 'f *a_Liv>.y4^^vx Ji^^t,

ig. 122 IXiiKc l.mguai^f nt bees, A. Riniiul J.iiuc;
llircc bees arc rci. c-ivinii iiK-ss.igc. B. I r.msitUMi trotii
roiiiul J.iiHc to t.nl-uMgging liancc. Schcin.itK': upper,
1,1 tigiirc eight (oriii: /,'iCiT, via sic kk'-sliapcil torni C.
ail wagging ilaiKf. tour bees arc receiving message.
4

I HI: i>i.n\ I K til 1 iMi I S

to hear."''^
milesshares
hundred
riding
The am.ile
cricket
his mating urge with distant temales whom he attracts with his
mating call. Birds too sing to attract mates, and they also share all kinds ot other information
with each other, tor instance warning other birds about approaching enemies, threatening
intruders upon their territtiry, or calling fellow birds to gather. Even whales are known to
communicate with each other by singing. The humpback whale {Me^aptera noi>aeanq_liae) in
particular has been reported to sing in eerie sounds beautiful even to the human ear. This song is
said to be verv loud and to cover a range trom deep basso to high soprano. What messages
whales share with each other by singing is not known, but scientists assume that it serves to
"identitv individuals, and to ht)ld small groups together during the long transoceanic
migrations.

Fig. 123. Dolphins rescuing dis.iblcd tfllovv Jolphin.
The migrations ot animals are immense shared enterprises. Kropotkin observed the gathering
ot thousands ot migratory birds on the steppes ot Siberia, and said that "they come together at a
given place tor several days in succession betore they start, and they evidently discuss the
particulars ot the journey. . . . All wait tor the tardy . . . and tinally they start in a certain
well-chosen directic^n — a truit of accumulated collective experience — the strongest tlying at
the head ot the band and relieving each other in that ditticult task. They cross the seas in large
bands consisting ot big and small birds."'''' One rarely appreciates the magnitude ot these shared
animal enterprises. The Arctic tern travels twice yearly trom one polar area ot the earth to the
other, spending the summers at the North Pole along the shores ot the Arctic Ocean and the
winters around the South Pole in Antarctica, a travel distance ot 11,000 miles each way. Such
gigantic enterprises could not take place without superb cooperation and mutual assistance.
Sharing in each others' distress and rescuing endangered tellow animals is reported among
many species. In 1969 it was observed in the Mediterranean how an electroharpooned dolphin
was supported and eventually rescued by tellow dolphins, (tig. 123) Similar reports have been
made about wild dogs, Atrican elephants, and baboons, among others.""' To quote Kropotkin
once more about triendship and loyalty among animals: "When a parrot has been killed by a
hunter, the others tly over the corpse ot their comrade with shrieks ot complaints and themselves tall victim ot their triendship, as Audubon said.""*^ Kropotkin was one ot the tirst to
THE ANATOMY OF SHARING / 75

f-|g. 124 Sli.ircJ sli.ipcs (it waves, hills, c loiuls .hk!
rotks ['.icitit (XcMii .11 l\>iiH Rcvcs, (".liitDrni.i, Icti.
•iinl rot k toriiLitloils ,it ( .Icli ( '.in\ oii. ( loiiir.idi), rn>/;r

collect a substantial volume ot scientific evidence ot these basic patterns of animal behavior. He
bec.ime convinced that sharing in the form ot "mutual aid and cooperation" was not only the
"prehuman origm" ot all mor.d behavior but was also a basic condition of survival and a
critical factor ot evolution.
In the nineteenth century this view was neglected in tavor ot popularized Darwinian
concepts such as natural selection, survival ot the tittest, struggle tor existence, and competition. The controversy is still on between those who hold that human beings are inherently
aggressive and competitive, and adherents ot the opposite view that we have equally strong
natural potentialities tor nonviolent cooperation.
The "innate aggressiveness" theory has been revived and made popular by the writings ot
Konrad Ltirenz, Robert Ardrey, Desmond Morris and William Golding, among others. On the
other side are those who hold that war and violence are learned behaviors, culturally tostered.
The anthropologist Ashley Montagu writes, "Human beings can learn virtually anything. ""''^
"War is not in our genes," says Sally C^arrighar in Miiii and Ai^iiression.^^ "While it is obvicius
that many men are killers, it i? equally true that many more are not. . . . Man's propensity for
violence is not a racial or a species attribute woven in his genetic tabric. It is culturally
ccinditioned bv history and the ways ot lite." So wrote Rene Dubos in 1971.''
To quote again Ashley Montagu, "At the present time the principle ot cooperation is in a fair
way to becoming established as an impc")rtant tactor in the survival of living groups. W. C.
Alice sums up the modern point ot view as tollows: "The balance between the cooperative . . .
and the egoistic is relatively close. Under many conditions the cc:)operative forces lose. In the
long run, however, the group-centered, more altruistic drives are slightly stronger. . . . Our
tendencies toward gocidness, such as they are, are as innate as our tendencies towards intelli-

TUl- l'C)\\ I K OF LI.VllTs

gence; we could do well with more of both. Another anthropologist, C'olin M. Turnhull adds
on the basis at his studies ot non-literate, tribal cultures, ". . . it man has a seemingK' limitless
capacity tor violence, tor aggression, he has an equally great potential tor nonvitilence, and
nonaggressivity.
In terms ot modern and practical economic policy — individual, national and international —
the economist Barbara Ward comes to this conclusion; "When men or governments work
intelligently and tarsightedly tor the good ot others, thev achieve their prosperity too . . .
Generosity is the best policy . . . Our morals and ouv interests — seen in true perspective — do
Sharing is creative. It we share what we have with our neighbors who have less, we gain
not pull apart. "^'^
more than it we had kept it all tor ourselves. This is the paradox ot sharing expressed bv the
words St. Paul attributed to Jesus: "It is more blessed to give than to receive."
We have seen that sharing as a basic pattern-torming process shapes harmonious rel.itionships in animal and human lite the same way it shapes proportional harmonies in .inimal
anatomy, in music and in the other arts. There is indeed a "mana ot sharing" throughout
nature. It one looks at a view ot the ocean shore, say in Calitornia, placing beside it a picture ot
rock tormations, tor instance in Colorado, (tig. 124) it is hard to tell where the rocks end and
clouds or ocean begin, because the tolds ot the rocks and the clouds share the wavelines
ot water.
Similarly, a peacock's untolding plumage shares the dinergic pattern at the center ot a daisv.
The dotted lines in tigure 125 connecting the eyes ot the peacock's plumage are identical with
the logarithmic spirals used to reconstruct the daisy's pattern. When circles are inserted
between the spiral lines (tig. 126), the peacock's p.ittern is transtormed into the central pattern
ot the daisy. This is not magic: it is the mana ot sharing, which is the verv nature ot n.iture.

lilt ANAICIMY Ol siiAliINC / 77

CHAPTER

6:

Order
in

and

Freedom

Nature

Organic and inorganic patterns
Sharing and dinergy are both basic pattern-torming processes that unite diversities. That there
exists a basic unity within the manitold diversities ot this world is one oi the oldest observations
ot mankind. Ancient cultures attributed this unity to divinities, or to a single creator. The
presocratic philosophers .sought the secret ot this unity in a universal substance — Thales saw it
in water, Anaximenes in air, and Heraclitus in tire. This last philosopher is credited with
having developed the concept ot "unity in diversity."
In more recent times, this concept has become basic tor both art and science. The American
mathematician Ci. D. Birkhott in 1928 developed a theory ot aesthetic measure based on this
principle, which he reterred to as "order in complexity. "^^ The measure ot aesthetic value,
according to this theory, is in direct proportion to order and in inverse proportion to complexity. H. E. Huntley, in his book about the golden section mentioned earlier, quotes J. Bronowski: "Science is nothing other than the search to discover unity in the wild variety ot
nature, or more exactly, in the variety ot our experience. Poetry, painting, the arts are the
same search, in Coleridge's phrase, tor unity in variety."''*
One ot the most beautitul examples ot this principle in nature is the snowtlake: every one is
ditterent, yet all are united by their basic hexagonal pattern, (tig. 127) Each snowtlake is
restricted to one pattern, repeated and reflected twelve times (see triangles and arrows). Such
unitormity is characteristic ot all inorganic, crystalline patterns, which have more order .md
unitormity than living patterns.
Hexagonal patterns, such as the snowtlake, are more common in inorganic than in organic
nature, which tavors pentagonal patterns. There are, however, interesting connections

Fig. 127. SnovvtLikcs. Arrows itidic.ite triangul.ir pattern
repeated 12 times in each flake.

ORDEK ANO FREtDOM IN NAIURE ' 79

5

2o isosceles f^co^^Lts coyyv he Ctrns/Ti^-

xcttxAxgles oiaX of ccvT2bocuut ,wxth a.
SUt alcmg-HiS {£:^J:c</iyyi£,^see ut left)
f^-t °jO° ej^Crriie j-askint\. .JlvC/vitij rvJtr^^

Pe^ptcM've

\ri t^(Byj^ sUcrvj H\<i hf^o -

f-ii; 128 Mivlfl ot icosdhcdron
between hexagonal and pentagonal patterns. One of these appears in the icosahedron (fig.
128) consisting of twenty triangular faces, which has a hexagonal outline when viewed from
one side, and a pentagonal one when viewed from the other side. Its diagonal planes (connecting diagonally opposite edges) are golden rectangles.'" Perhaps the example of the icosahedron
is a reflection of the relationship existing between inorganic and organic matter, the latter
being built up trom the former, as in the human body which is two-thirds water.
The unity within the diversities ot organic and inorganic patterns is also seen in the spiral
patterns ot certain galaxies (fig. 129) which echo on a cosmic scale the minute dinergic spiral
patterns ot shells and flowers.
so

THF PcnX FR Of L IMITS

Fig. \2'-). Spir.il galaxy's maiid.ila pattern is similar to spirals ot organic growth
c~)kn[-K AND HRhinXIM IN NA IUKK / 81

Pincconcs likewise untold in similar patterns. The seed-containing scales grow along the
intersections oi two sets at helixes — spirals that untold in three-dimensional space like the
DNA molecule. In plan-view, the spiral projections ot these helixes resemble miniature galaxies, (tig. 130) In the cone ot the Jettrey pine, tigure 131, thirteen helixes move in one direction
and eight move in the other, closely approximating golden section proportions.
In the early l^OOs in England, T. A. Cook published a profusely illustrated book, The Curves
oj Life, about the prevalence ot the golden section's proportions in nature and art.^* But he
stressed not the paradoxical combination ot unity and diversity, but rather diversity alone, as if
unity would necessarily mean unitormity, which is tortunately not so. Two American books
which appeared about the same time, Xature's HarinoHU I'mly and Proportional Form by Samuel
(Oilman and C Arthur C^oan,'''^ also describe the role ot the golden section in the harmonious
patterns ot nature and art. But these books emphasize only the unity ot these patterns. That
diversity and unity are dinergically joined in all harmonies ot nature and art is a point not
stressed in these books, though it is the truth documented by all their examples.
Reality unites and diversities at one and the same time. Montaigne observed in the titteenth
century: "As nci event and no shape is entirely like another, so none is entirely different trom

hig. 131. 1 Icli.xLs lit |cttrc-\' piufconc-.

another . ... It our faces were not similar, we could nox distniguish man from beast; li thev
were not dissimilar we could not distinguish man from man."''"
How nature accomplishes the seemingly impossible, creating forms that are both similar and
dissunilar, united and diverse at the same time, has been brilliantly demonstrated by Sir D'Arcy
Wentworth Thompson's "theory of transformations" to which earlier reference was made.*"'
With the help of this theory, the shape of one species can be seen to derive from the shape of
another, related species. This distinguished author derived, for instance, from the shape of the
very common porcupine fish (Diodoii), the shape of a very different-looking sunfish [Ortluiiioriscus nioLi) by transforming the right-angled network of coordinates, within which the former
was plotted, into a corresponding but deformed network of curved lines that fitted the latter,
(fig. 132) This could be done because, as the author says, "There is something, an essential and
undisputable something, that is common to them."'"' What this essential something might be
can perhaps be found by comparing the basic proportions of these two shapes: they are both
variations of the golden section's proportions. The porcupine fish fits into two reciprocal
golden rectangles, while the sunfish fits into two 3-4-5 triangles.
The zoologist Paul Weiss, in his inaugural address as president of the American Association

ORDER AND IREEDOM IN NATURE / 85

tor the Advancement ot Science in 1953, interpreted the unity within diversities in the patterns
ot organic nature as a combination ot order and freedom. This combination is as paradoxical as
It is dinergic: order <ind unity involves constr.unt, while diversity implies the freedom to ditter.
"Lite is t)rder, but order with tolerances."''"'
Siunvtlakes have shown us that this principle is also present in inorganic nature. Other
inorg.inic patterns that demonstrate tlie principle ot order and freedom can be seen in the
movement ot pendulums. The sh.ipes in figure 13.^ were made by a harrnonograph, which
consisted of two pendulums that registered their simultaneous movements with the help of a
tablet attached to one and a pen .itt.iched to the other. When their lengths — which determine
the swing times ot the two pendulums — were left entirely free ot any constraints or relationship to each other, the pattern bec.mie chaotic, like tangled wool. (C) When, however, the
lengths were adjusted so that their swing times related tii each other in ratios expressible in
small whole numbers, then the p.itterns became harmonious, as A, B, and D illustrate. The
pendulums still swung freely, but now the lines also reflect, by the number of looped configurations on each side, the proportional limits between the length, and thus between the swing
times, ot the generating pendulums.''-' The difference between chaotic and harmonious lines
produced here bv gr.ivitv is analogous to the difference between noise and musical sound
discussed earlier.
There are curunis similarities between h<irnu>nograph patterns and certain shell shapes.
Figure 1.34 shows the cross section of a nautilus shell and a harmonograph pattern produced by
two pendulums that were equally long but swinging in opposite directions. The two patterns
are diverse in origin, but there is a similarity between their graceful lines. This similarity is
rooted in the fact that dinergic proportion.il rel.itionships create both patterns: increments of
growth in the shell and swing times in the pendulums.
(Iravity is weight. The lifting ot weight by its dinergic sharing is grace. It is the seemingly
effortless release from burden that charms us in grace, hence its divine connotation, (juivity and
(•niLi' is the title ot Simone Weil's posthuiiKHisly edited iKUebooks in which she movingly
records her observations about the strange wavs in which necessity and beauty, order and
freedom, gravity and grace, unity and diversity <ire linked together in nature as well as in
To our
prevuHis examples ot unitv m diversitv. let us ik>w add a tew from the worlds ot
destiny.''''
human
insects ,ind (^t humans.

l.VV V',11 ictif- ot JmcrgK li.irnioiiour-ipli ['.iltcrtis
S4

I til- I'dW l-K O] I IMl IS

D

Fig. 134. A. Pattern drawn hy harnionograph.
B. Cross section ot chambered nautilus shell.

ORDHR AND f-i<hErX^M IN NATURE / S.S

^ttt^(}toM} weevil

^ Cioverston boftr (n Uzmu) beetle. )

fid'jjjjj. h'pu/ywi'aJ a. I J Ml )

L a^^iAiUM. Mo^dLrdc IstytrttUie.

From

f it;. 13^. L'nM\ m the ilivcrMtics o( hct-tlf sli.i

beetles to butterflies

The largest insccr urdcr is Coleoptera, the order ot
beetles. Figure 135 shows a random selection of species,
belonging to different families and subfamilies, all having
different shapes and yet all united by the same kind of
proportional relatie)nships between their interconnected
parts. This drawing shows that these relationships range
between the 0.618 ratio of the golden section and the 0.75
ratio of the Pythagorean triangle. The graph at the lower
left shows the diverse ways in which these proportional
relationships are approximated. As a result of these
shared relationships, the overall proportions as well as
the detailed articulations of every one of these beetle
shapes approximate the visual equivalents of musical
root harmonies of fifth-diapente and fourth-diatessaron.

S6

WW VOW VW 01 1 IMI i s

10

^

0

S

10

15

20

ZS

= 0.6/9
• ■^/ = a&/s
= 0.6/8
7-1 -.11 -3 = 0.6'^
4.C; 7.? = 0 630
2- :3.3
3. 3.- ^3 =0.623
£.2.-/0 =■0.620
3.8.6.2 = 0.6/?

'p-O.ki'i..-(he. frjti^

- 3S ^O.OS

Fig. 136. Proportional analysis of niydas tly

V

The body of the myJas tly (order of Diptera) (Hg. 136) tits into
two golden rectangles. Growth seems to have proceeded ni this tlv
ixom the thora.x upwards and downwards. Constructions ot the
giilden section show the growth process with a series of diminishing
golden rectangles (shaded). Succeeding stages of growth are in
golden reciprocal relationships. The harnn>nic rhythms of the
growth process are illustrated by w.ive and bar diagrams and by
numeric and graphic tabulation. The shape of the wings shares the
basic proportional relations of the bcKly. A golden rectangle contains the narrower part c^f the wing, while a square ctirresponding
to the width of the wing fits the broader part, the rel.ition between
square and rectangle being the reciprocal "rel.ition of neighbors."
Though dragonflies, damselfies, darners, .md skimmers (order of
Odonata) don't look like flies, they nevertheless share the same
basic proportitinal limitations. The common skimmer's over.ill
shape, for instance, neatly tits inti> .i single gcilden rectangle, (fig.
OKOfcR AND I KFJ-DOM IN NATURE / 87

137) Alcing the Kmgitudinal axis ot the body, the head,
pronotuni, thoracic <ind abdominal segments, and wing
K>cations shtnv simil.ir rehitions ot neighbors as the mydas fly.
This relatumship connec ts the last segment ot the abdc^men to
the elongated apex, which serves to expel water from the
body, thus .liding flight by "jet propulsion."^ The common
skmnner's huid wuig has the same proportions as the mydas
flv's wuig. Its narrower p.irt fittmg into a gc:>lden rectangle,
while the broader portion is ctmtained in a square equal to the
wing width. The elongated trcmt wing tits into twci golden
rectangles and their reciprocal.
The proporticins ot the wings ot other insects, such as mayflies, bees, wasps, .ints, crickets, anci grasshoppers, show similar proportion, il limitations. What is more, the same wing
shapes appear outside the animal kingdom, tor instance in the
winged seeds of the maple tree. Figure 138 shows four random
pairs o[ winged maple seeds. In specimen 1, the two wings
completely overlap, fitting into a golden rectangle and its
reciprocal. In specimen 2, the two wings tit into a single
golden rectangle, and the widest point of the two combined
wings is at the gt^lden section point of its length. In specimen
3, the right wing has grown along the diagonal ot a golden
rect.ingle, while the left wing tits into a golden rectangle and a
sc]u.ire, the width of which corresponds to the full width c^t the
wing (in the pc:)sition it occupies within the whole configuration). Specimen 4 shows a further variation, each of the wings
corresponding to the diagcMials ot 3:4 rectangles.
«H

l lli; I'OW 1 R Ol 1 IMl I s

[3)

/9« Z 2i(-, = 47 -IXv ;

Jfl^ ' 5.5/6

51'-, ' ",i

Considering each winged seed separately, we find that lA
tits into two golden rectangles; 2A tits into a golden rect<ingle
and a square, ctirresponding to its width; 3A tits mtci two
golden rectangles and their reciprocd; and 4A tits into two
golden rectangles and a square equaling the wing width. In
each ot these specimens, the seed itselt extends to the golden
section point along the length ot one ot the golden rect.uigles
that trame the overall shape.
The variety and beauty ot buttertlies (order ot Lepidoptera)
is proverbial. The proportioning ot buttertlv wings varies
trom species to species, yet there is <» unitv in these diversities,
a unity created by the same proportional limitations we
observed earlier, with the 1:2 = 0.5 proportion added, corresponding tothe octave-diapason.
For each buttertly illustrated here, six basic proportional
relationships were checked: total or h.ilt the wing width (2A
or A) to wing height (B); body length (C) to total wing height
(B); body length (C) to total or half the wing width (2A or
A); length ot hind wing (E) to length ot tront wing (D); width
ot tront wing (G) to its own length (D); and width ot hind
wmg (F) to its own length (E).

Fig. l.iS. I'ropnrtidii.il p.ittt rm nf w mmtl maple seeds.

lM<l)tR ANDI UI i nOM IN NAtUlU-. ,W

he

I ^'' I'l

.in.il\Ms ot ( .7,'./m^ /Mri;.i<>;((^
Figure 13^^ shows a specimen of C.L\iuis pdniiissiuf, belonging to the taniily ot Parnassadiae: a
ligln gr.iv huttertlv with ilistinctive round, red dots on its hind wings and crescent-shaped dark,
markings .iround the edges ot rhe wings. It shows octave-diapason rehitionships between body
lengtli and total wing height (2), and between width and length ot the tront wings (5). Fifthdiapente harmonv is approxim.ited bv the relationship ot bi)dy length to halt wing width (3),
while tourth-diatessaron appears m three rel.itu>nships: halt the wing width to wing height (1),
length ot hind wing to length ot tront wing (4), and width to length ot hind wing (6).
(nitterences between mathem.itic.dlv exact ,ind actual proportions are indicated with d in the
drawing.)

;0 ^ 0

10 20 JO 40 50
III

60

7o

60

so /oo
^ ■

6i

A

64

F
E
LftzmtLCt/U-

Fig. 14(1. I'toportional an.iK sis

i H o-i an
cloiklcj sw.illowtail.

38 £0.6/5...

Figure 140 represents ,1 clouded swallowtail in ventral view. It is a large, beautitul buttertlv,
belonging tii the taniily ot Papilionidae, with wings that appear woven ot dark lace, and with
the characteristic elongation oi the hind wing which accounts tor its name and makes the hind
wing as long as the front wing. We tind the equivalent ot diapason in the relationship oi bodv
length to halt the wing width (2), while diatessaron relates halt the wing width to the wing
height (1). There are three diapente relationships in this specimen: one is between bodv length
and 6).
wing height (3), the other two are between the width and length ot each e>t the wings, (5
OKDER AND l-RHtDOM IN NAIUIU; 'Jl

The /chr.i biutcrny, (tig. 141 ) (I Icluoiiius clhiritonius), which belongs to the tainily ot Heliconk!.i(.-, is tlark brown with bright yellow stripes. It h.is elong.iteil front wings which fit into the
v rectangle, composed i>t two reciprocal golden rect. ingles. An enl.irged version of this same
proportion eiicompasss the overall sh.ipe ot this butterfly. The 21-millimeter body length and
the 34-millimeter total wing width of this specimen correspond to Fibonacci numbers, bringing
.ilnnit <i iiiultiplicit V ot diverse di.ipente harmonies (see 1 , 2, 3, 4, 5). The propcirtions of the hind
wmg appro.ximate 3:4 = ().7.S, the visual equivalent ot diatessaron.
It is ama/ing to beluild sue h unit\' m the manitolil diversities of nature, each species developing freely its uniqueness. \et all united bv sh.iring the same simple, dinergic and harmonious
proportional limitations. Butterflies tlutter. dr.igontlies dart, and beetles bore. The allosaurus
must have nK)ved with ,i heavy, lumbering gait, unlike the graceful gallop of the ht)rse, the slow
crawl of the crab, and the sudden leap of the frog. I low unique each is, and how different than
winged m.iple si-eds, d.iisies and Miiitlowers, and \et they all are united bv sharing the proportional limitations of music.il root luirmonies. This unitv of diversities extends also to the
proportions ot human an<itomy, .is the following ex.imples intend tii show.
•>: 1 111 I'ciw 1 K oi I iMiis

Human

harmonies

The perception ot hum.in proportions has varied greatly throughout the ages. One ot the
earliest written documents dealing with human proportions is bv Marcus Vitruvius Pollio, the
first-century Roman architect and writer. He begins his I'cii Books on A re hit cc lure with the
recommendation that temples, in order to be magnificent, shc)uld be constructed on the analogy
of the well-shaped human body, in which, he says, there is a perfect harmony between all
parts. ''^ We shall see more of Vitruvius's ideas on temples in the next chapter. Here we are
concerned with his examples of harmonious human proportions. Among these he mentions that
the height of a well-shaped man is the same as the span of his outstretched arms, these two
equal measures yielding a square which encompasses the whole body, while the hands and feet
touch a circle centered upon the navel.
This relatedness of the human body to the circle and the square rests upon the archetypal idea
of "squaring the circle," which fascinated the ancients, because these shapes were considered
perfect and even sacred, the circle having been looked upon as a symbol of the heavenlv orbits,
the square as a representation of the "foursquare" firmness of the earth. The two combined in
the human body suggests in the language of symbolic patterns that we unite within ourselves
the diversities of heaven and earth, an idea shared by many mythologies and religions.
When the Renaissance rediscovered the classical remains of Clreece and Rome, Leonardo da
Vinci illustrated Vitruvius's version of this idea with his own famous drawing (fig. 142). The
bar diagrams ,ind the triangular diagram, which here are added to the dr.iwing, show how the
adjacent parts of this body share proportions which fall within the range of the golden section

IIKPI R AND f-KhhlH^M IN NA I UlU- / 9.^

14_v hra I lua I'.uioli, aiitlior ot Dwina I'rop.^rth'ih'. with .1 stuJcllt.
1 11!-; Pcn\ tK Oh 1 IMllN

&ntiput

Stow

aiflfaDnfrfct
2)?atiimar
^Iramdnm fub
moiw
^umni( bunifrt
3u3uli

^Iniw to^rorii
^ummumcoja ft*
miirfni
^imur

3nfra m4mrtla»
iumhi tibiinant
oiimir
0inu» coratum
©uifium frtnur
'^tm a(utt»
@upt<t gtnn
(3?irlrnti( ttfHn*

tflriorts
3mumfur«f^
^ifiim furor
tmcncn*

racn»
iiin
wfu»
3niS
®u

n

3mumtalior«
nort»

1+

Fig. 144. Durcr\ studic-- ot huni.iii propurtions
using harmonic ^(..ilcs.

JUam
and the Pythagorean triangle. Leonardo, .dong with many ot the Renaiss.ince masters, vv.is a
great student of harmonious proportions and illustrated the mathematician Luca Pacioli s hook
Diviiia Proportioiic. about the golden section, published in 1509. (Fig. 143) Leonardo summarized

his studies of good proportions in memorable words: ". . . every part is disposed lo unite with
the whole, that it may thereby escape from its incompleteness."
This disposition of the human biKly's diverse parts to unite with the whole .dso tascinated
another great Renaissance painter, Albrecht Dlirer, who published several vt>lumes abmit
human proportions. His theories include the use of harmonic scales, as shown in tigurc 144,
illustrating these relationships along drawings ot .i child's .nid .i man's bodies.
CMUM-R ANO f REtPO.M IN NAIL'KE '

I he kIcm th.it the root harmonics of music — in accordance with revived Pvthagt)rean
concepts — correspond to good proportu'ms ui the human body, and should theretore also be
followed in architecture, became a leading ide.i annMig the masters ot the Renaissance. Following that time, some ot these ideas about human harmonies took a mystical turn, strengthened by
studies oi Kabb<ilah, the )ewish mvstical tr.iditiitn, which became available in Latin translations
ot ancient Hebrew texts. The Englishman I^obert Fludd depicted man as a microcosm, united
with the m<icroct)sm ot the universe, ct)mbining dark, earthlv potentialities with light, heavenly
ones, .ittuned to universal musical harmonies like a immochord stretching trom earth to
heaven.''** (tig. 14.S)
Later, the Ages oi F.nlightenment and Rationalism trowned upon such mystical ideas. The
painter Hog.irth considered it "a strange notion" that there should be any correspondence
between be.uity .is seen by the eye and h.irnumy as heard bv the ear. The Scottish philosopher
Hume made the point th.it be.iutv is m the eve ot the beholder and that it is entirely subjective.
The Fnglishman F:dmund Burke said that "no two things can have less resemblance or analogy
than .1 man, a lunise or a temple." By the end ot the nineteenth century, |ohn Ruskin asserted
that "propiirtions are intinite as piissible .iirs m music, and it must be lett to the inspiration ot
the artist to invent be.iutitul proportions."''''

I HI I'ow hR cn I iMi rs

0

5

0
(Li citt^'i/inrtii
2^ i ncAts

0.6I&-

A;3 (hi 2-h t>:f \J-j a.b i) c X
\

i.f f-.j ^q:n j.k

ho/nd- Ci-i^n- hiJAik

Fig. 14f). I'ropot tions of the male bodv.

Futures 14f) and 147 arc based upon the author's me.isurements of human skeletons, mtegr.ited
with uiforniation gleaned from measurements oi live models as well as trom <inatomical
textbooks. All dimensions are those ofaverage-sized adults .is reported by U.S. governmental
surveys.
U AND PRFFIH-iM IN NAI UlU

Fii; 147. Proportions ot the female body.

98 / THE POWER OF LIMITS

These drawings of the female figure show that raised arms and outstretched legs touch yet another circle, beyond the one centered at the
navel. The center ot this new circle is close to the center oi gravity of the
whole body, near the pomt where the vertebral column emerges from the
sacrum, as in the frog. This circle is somewhat larger than Vitruvius's and
Leonardo's, because they both refer to a figure standing on the soles of
the feet, thus excluding the length of the feet themselves, while the
present drawings include the length of the feet, fully extended like a
ballet
The dancer's.
diagrams in figures 146 and 147 show again how all parts of the
himian body share the same proportional limitations. Thus, the length
relationships of hand to arm to trunk (to the starting point of the spine in
the pelvis) are shared, as in the thoroughbred horse, by the relationships
of head to neck, trunk, legs, and feet. The entire human bone structure
fits neatly into three golden rectangles and a reciprocal, the latter containing the head. (See Appendices I & II.)
The unity we share with plants and animals is again visible from the
fact that our growth, like theirs, seems to unfold from a single center,
which in our case is at the top of the sacrum, just as in the frog. It may be
recalled how the spirals of the daisy and sunflower also unfold from the
center.
Because of its central location within the animal body, the ancients
considered the sacrum of their sacrificial animals particularly sacred,
hence its name: c'5 sacrum, "sacred bone" in Latin. It is the center of the
circle around the extended extremities, as shown in the skeleton in figures
146 & 147, and it is also the center of gravity of the entire body.

ORDER AND FREEDOM IN NATURE / W

l-iu- 14H. LJnit\' lit longitiiLlinal propunnnis iii vvomcii
.iikl nicn ot diverse- mzcs.

a i"
r
> ■ J
^
•U■ 1
■
A further instance oi unity ni diversity within human anatomy is the surprising correspondence between proportions ot diversely sized bone structures ot both sexes, as the comparative
table in Appendix I indicates. Figure 148 shows that all corresponding longitudinal dimensions
ot tall, average and small women and men tend to tall upon coaxial circles.
The wave diagrams ot tigure 148 are simplitied versions ot the ones seen earlier, with
proportions corresponding to the ones in Appendices I and 11. The trend towards unity ot these
wave patterns is so marked that they are almost identical, appearing to be stroboscopic images
ot one and the same moving pattern. These rhythmic waves are reminiscent of the gracefully
swinging loops ot pendulum patterns and the tanlike overlapping stages ot growth in the daisy's
central pattern.
The graph in Appendix I indicates the spread ot approximations to musical root harmonies.
This graph could be looked upon as a kind ot musical score ot the human body's silent
harmonies, or rather as variations upon this singular theme song.
As great as the diversities ot temale and male bodies are, still women and men are united by
the almost complete identitv ot their anatomic proportions, at least as tar as the length of their
bones are concerned. The only ditterence is a general retinement in the measurements of the
female skeleton and a widening ot the pelvic girdle.

10(1

rut row ER C1H LIMI i s

Fig. 149. Unity and diversity ot
propcirtunis m the lumi.m hand.

Finally, wc find an astiHiishmu; unity between the proportional harmonies of the vvliole hotlv
and Its diverse parts. Figure 149 shows a man's hand, traced irom an .x-r,iv photo. 23Even though
this hand is somewhat deformed by arthritis, the length of the bones lined up on their .t.xes show
that all joints tend to tall upon coaxial circles. The rendering of the wave diagr.ims emphasizes
the united rhythm ot these proportions. The h.md is .i microcosm mirroring the m.icrocosm of
the body. It grows out ot the wrist <is the spine grows out ot the sacrum, and as wings grow out
ot the buttertly, or as leaves and tlciwers gniw out ot their stems.

— i 6 (>■)}

0 15Of, 18

0.5-

ORDl R AN! ) 1 Ri l l H )M IN N.'\ I UUI- Id!

"Beauty is the harnnniy and cotKord of all parts, achieved in such a manner that nothing
could be added or taken away or altered except for the worse. These are the words of
another master of the Renaissance, Leon f^attista Albcrti, an architect and author of a famous
treatise on architecture.
The human body has the potentials tor such harmony and beauty. This is C)bvious in the
graceful movements of an accomplished ballet dancer, for instance, (fig. 150) The American
Heritage Dictionary gives as the first meaning, of the word "grace": "seemingly effortless beauty
or charm of movement, form or proportion." I^allet is certainly anything but effortless, like
.my cuher form of art, but there is a freedom of movement in ballet that appears miraculously
easy. This freedom turns upon order, the order of discipline that prepares and sustains all great
accomplishments.
One of the secrets of this order in ballet is the support of the body's entire weight upon a
single point: the center of gravity in the sacrum, which is upheld by only one outstretched leg
on the tip of the toes. Cirowth, gravity and grace concentrated in one point of our sacrum is the
power of limits enshrined in our bones.
Simone Weil, wht)se thoughts about grace and gravity were mentioned earlier, notes in
another volume of her notebooks: "Something infinitely small, under certain conditions, operates in a decisive manner. There is no mass so heavy but that a given point is equal to it; for a
mass will not fall if a single pi>int in it is upheld, provided that this point be the center of
gravity." She added — and this was during the days of Nazi occupation in France — "brute force
is not sovereign in this world. . . . What is sovereign ... is limit. . . . Every visible and palpable force is subject to an invisible limit, which it shall never cross. In the sea a wave mounts
higher and higher, but at a certain point . . . it is arrested and forced to descend. . . . That is the
truth which bites at our hearts every time we are penetrated by the beauty of the world. That is
the truth which bursts forth in matchless accents of joy in the beautiful and pure parts of the
Old Testament, in Cirecce among the Pythagoreans and all the sages, in China, with LaoTzu,in
remains.""'
Egyptian
Hindu
the The
truthscriptures,
of these in
words
has been
one of the main inspirations of this book. These words
reveal the other, traditional meaning of the word grace: mercy and the divine gift of love,
springing frt)m the relatedness of all that exists.
The ballet dancer's visible grace is a symbol of the other, invisible grace: the potential of
harmony and beauty that exists within every human being, for indeed all of us, not only
accomplished dancers, have an inner center, a sacrum, both in a physical and a spiritual sense.
That there also exist disorder and disease is testimony to nature's tolerance of diversity and
freedom, which at times can be very generous. Alberti's statement holds true for the art of
living as well as for other arts: too much added can harm as surely as too much taken away. Too
much leisure and luxury can destroy our native beauty as much as too little of life's necessities.
Harmony and grace are born from the marriage of plenty and poverty as Plato told us in his
Symposium. A comparative study of classical Western and Far Eastern arts strengthens this
view.

Fig. 151). Deborah Hadley, solo
dancer ot Pacific Northwest Balli

CHAPTER
Man

7:

Helks

and

Haiku

the measure

1 he <irt tornis nt the Hast and U'est arc vastlv ditterent: compare a dreek Apollo and a Tibetan
Buddha, the Parthenon and a pagoda, or the epic poetry ot Virgil and the haiku poetry ot Japan.
Bui the ponits where the arts ot East >uul West do meet reveal an underlying human unity
he\ond the surface diversities.

l ii; 1^1

\«A

I )iir\ phoniv. tile spu.ir bciriT.

nih i\n\ 1 R oi 1 iMi 1 s

".Man IS the measure ot all things." .iccording to Protagoras, the Greek philosopher ot the
titth centurv B.C.. This epigram becomes palpable when one looks at great Greek sculpture.
The spearbearer or Dor\phoros (tig. 151) is also trom the titth centurv B.C., created by
I'ciKcleitos. who IS credited with having written a celebrated treatise, now lost, about the

pnijuM tioiis oi the luinian IkhIv. (iokicii scctuui ccinstriK tidiis oi this sc ulpture show t\V(^ sets of
reciproc.il golden reetangles, each set s/ 5 long: the larger set eneonipasses the whole hodv,
with knees <nul breasts at golden section points; the smaller set reac hes trom the top ot the head
to the genitals. The navel is at the golden section point ot the kill height, the genitals at the 3/4
Fig. LS2. Aphnxlite of Cyrcnc.

point ot the height to the chin. In the Aphrodite iit' C A'rene (tig. 152), one can recognize
similarly harmonious length relationships, though the he.ul is untortunatelv missing.

HMJ AS AND MAIKU 10=.

The heads of Hypnos, goddess oi sleep (tig. 153-A) and of Hygeia, goddess of health and
patroness ot the Pythagoreans, (tig. 1.S3-B) both trom the fourth century B.C., share in
miniature the same proportional limitations which articulate the bodies ot the Cyrenian Aphrodite and the Doryphoros. Scales and wave diagrams beside these heads reveal how the vertical distances between the main teatures trom top ot head to chin share the same simple numeric
relationships tound earlier in all living shapes. The Greeks thought that humans, with all their
limitations, had the capacity to retlect limitless harmony and beauty, conceived as divine. Thus
man was said to be the measure ot all things.
In tact, we are told by Vitruvms, the Roman architect mentioned in the previous chapter,
that the ancient Greeks even laid out their temples according to human proportions. On this
basis Vitruvius rect>mmends that the length ot a temple should be twice its width, and the
proportions ot the open entrance hall (prcmaos) and the enclosed inner room (cella) should be in
.3-4-5 relation (3 being the depth ot the pronaos, 4 the width, and 5 the depth of the cella).
Figure 154 shows these proportional relationships as they correspond to musical harmonies.
Vitruvius also turnished many other recommended temple proportions, all based upon Greek
nnxlels, tor instance regarding the distances between columns and their proper height, both
expressed in terms ot column diameter. Such an element, chosen in order to express the
proportions ot an entire structure (as the proportions ot the human body are expressed in feet)
IS called a module, a concept that was to play an important role throughout the history of
architecture.
I HE I'cnX hH Ol 1 IMI 1 s

-

•

4
/
y

•

1
• .

•

•

•

•

1I
•
*

i
.

•
U'7

•

at Lodrujtm3ou

cUdttssm/m

jmnJth

liiffmeMces beh\)een. l/itiM^nus

ipm^ple of- HmxAAis
Fig. 154. (ircck temple propoi tmns .in iirJing to
Vitriivius, (. omp.ircd with .iLtii.iI c x.imiilcN

{&mfLe.
oj- Them^^
at RM/i(yin/tuiS

HI I I .AS ANP HAIKT / III"

-^A

ScjUi' fin- frrmt eitvaxum ■

p-. ;o.62/;.
f-- '.9.69

Fig. 155. Parthenon, Athens.
[ fll- POWEK Ol 1 I.MI I S

Fig. 15(1. Athcn.i temple, Pricnc.

The rccomnieiKk-J temple proportums can he seen m rwo examples, helongmg ro two
different styles: the ParthentMi cit Athens (tifth century B.C\), (tig, 155) representmg the Done
order, and the Athena temple oi Priene (fourth century B.(].), embodymg the Ionic style (tig.
156), The ditterence between the two styles is exeniplitied by the ceilumns: the Doric being
more sturdy, the Ionic more slender. The height ot the Parthenon's columns is tiye .ind .i halt
times the width ot the column base. The capitals consist ot simple square slabs (ab.ici) resting
upon shapes, the contours ot \yhich h.iye been likened tci two outstretched hands (echini). The
height ot the Athena temple s columns is nine times the width ot the column base, and the Ionic
capital IS gr.iced by two shell-shaped yolutes.
The Parthenon's main facade tits into a single reclining golden rectangle, while the t.ic.ide oi
the Athena temple rises within twc^ upright ones. Rel.itioiis ot superstructure to supporting
columns plus steps echoes the same proportions in two variations. In the Parthenon, the top ot
the colunm c.ipitais appriixim.ites the golden section pomt oi the tot.il height, while m the
Athena temple this point corresponds to the meeting line betvyeen two reciprocal golden
rectangles. In the Parthenon, the centerlines ot the two corner columns and the lines oi the
tloor and entablature-top torm a v' 5 rectangle, consisting ot two reciprocal golden rectangles,
while in the Athena temple, three neighboring column-centerlines encompass .i single golden
rect.ingle. (See dotted diagonals m eley.itiiMis.)
ni l I .■\s AND H./\IKli liw

The series oi columns m themselves contain proportional rhythms, the columns and the
spaces between them representing a "recurrence ot strong and weak elements, " a standard
definition ot rhythm. The front coKunns ot the Parthenon with their seven spaces embody the
3:4 ratio ot the Pythagorean triangle and the corresponding musical harmony ot tourthdiatessaron, as well as approximations ot golden priipt^rtions or titth-diapente harmonies. In the
Athena temple, 2:3 and 3:.S relations ot columns approximate the root harmony ot diapente.
The rhythmic diagrams below the columns express some o{ these latent equivalents ot
musical root harmonies also along the long sides ot the buildings. The Athena temple is about
twice as long as it is wide, bearing out Vitruvius and embodying the 1:2 harmony ot octave-

^

diapason. 7 he Parthenon's plan corresponds to two reciprtical golden rectangles, thus echoing
diapente harmony. The interior structures ot both temples also contirm Vitruvius, at least
partially. The pronaos ot the Athena temple is in 3:4 proportit)n, while the naos or cella in both
temples, and the treasury or virgin's chamber in che ParthentMl are in golden proportittn.
It is fascinating to discover the unity ot proportional limitations — corresponding to patterns
ot organic growth as well as to root h.irmonies ot music — in the diversities ot these temples,
both m plan and m elevation. Diagrams A and B in tigs. 155 and 156 illustrate this by showing
that characteristic dimensions ot both plans and elevations can be represented by the same
diagrams that were used earlier tor patterns ot organic growth. Org<ui-pipe-like bar diagrams,
representing the same dimensions, further illustrate this proportional unity, by the tact that all
of these main articulations converge m a single point, as seen earlier in the anatomv ot the
horse.
The goddess Athena, to whom the Parthentin was also dedic.ited, united in her perstin both
"masculine" .uid "feminine" virtues. She was the patroness of wisdom and of the arts and crafts
and she was an example of v.ilor in battle. The grace ot her Priene temple and the strength of
the Parthenon express the unity of these diverse human qualities in her, a divine model of
human wholeness.
The diversity between the Romans and the (Ireeks becomes apparent from the kind of
buildings in which thev excelletl. Whereas the (Ireeks built temples and theaters ot unsurpassed
beauts', the Riimans built roads, aqueducts, palaces, public bath-houses, triumphal arches and
circuses, coupling the beautv ot the (Greeks with a m.istery of engineering techniques. They
added arches, vaults and domes to the columiial orders inherited from the Greeks, and they
increased everything to a colossal scale, making the Cireek temples look modest.
In spite oi these differences, (ireek ,ind Roman architecture are united bv identically shared
proportu)nal limitatuins. fwo examples mav illustr.ite this: the Triumph.il Arch of Constantiiie. (tig. 157) and the (\>losseum (fig. 15H) both in Rome.
The Triumphal Arch of ("onstantine is a veritable treasury of golden relationships. The
overall shape of this structure approxim.ites two giilden rectangles (d:e). Half the width
projected upcni the height establishes the springline of the central vault (A) as well as the
bottom line of the architrave (B), (see diagrams and golden section constructions at right).
The top ot the main cornice (C) as well <is the springline of the small archways (D) coincide
with the sides ot two giilden rectangles flanking a square in a semicircle, the classical construction of the golden section. A diagram (lower left) shows that the heights of the major archway
and of the minor ones (o and p) as well their difference (n) and two articulations of the
architrave (m and 1) form a series ot golden relationships which again coincide with the pattern

no

1 Mh i'(,n\ hR o\ 1 iMi I s

Fig. 157. Triumphal Arch of Constantine, Rome.

ot organic growth. Diagrams above and below the elevation indicate how the golden section
relates to each other all major articulations also in horizontal direction.
Proportional study ot the Colosseum shows that the plan tits into two golden rectangles
(b:a) and that the width of the giant ellipse which forms the outside wall relates to the width
ot the central arena in the proportion ot two reciprocal golden rectangles (see diagram and
construction above plan). Similar relationships exist along the shorter axis ot the plan (see
diagrams and constructions at the right ot the plan).
The same relationships reappear in elevation between the heights ot the three lower stories
(n:o:p) and also between these latter combined and the crowning tourth story (r:s:t) (see
diagrams and construction at right ot elevation). All these proportions approximate the musical
root harmony ot the fitth-diapente, while the central location of the cornice over the second
floor corresponds to octave-diapason .
HELLAS AND HAIKU / 111

Rhvthinic vv.ivc (Ji.igr.inis A, B, and C illuMr.iting basic proportions of plan and elevation
reveal that these again correspond to organic growth p.itterns. H.irmonic unity achieved
between the diversities ot plan and elevation, through shared proportional limitations is again
demonstrated bv bar di.igrams. all articulations ot" which converge to the very same point.
Rom.in poets apparentlv shared the Rom.ui architect's devtnion to the proportions of the
golden section. According to Priitessor G. H. Duckworth of Princeton University, these proportional relations can be hnind m the poetrv of Catullus, Lucretius, Horace, and Virgil.'^ For
instance, in Virgil's celebr.ited epic. Tlu- Aciwui. the number of lines of the various parts of the
narrative are never arbitrarv. but alw.iys approximate golden relationships,
often corresponding to Fibon.icci numbers.
ii:

mi- I'ow 1 K Of I iMi i s

'■f0.6/Si ; M

.0618 \

d^- 10-') 89-0 II a/K^iiJjy. '^m smuJI 'n fx .haujK. inaft-u-uUiu.)
12

S g

10

lZ[i tvji^l^ = ItK&JPm-

^0

30

40

50

^0

Prn-pmJj^vynL fh^-nxt/yiAtc^ (ai ( \
OS
0GI8 OJSO
Measuring the immeasurable
The dittcrcnces between Greek and Rmnan
art tlwmdle when we compare these classical
terms to the arts ot the East. The Hve examples we will look at were chosen tor their
diversity as well as tor their miportance
within their cultures. As we will see, the proportions we have tound in the West also
appear in the arts ot the East.
The Tibetan canon tor the construction ot
Buddha figures, published in Benjamin Rowl.ind Ir.'s book. The F.i'oliition oj the Buddha
IiiicK^c in 1976, shows how the tigure tits into

:4k 0 &ia- 4 83
ci,= /4.83-/4 = 0 83 AngUa.

Fit;, l^'-). Tibc-t.in Lanoti tot BudJlia hi;urcs.

0-750

three golden rectangles within each other.''"'
(tig. 159) The largest rectangle encloses the
whole tigure trom top knot to base, encompassing the knees; a smaller one reaches trom
top ot head to legs, touching right hand and
elbow; and the smallest trames the head.
Wave di.igrams and constructions ot the
golden section above and below the tigure
reveal reciprocities that unite the upper and
K>wer portions c>t the body, suggesting the
compassion ot the supreme Buddha toward
even the lowest living things. Corresponding
musical root harmonies are shown by the vertical wave diagram and the graph.
The two triangles which appear in the original Tibetan canon, reaching trom chin to
legs, are shown to correspond with diagonals
ot halt the enclosing golden rectangles, delineating a central pentagon and pentagram
pointing to chin, waist, and armpits.
The Korean brtmze tigure ot Maitre\a, the
tuture Buddha (tig. 160), can be enclosed in .i
golden rectangle resting upon a square ot
equal width, the latter containing the seat, the
HELLAS ANP HAIKLI

1 1,^

lis ^

3

^, a

F it;. I'lii f-igurc ot Maitrcva.

tonncr tr.inung the bulk ot the tigurc itsclt. Wave diagrams and graph show that the critical
point, where the right elbmv rests upon the right knee, is exactly at the center ot the whole
height, corresponding tc^ diapason musical harmonv. Other important relationships, such as
shiiulder height between top ot head and seat, and forehead height between top of head and
shoulder, apprc)ximate golden proportions ,ind thus the harmony ot diapente.
The similarity is striking between these proportional relationships and those prevailing in
(ireek art. It is well known that historic cont.icts existed between classical Western art and
Buddhist .irt, through trade and the conquests ot Alexander the Great in the tourth century
l^.C]. rhis expLiins the physical means by which intormation may have been transmitted, but
the univers.il appeal ot these particular proportions surely springs from other sources. This
uiiivers<ilit\- IS turther demonstrated by a look at Buddhist architecture.
lioriibudur, the world's largest Buddhist stupa (tig. 161), was built at the end ot the eighth
centurv on the island ot [ava, Indonesia. It consists ot eight stupa-covered terraces arising trom
a raised base that covers abt)ut one and a halt city blocks (115 meters). The tive lower terraces
.ire square, the three upper ones are circular: .^-3-8 are, itt course, Fibonacci numbers.
Buddha tigures are enshrined m niches ot the b.is-reliet-covered balustrades that surround
the square terraces. Larger bell-shaped stupas on the circular terraces house larger Buddha
ticures. all representing various stages ot enlightenment. Even the numbers ot these stupas — 3224-16 — apprciximate musical root harmonies in their relationship to each other, as the graph
indicates. At the center ot the tcip terrace is the greatest stupa containing the largest Buddha,
representing the highest attainment.
114

WW i>o\\ FR o\ I IMl i s

AW Jime-niid>'^ i*t/n6^^i. ^.-iTan^iT'''^ >t_>ii^i*^i
'.A/ii^ri) :jhM./Jws h(TiA,-.'Aif^ l^iiMl^n ji'^n
1

'y,.

|0

r'<^ liD/;

Fig. 161. Borobudur Buddhist stup.i, [.iv.i.
The diameter of the largest circuhir terrace and tlie width ot the square base are again in golden
relationship with each other, indicated by points A and B in the wave diagram at the right, and
by the golden section's classical construction, containing two reciprocal golden rectangles
(dash-dotted lines). The section of the Borobudur stupa shows hciw the height of the supreme
stupa and the base line form two 3-4-5 triangles, similar to the Mexican Pyramid of the Sun and
the Great Pyramid of Egypt, though in the latter the two triangles stand on their short sides.
Wave diagrams and gr.iph indicate further harmonious proportions, approximating musical
root harmonies.
HtLLAS ANP HAIKU 11^

In lap.iii. one tiiuls cntirclv dittcrcnr tonus ot Buddhist architecture,
exeniplitied b\- the Paeoda ol the Yakushiji temple, known tor its soaring grace .is well .is iov its mgenumslv contrived structural strength,
(tig. 162). It is built ot wood .md consists ot six ro(^ts, all ot ditterent
sizes, rising one above the other, culminating in a tall steeple. Above the
ground tloor there are two balconied tloor levels, and each of the floors
has two roots. The entire structure articulates into eight equal heights.
Ot these, two contain the ground tloi^r. two the steeple, and the remaining tour Ciinrain the two upper floors m between. The heights ot the
three lowest and the three highest levels relate to the heights of the two
central ones in proportums approximating golden ones, as do the tive
lowest to the three highest and vice versa.
I he prev.dence ot these reciprocal proportions in the entire structure
IS also shtnvn bv the t.ict that its overall outline tits neatly into one ot
the pent.igon.il st.ir s tri.uigles. and it mav be recalled that all relationships m this star pattern are golden ones. A netwtirk ot minor pentagram
triangles interrelates manv salient points ot this structure, such as the
ndgelines ot the second and third roots; the length ot the tirst, second,
and fourth; the baseline of the steeple and the eavelines cit the highest
.ind the lowest roots.
The w.ive diagrams reveal how waves of pri^porti(.inal relationships
pulsate through the entire bod\- of the building, as if it were a living
c^rganism. \otations of these relations are shown in the wave di.i^rams:
"ni st.mds tor minor. "M" for major members ot a golden relation.
"M designating the combiiuitum oi the two, and "M" referring to a
still further c(Mnbinatioii. such .is the \ 5 rectangle, containing two
recipriKal golden relationships. This notation shows at a glance how
mincir elements in one rel.itionship become major ones within the next,
as in processes ot organic growth. The letters "t" and "T" (for tessaron ) indicate proportions close to the n.7.S rate of diatessaron and also
to the Pvthagore.in tri.mgle's .■^:4 rel.itions. while "o" and "O" stand tor
the
or 1 ;2 rel.ition of ix'tave or diapason.
The h e.ivier wax'elmes oi tlie vertical wave diagram show two golden
sectum points oi the total height — one at the ridge ot the third roof A,
the other .it the eave of the sixth root B. Lighter wave lines indicate
some ot the m.in\- smiil.ir relationships among diverse other heights.
It is interesting to observe how vertical proportions are shared bv
horizontal ones. The floor and root structures share these relationships
in p.iirs; 1 with 6 (the highest and lowest), 2 with 3, and 4 with 5.
W'uhm e.icli ot these parts cit the structure one again finds
correspondences to all three musical root harmonies, both in the overall
shapes and in more minute details, including height to width, length ot
overhang to supporting structure, steeple height to height and width ot
top roof, and so on.
1 1'. 1111 i'(n\ 1-K ^ 11 1 i\ii I s

UhLl AS ANI) HAIKU 117

In entirely tlittcrent ways, the same proportional harmonies can be discovered in the Ryoanji Zen temple's garden, near Kyoto, which dates from the begmning of the fifteenth century,
(tig. 16.3) This garden is designed to be seen from the veranda of the monastery and frorn the
p.ived walkways around it. The rectangle ot coarse, raked white sand is never walked on.
There .ire five groups ot rocks on the sand apparently at random, like rocks along the shoreline
ot the sea. The rocks are placed on the sand apparently at random, yet they seem to belong
together as naturally as the land and the sea. One secret of this relatedness is revealed by the
subtle proportions that unite the overall shape i)f the garden with the distances between rocks
and enclosure.
I he tield ot sand has proportions correspiinding to two reciprocal golden rectangles, as
shown by dash-dotted diagonals which are identical with those ot the construction of two
reciprocal golden rectangles, below the plan. Lines A and B connect the rocks. Line B is
identical with the diagonal ot one ot the reciprocal golden rectangles constituting the sand
tield. Line A connects the three-quarters point ot the tield 's eastern side with point C along the
opposite side, this latter point corresponding to the meeting of two reciprocal golden rectangles, asthe ccMistruction demonstrates. Wave diagrams and multiple constructions of the golden
section above lines A and B show how the distances between the rocks within the field share
proportional relationships corresponding to the root harmonies of music. Thus rocks and field
become one.

11«

nil 1>0\\ hK Ol I IMi I s

IIKM.AS ANO HAIKU / 11')

W'f in)\v conic to I.ipan's oldest, dud at the s.unc tunc newest, architectural gem, the Isc
shrine's East I'reasure 1 louse, dedicated tti the goddess of iood, Toyo-uke-bime-no-kami. (fig.
164) It is the oldest because it dates back to the tourth century, built according to prototypes ot
raised prehistoric dwellings. It is alsii the newest because it is torn down and rebuilt every
tweiUN' years, in order xo preserve its origin<il mtegritw .ilways taithtully constructed following
the same design, one unsurpassed m its cLirity. All parts retain their natural shapes and
t inishes: round posts are of white cedar, grown near the site, the bark ot the same trees is used
ior the root: and the beams, ratters, and wall planks are unpainted, revealing the natural beauty
ot the wood grain.
The plan ot the building is a single golden rectangle. The gable elevation, trom ground to
ndgeline and trtnii eave to eave, corresponds to two golden rectangles. The side elevation.

Side ^k/v(AJr^(ni
OhlS

" 5" i. (815 =0=0 6?5
6J5

15 -M

(SC
t

10 -.16 ^of,?r.

L

15
.

:

23:36 =(1^39

i

'6.36 - .T
3: 5" ciVi^

i
i

5:8 (1.6:3
8:'i i )67.T

)

... .
30

t i 7 nnf- h/ifimr

Fii;. I(i4. Isc- Shinto slinnc\ E.ist Trc.isury House.

between ground and c.iveHne and between the edges of the roof, Hts .igani twi^ golden rectangles, topped by two larger ones that cover the roof it.self. Nothnig is arbitrary; these same
proper, as well as beproportional limitations exist between roof overhangs and the building
tween the windmill-like extensions of the rafters and the roof itself, shown at a glance by the
wave diagrams around the gable elevation.
Ill 1 1 AS AND HAIKU / 121

for ^lisploAj of OAtMOlk ,flo-i^trs ,ttc.

t ic W>^ l'rv>pi>t tnMl^ i>t l.ip.mc^r tr.i rooms
A, B: HoM ii tin.il .iti.imnK-m ) ti-.i ri>i>ms
D: IspK.il if.i room pi.ins.
C ) pLoAt ~ 3 tcita/mL yna:ts
Ml

nil I'OW 1-K 0\ 1 l.Nll 1 s

The greatness of little things
o.e/8
/

,

/.6/8

The l.ipancsc tea c crcnicinv is the celebration ot the simple jeiysot lite. This ritii.il evolved troin
traditions ot Zen Buddhism, which te.iches the v.due ot limits bv the discoverv of "greatness ot
little things."'^ All the te.ihouses and te.i g.irdens in |.ipan were l.ud out by revered te.i m.isters.
They were often painters, piiets, architects, and g.irdeners as well, like Koburi Enshu. who
built the Hosen (hn.il <itt,iinment) tearoom m the seventeenth centurv. (Hg. 163) It is one ot the
earliest examples oi the unu)n ot inside and outside, a teature which became important in the
modern architecture ot the west. Here it is accomplished by means ot suspended shoji screens,
made ot ric<- paper pasted on a light wnioden Littice. As the dr.iwmg shows, the proportions o{
this sho]i and its opening towards the veranda correspond to reciprocal gcilden relations — a
tangible reciprocity th.it unites the intangible diversities separ.iting m<in troni nature.
As in most h'panese luuises, the floor is spre.id with tatami mats, made ot straw and ciivered
with woven rush, usually three teet wide and si.x teet long, thus incorporating the 1 :2 harmon\-.
The floor pLin B reflects golden proportional h.irmonies. fhe mam room and veranda lointiv
correspond to a golden rectangle (see dash-dotted diagonal marked 2:3), .md the extension ot"
the room, three t.itann mats, share the same proportions. Figures C .md D show how the
equiv.ilents oi the music.il root harmonies 2:3 .ind .^:4 .ire embodied in the pl.ms of two tvpic.il
smaller te.ircHims. It is mneworthy th.it the pent.itonic music of the East (.md muc h folk music
in the West) is limiteil to five tones, thus rem.unmg .ilwavs close to the root h.irmonv ot"
titth-diapente.
The use ot t.tt.imi m.its ensures th.it in j.ip.mese .irchitecture room sizes .md .ilsc^ the grouping
ot rcH')ms into entire buildings will .ilw.ivs be m harmonious proportions. The t.it.imi m.its thus
.ict .is modules iov .ill tliHir l.ivouts, just ,is the slu^p screens .ict as moilules for the vertical

0750

I-ig. 166. PLm ot Katsur.i Iiiipcri.il Vill.i

i:-4

I ill I'OW i l( CM I IMI 1 s

articulation (.it the walls. The plan ot the Katsura Inipcnal Villa m Kyoto (tig. 166), which is a
tree combination ot diversely shaped and sized rooms, shows how the use ot the modular tatami
mats creates a rhythmic and harmonious unity and wholeness, without becoming monotonous
or forced. Thus the disciplined order of shared proportional limitations achieves treedom and
grace. The proportions ot each room correspond to the n.>ot harmonies ot music, as the wave
diagrams and the graph demonstrate. Music played an important part in the conception ot this
plan: music being played on the veranda ot the Middle Shoin could be enjoyed trom the veranda
ot the Old Shoin while watching the rising ot the moon.
The exterior ot the Katsura Villa (tig. 167) harmonizes with the plan through its own golden
proportions, as can be seen trom drawing A, which reveals that one ot the main openings
relates to its two tlanking shoji panels as the square relates to its two tlanking golden rectangles
in the classical construction ot the golden section. Similarly, construction B shows how the
proportions ot the openings and shoji screens are shared by the spacing ot the structural
columns, integrating thereby the rhythmic harmony and wholeness ot the entire building.
The shared proportional limitations ot architecture reflect a basic pattern-terming principle
permeating all Japanese lite and art. For instance, haiku poems are limited to seventeen syllables in three lines of tive, seven, and tive syllables. These narrow limits allow powertul
expression through suggestion by detail, a torm ot power ot limits.

The picn imi chill I \vcl:
my dead wijc'i coinh, in our hcdrooiii,
under my heel.
— I3u.son, 18th century
A iHouuldui I'ilhii^e:
I 'iider the piled-up siiow
the found of water.
— Shiki, 19th century
. : 0,618 ; . / . ; O.fS
/.S8Z--2.2Z&= o.€;8

Fig. 167. K.itsur.i Inipcri.il
Villa, MHuhc.ist elcv.itUMi.

Vallen petah rise
Ihhh to the hraneh — / watch:
oh. . .butterjlies!
— Moritake, l.Sth century
/ liai'e just come froni a place
at the lake hottoni! That is the look
on the httle duck face.
— |oso, 17th- 18th century'''

/.6/8
ULLLAS AND HAIKLI / 125

1 m I'ow 1 u o\ i imi i s

CHAPTER

8:

Wisdom

and

Knowledge

Eastern and Western arts of living
Among the essentials needed to turn mere survival into the art oi living, perhaps none are more
important than wisdom and knowledge. In a certain sense, these two human aptitudes are
almost indistinguishable trom each other; in another sense they are polar opposites. Wisdom is a
putting together, knowledge a taking apart. Wisdom synthesizes and integrates, knowledge
analyzes and differentiates. Wisdom sees only with the eyes of the mind; it envisions relationship, wholeness, unity. Knowledge accepts only that which can be verified by the senses; it
grasps only the specific and the diverse.
The origins of these words hint at their opposition. Wisdom comes from the Indo-European
root verb ii'eid, "to see," the same root from which weirds like "vision" and "Veda" come, the
latter being the name of the ancient, sacred teachings of India, meaning literally "I have seen. "
Knowledge, on the other hand, originates from the root tjHc, "to know," which gave birth also
to the words "can" and "cunning."
Both wisdom and knowledge are based on experience, but wisdom more so than knowledge,
which frequently retains experience only through the filter of conceptual thought, at times
discarding the seeds of life. In contrast, wisdom often stammers, or speaks in images, symbols,
paradoxes, or even riddles.
One could say that the greatness of the East has been its dedication to wisdom, while the
West has been concentrating, particularly in the last century or two, upon knowledge. This
emphasis in the West has brought about the phenomenal flourishing of science and technology,
but unfortunately without a similar development of wisdom, though of course the roots of
Western culture are not lacking in ancient wisdom of their own, as we have seen. But
knowledge and wisdom are equally essential dinergic diversities that should complement each
other. A dinergic countermove to supplement our present one-sidedness is the increasing
Western interest in the teachings of the Orient.
The Nobel-prize-winning physicist Erwin Schrodinger said in 1956 in his lectures at Trinity
College, Cambridge: ". . . our present way of thinking does need to be amended perhaps
by a bit of blood-transfusion from Eastern thought."" This blood-transfusion is actually in progress, inthe form of Western studies of Eastern medicine, yoga, Buddhism, Tai Chi, and other
Oriental disciplines, as well -as such books as R.G.H. Siu's Tlie Tao of Science: An Essay oti Western
Knowledge and Eastern Wisdom, to which this chapter is indebted.
Following are a few highlights of Eastern wisdom compared with .some salient features of
Western knowledge, in an attempt to show that they are indeed dinergic diversities sharing the
same basic pattern-forming proces.ses. If we could unite them, we and our world would become
more whole.
WISDOM AND KNOWLEDGE / 127

A rctlcc turn oi the coinp.issioiiatc teaching oi the Ikicklha was revealed by the reciprocallv
related higher aiul lower elements ui the Tibet. m canon of his Hgure, by siniiLir reciprocities
between the highest and lowest terraces of the Borobudur stupa, as well as by the highest and
lowest rtH)tlines in the pagod.i ot the Y.ikiishiji temple. These teachings were preceded in India
bv the wisdiim ot the Ved.is, expressed <is till tuuiiii ti^i. "this thou art, " teaching the relatedness
ot <dl things and the nonviolent attitude that results trom that realizatitm.
rile unity ot diversities in the individual, between one's consciousness and that which is
beyond it, is the key experience ot Zen Buddhism, reflected, tor inst.ince, by the complete
reciprocities between rocks .md sand field in the Rvoanji Zen garden. The flash of this unifying
experience, called <dtori ("enlightenment" or "insight" in Japanese), was captured six hundred
ye.irs .igi> m the sculpture n\ a Chinese monk (Japanese Zen having developed from Chinese
Ch'.m Buddhism). (f"ig. 168)
The Buddh.i t.uight about the neeil to avoid excess bv treading the Middle Path between
self-indulgence .uid selt-mortif ication. Thus he expressed in terms of human behavior the
h.irmoiu' of the gi>lden mean. The bliss of wholeness found in the enlightenment of the Middle
Path is often described .is new birth, trequentlv svmbolized bv the unfolding of the mind's
thousand-pet.il led lotus.
The gre.it (dunese teacher Camtucius (fifth or sixth century B.C.) also believed that the
reciproc.il rel.itionships of the golden rule were the wav to unite most h.irmoniouslv the
diversities ot hum. in interests. His te.ichmg was simil.ir to the Old Test.mient's "Do not do to
others wh.it vmi would iK>t wish others to do to ytni.
C Airresponding to the pr.ictic.il wisdom of Confucius is the mvstical wisdciin of the Tao Te
CJiing, .ittributed to I..io Tzu (seventh centur\- B.C'.). It expresses the Colden Rule in positive
terms, ,is in the New Test.imeiit s "Do good to them that hate you.""'' For Lao Tzu, the power
ot limits beiomes the kev to h.irmonunis hum.in beh.ivu>r, revealing the unity of minor and
ni.in>r hum.in .ift.iirs: "(n)verning a Lirge st.ite is like binling a small fish." And this recommend.ition to bew.ire ot excess: "He who tiptoes c.innot st.ind; he who strides cannot walk; ... he
who bo.ists c.iniiot endure. " The n.itural world which unites l.irge and small in the "greatness
of little things" is constantlv held up bv the Tao Te ("hing as the best guide to the art of living:
"in the world there is nothing more submissive .md we.ik th.m w.iter. Yet for attacking that
whkh is h.ird ,ind strong nothing cm surp.iss it."*'
Possiblv the oldest hook of wisdom to influence the <irts ot living in C^hin.i is the Book of
(!hiin(^t'\ or / C/n»s^', which origin.ued, .iccording to tr.iditu-in, .dn)Ut 4(H)() years ago. It is based on
the recognition th.it the ever-ch.iiigiiig (.hversities of existence h.ive an underlying unity of
order, in which evervthing is related to evervthing else. The foundation of this order is the
dinergu unitv ot the d.irk (yin) and the light (y.uig) principles, the former represented by a
broken line
, the l.itter bv <i solid line
. These lines are grouped by threes into eight
irii^niDis. which are put together in all possible ct>mbinations to form sixtv-four hcwiiirtiitis, each
consisting of six lines .uid e.ich symbiilizmg a different basic life situaticMi.
Over the centuries, the s.iges of Cdiin.i h.ive added comment.iries to each ot these signs. The
book h.is been consulted throughout the .iges as .111 or.icle, to g.iin advice as to the proper
.ittitude to be t.iken in an\' particular circumstance. The advice is usually cotiched in picturesque, mvtho-poetic langu.ige, with images often taken from nature. The wisdom of nature is
12s

mi vow I K 01 1 IMI 1 s

always held up as the best example oi how to
live. The so-e<illed prnnal drnvi'^i'»iciii ot the
eight basic trigrains, with their m.un meanings, ISshown in figure 169, grouped around
the central ym-yang svmbi^l, called (^In.
expressing the unity ot diverse light .uid dark

Scruth- ^
swnwieA,
CH'IEN

The arts ot living m the West have been
elements.**'
shaped
by knowledge rather than bv wisdom,
as we shall see trom the examples that tollow.
But, nideed, the diversities ot Eastern wisdom

SUN

SovJdrv Bash
TUI

and Western kniwledge seem to have common rtnns in the same basic pattern-tormmg
processes that create the harmonies ot nature
and art.

UiKe

West
K'AN

Bast
I
middk dm^hkrii'^

OMiwrrin.
middle son

I
f- mm M

in an eighteenth-century letter trom an
exded Hungarian treedom tighter, Kelemen
Mikes, the following anecdote appears, about
a bishop whose own religious belief did inn
prevent him trom becoming united with
another human being, even one who expressed
his faith in quite ciintr<iry terms to the
This bishop, landing on a lonely island,
found there an ignorant hermit in fervent
bishop's.
praver, repeating the words "(lursed be the
LiM"d."' The bishop sternK- reprim.inded him

Nontk \Mest
CHEN
eidest son-

KEN

Ijmn^Rst son.
Keeping stilL
K'UN
mothe/L

\ trigr.mis.

catching the wind when a man w.is seen running after the boat. He c.iught up with it and
climbed on board, to the amazement of the
sailors, who thought he had run on top of the
waves! It was the hermit, in tears, tor he h.id
torgiUten the right words. The bishop, himselt
deeplv nu>ved, lifted the hermit from his

% Jht Chinese place. South cm. ixrp
Fig. 169. Prini<il .irr.uigc-iiicnt ot /

and corrected his prayer: 'Tilessed be the
Lord! " Then he re-embarked and his boat
soon lifted anchor. The sails were alreatlv

knees, embr.iced ,ind kissed him saving "Prav
as vou .ilwavs praved."**'

WISIMI.M ANP KNOW ! 1 1H,1 ]2'>

It vvc look ior uiiiry in diversity in the two nia](ir pcilitic.il .ind cctniomic powers today, the
U.S. S R. .ind the U.S.A., we find them both lacking such unity in quite opposite ways. The
U.S.S.R. strives tor nnnuilithic unity and .icconiplishes it, but at the cost ot stifling and
condemning all diversity. I he U.S.A., on the contr.iry, strives tor complete freedom ot diversities, which It achieves to a large extent, but at the cost i^t unitv ot purpose. The reciprocal
relationship ot neighbors, uniting dinergic diversities, is sadK' missing in both cases, with a
result.int lack ot siKial harmonv and strength.
The principle oi the relatedness ot neighbors was, however, p.irt ot the wisdom that founded
this countrv. I hom.is Ietterst>n re.ilizetl that all hum.m beings "are endowed bv their creator"
with equal rights to "lite, liberty .md the pursuit c^t happiness," because none are born "with
s.iddles on their backs, lu^r a favored few booted and spurred. . . ."**^ Such was the Western
world \ contribution to the adv.uicement ot hariiKMiious living in the eighteenth century,
l odav, our culture's ciMitribution to human knowledge is largelv in the realm ot high technoli\gv, vet even here the principle ot dmergy .ipplies.
Knowledge ot .lerodvn.imics, o[ the structural strength ot materials, ot the physics and
chemistr\ ot engines, <ind ot business skill woukl seem the most obvunis considerations in the
design ot an .iircratt. I he design ot the Boeing 747, however, also reve.ds harmonious proportu>ns strikingK' similar to those we have seen m n.itural tonus and works ot art.
As tigure 17(1 shows, the entire plan C ot this aircratt tits into two pairs ot reciprocal golden
rectangles, whuh meet .ilong the centerline ot the fuselage; the length ot the larger ones
corresponding to the tront ot the plane (from nose to end ot .mtenn.ie, at the wingtips) while
the smaller ones enciMiip.iss the tail end. I he sideview B shows th<it the entire body is contained
111 tive golden rectangles plus d reciprocal: the sm.dler one ot these tits the nose, tour of the
larger oucs embr.ice the rest ot the tusel.ige, including wings and tail, while the fifth contains
the rudtler. Hrimtview A is contained in two golden rectangles. The wheel base is in golden
proportu>n to the height ot the pKine (troni the gnnind to the top ot the rudder). (See wave
di.igram between A and B .is well .is graphs A and B.)
I he proportions ot each wing D recall the winged seeds ot the m.iple tree and the wings of
tlies. r.,ich wmg is cont.imed withm .i p.iir ot equal golden rectangles, as the frontview is. The
wave diagram ot the wmg shows how even the positum c^t the engines aUmg the leading edge
<ind the bre.ik in the trailing edge ot the wmg sh.ire the very same relatiiMiships. Wave diagr.ims
<dong the length .uul width ot plan C show similarly shared relationships between the width of
the tusel.ige, the bre.iklme ot the wings ,uid the tull wingspan. .md between the tront ot the
tusel.ige. the wmgsp.m, .md the t.iil end. I he graph shows how these proportions approximate
the root h.irnu>nies ot music. W hile this plane is the product ot technological, scientific and
business kiu>wledge, it is .ilso a work ot .irt with a be.iutv all its own. Such beauty is more than
pleasing torm: it is .ilso wholeness .uid strength.
These r.mdom ex.miples were me.mt to suggest how wisdom and knowledge have contributed m their diverse ways to the .irts ot living in East and West, and how our Western
know ledge needs to be complemented at times b\ elements ot Eastern wisdom, so that harmonious proportions m.iv tulK' untold not onl\- in our .urplane designs, but also in the patterns of
our d.iiK- living. Erom the unity ot diversities as wide apart as Buddhism and aircraft design,
p.itterns ot wholeness h.ive emerged. A more detailed inquiry into the nature of wholeness as
rel.itei.i to the .irts ot living sh.dl be our tin.d titpic.

0&f8

0,5
59.64
(6,74:2'9.82 =06281
J^^.gZ. 5"). 61=0.5
/9 2: io ^8 = 0.634 i
^'3.8Z:?'r,82
.//C#;
li-Z =<366si
=0.S77j '
.jr.«J:i9 64=0.60; •
=0,6
l<).2: 3( 2
S.-J.-lS.ii
?■%■- 12
I0.2:I7S4
IZ: /9.£ =0,562
^2.-/g.2
^.•/^■.ee =o.J75
.)5,33
7. S-).-92,- ,74=0.632
-0 62S"i
£7: 'is.s'/.o to i
Z'?.82-.4J. 63=0,600!
(.'9..62;48.7^=0.S/2 i
/<3,'J4;5S^5=0 $6oj
49-«>?.79r(=0,G2S|
:i.-28.(,^
3- -OJJzi
=0.6l7j
28.69
:4J.63=0.r?7j
10.21:1^.51
=o.6te\
^a^M.l^,=<J.e,le\
lO.tl: ;(;.46>f,62c^
ig.' =(7.6ie[
7.2;a: 27.7
=0.62ji
/9./,-Jo.9^O.Gie'i
=d,&6i
('10.5:17.2
/<3.I:J8.2=0.5' f
/4.e:ZJ ,6=0,6/3!
23.6:38,2=0 6/a 1
~Orridxrs

10

f

()

10

^30 fttir
Fig. 171). Boeing 747.
WISIXtM ANI1 KNOWl t nci- IM

-

whole, hell and holy
The art as well as the wisdom and the knowledge of East and West alike testify that there exists
a deep-rooted unity below the many surface diversities of this world. This unity manifests itself
in simple proportional relationships that create patterns of harmonious wholeness out of the
vast
and often dinergically opposed diversities in nature, in the arts, and, at times, in the arts of
living.
The etvmology of the word whole comes from the Indo-European root kiiilo, from which also
come hale, health, hallowed, and holy. The word hell, though of smiilar .sound, is of quite different
origin, coming from the root kel. From this root comes calamity, clamor, conceahiieitt, and calumny.
Whole, hale, and holy on one side and hell on the other express the ultimate potentialities in
human life: good and evil. These ultimate powers, the divine and the demonic, are usually
thought of as supernatural and are looked upon with awe. The word mtmiuons has been used to
describe such feelings, a word that comes from the Latin numen, meaning divinity or spirit, from
a root verb meaning a divine nod or command of compelling power.
But numinous feelings are not the exclusive domain of the supernatural. Quite to the
contrary, the marvels of nature awaken in us similarly numinous feelings, particularly the
wholeness patterns of nature, such as the thistleflower's structural pattern, (fig. 171) the cells
within the stem of a lily (fig. 172) or a poppy (tig. 173), or the intricate single cells of tiny water
plants called diatoms, (figs. 174, 175) Inorganic patterns, too, are awesome in their wholeness,
as for instance the sound frequencies in figure 176.
In the Middle Ages, holy men argued about the number of angels that could dance on the
end of a sword. Today we see in photographs of atomic patterns, taken with the help of the ion
microscope (fig. 177) that not only a tew angels but entire worlds dance in the tip of a needle!
WISDOM AND KNOWLEDGE /

2: Jke. CaoAUXyt

3: Ihz Gluitomns

''

5 :%&WnaJtkfd g^SiAJi&rL
^kt Hm.£lic6

A

Violmt I ^tstud
Patterns ot vv}h)1cik-ss have been created
throughout the ages in all parts of the world,
in cratts, arts, and architecture, giving tangible torni to the itangible t)rder that unites the
diversities of this world. The Hast developed
such patterns, which in Sanskrit are called
mondiilas, as aids to meditation and worship.
I he plan ot the great Borobudur stupa is such
a maiulal.i pattern. Poets have also chosen
niandala patterns at times to express human
wholeness, the agony ot being without it, and

S-%e3lMMdulmt

[Evii Ditches)

9 :Jite Tvjzm Uu<£ of Jke Lyvdcss (Coujtus}

Descent

-^-.^

'l^^^^"^^

■

-U-

-

the struggle to achieve it. 'I'he Du'tne (Jomcdy,
written at the beginning ot the thirteenth century by Dante Alighieri, presents a journey
through the patterns ot human destiny in accordance with the conceptions ot medieval
C^hristianity. Fhe three parts of the poem.
Hell, Purgatory and Paradise, are each conceived mthe shape ot immense mandalas.
Hell, as Dante describes it, is a tremendous
tunnel-shaped pit, like the crater of a volcano,
into which the poet descends, guided by the

^^^^
^
CMidx,^
/

Fig. 17H. M.iikl.il.i p.utcrn ot" 1 )antf 's 1 k-l

\M

THE l'C)\\ FK O} 1 LMFFS

SectLoTL

Ike E^imihL^ PaflcndlH

swuiaundeb bjj a. wait of flakes [G<^ in.Z4.)

7 Tkt LustjMt

Too iittte lovt :

4 The sbthfvil
3 The wnalhfid

, IJ}i£, pruruA)
J>ie JsLa/nd

CcriMAXt 7

Latin poet Virgil, whom Dante reters to as his
ancestor. They move in ever narrowing circles, deeper and deeper, shuddering <it the
sight of the tormented who in their lives had
cut themselves ott from human relationships
by their excesses ot incontinence, violence
and fraud. At the bottom ot Hell's hole, at the
ninth circle, are those who had treacherously
denied all bonds ot love and compassion. Here

CovnUz ,5"

Asc&ttt
(jaietoPun^cdiny Itadm^
-oven, 3 ^tef>5 of 07tiWi-<^ •
to "TTit NeecUei f^€" (Mat.

they are (tig.
tound178)
trozen in the icy lake ot lovelessness.

ot Hell's
the ainverse
179) islike
y (tig.shaped
giant pinecone,
a mountain
pit:Purgator
in plan likewise a mandala, which the poets
ascend with great ditticulty. Along craggy,
rock-strewn spiral ing pathways they tind
those who even after death sutter trom various torms ot egoism; pride, envy, sloth, avarice, and so on. (Vices which represent, in
lohn CiardTs words, deviations ot love: "bad
love, too little love, and immoderate love. ")

Fig. 179. Mandala and diagram ot Dante's
Purgatory.

W1SIX>M AND KNOWLEPCF / l.^S

■Eve
■v.

.5"^ of ^ bUsstd wham DoMtemcognUed in heM>m.:
■Mi

JcrW f^o^ fvMi^d^, Pdvi, Ho^, Ada/m ,Mxises
■ Rfukel - deaXruxe

Rebecca,

Hehrwo warned

DiviMt LiQht of love

^ A/ew Law
8kssed<ftke Oil
irGuiistia/i^)
(Mldrm. . (Pre-CkrusiuiM.
Btyie^Lcb
Avi^iAsime
Ficonds ofA^saC

ig

Mdiulala i>M).mtc\ Paradise

From the top of Mount Purgatory, Dante
ascends into Paradise, where he is guided by
Beatrice, the great love of his life. Paradise
reveals itself as the ultimate vision of harmony, stretching through the heavens like an
nnmense rose, (fig 180) bathed m radiant
light. The poem ends with the following
words:
Here my powers rest from their hi^h fantasy
but already I could feel my hemg turned —
instinct and intellect balanced equally
as in a wheel whose motion nothini^ jars —
by the love that moves the Sun and the other Stars.

I UK lHn\ KK Oh LI.MII S

The outward pilgrimage ot the Divine
Comedy is really the inward journey ot all ot
us. We all tail to share ourselves in love. We
all know the frozen lake of lovelessness. We
all scramble over the craggy rocks ot egoism,
and it we are tt^rtunate we may eventually see
the light ot "love that moves the Sun and the
other Stars."
A modern counterpart to this medieval
mandala is the "Song ot the Cosmos" written
by the Hungarian pc^et Attila lozset (19051937) when he was only eighteen. It is alsc^ an
outward journey reflecting an inward one: a
trip into the modern world, a world still in
need of shared human wholeness. Outwardly,
it is the trip ot a lonely planet, orbiting in icy
outer space, "seared by the winds ot void."
Inwardly, it is the journey ot the young pc->et,
who grew up in utmost poverty, whose father
left the tamily in search ot work, whose
mother tried to support her three small children on meager wages earned by washing
and cleaning tor others.
The chaos and lack ot wholeness in the
poet's lite is mirrored by the stream ot unrelated imagery that makes up the poem —
violent flashes, nostalgic scenes ot purity and
beauty, all expressing a desperate yearning tor
personal and social harmony. The versetorm,
however, relates everything in a wholenesspattern according to the rules of the Soiietti
Corona of the Italian Renaissance.
The "Song of the Cosmos" consists ot tourteen sonnets. The last line of each sonnet is the
same as the first line of the following one,
until the last line of the last sonnet becomes
the first line of the first sonnet. Finally, all
these first and last lines comprise a Master
Sonnet which conveys the succinct message ot
all fourteen sonnets combined. A kind ot electrical circuit ot energy is generated bv this
dinergy: the tightly ordered structure and the

"Sung ot the t-i)smos. "

WISDOM AND KN0WLEDC;E / 137

freedom of diverse, anguished images. Here is
a translation of the Master Sonnet:
/ am a world all by myself alone,
my soul is fresh soil of a spinning planet 's sphere.
Trees of beauty, full of fragrance flourish here;
my brain: a city, filled with motor-drone.
Moonlight patterns weave black with silver
in my nocturnal grove, like drunken men.
Worlds wing by like bugs, to mate-dance in the glen
over my dark faith: my sacred river.
My planet spins, as my worn brain does at night;
it cools off and falls, disappearing jrom light,
like lines of poems forgotten in my youth.
If all the worlds and all planets shall turn cold
one cool light shall flare up in the void, most bold,
lOl'.lf A^ILA
A KOZf^OSl
1923 e N E KE

kindled by the blaze of my lone planet's truth.^^
Figure 181 is a pattern of the word-mandala
ot the "Song of the Cosmos" prepared by this
author in 1945 with Dr. Janos Lotz.^ We used
traditional Hungarian flower patterns to
represent lines ot the sonnets. The major loops
correspond to the fourteen sonnets, the winding of the vine indicates the stanzas of each
sonnet — two quatrains and two terzets. The
central garland represents the Master Sonnet.
Figure 182 shows the complete text in Hungarian, with looping lines (the vine in the previous drawing) indicating the sequence.
The drawings present a visual equivalent ot
the harmonious structure of this poem. The

Fiji. 1H2. Word
iii,ini.lal.i ot "Song
ot the Cosmos "

i.vs rut pcn\ HR o\ 1 iMi I S

"Song ot the Cosmos" has the pattern of a
lite-saving ring, constructed trom the realities
ot the modern world, to save us trom drowning in a sea ot lovelessness. The intensity of
the struggle tor love and harmony gives both

the Divine (Comedy .ind the "Song ot the Cosmos" their awe-inspiring, numinous power.
Both poems show us that there is a limitless
order to our existence, an order of wholeness
as untathomable as the order ot the cosmos,
and as dreadtul when violated as the order ot
the atom.
The ancient Hebrew wisdom ot the Kabbalah holds that we are split bemgs, living in a
split world. It teaches that our task in lite is to
restore to wholeness as many fragments as we
encounter along the path ot our lite. This is
the art ot being human. The Hebrew word
shalom preserves this wisdom in a nutshell: it
means not only "peace," but also "wholeness."
We are all adolescents at the threshold ot a
new age ot maturitv. Perhaps one ot the ways
leading to the wisdom ot maturity is the
pathway ot proportions, ot shared limitations,
which we need to find beneath the weeds and
underbrush that have overgrown it. Proportions are shared Hmitations. As relationships
they teach us the mana ot sharing. As limitations they open doors toward the limitless.
This IS the power ot limits.
The power ot limits is the torce behind
creation. When two pebbles are dropped into
the water some distance trom e<ich other, circular patterns ot the parent waves join to
create ellipses that grow wider and wider,
until — beyond the contmes ot this picture —
they also bectmie circles, (tig. 183) Me<mwhile, the tirst circles are becoming transtormed: trt>m closed circles, centered upon
themselves, they are growing into parabolic
arches, reaching out beytMid themselves
toward the intinite.
Is this merely a pattern ot pebbles, ot
vibration, or is it also a metaphor tor love, tor
the power ot shared limits, and tor the creative act itselt^

Fig. 1H3. The cre.invc .ict.
W IsnOM

KNOW 1 l lX.l l.V)

when we share our own limitations with the limitations of others, as we do in the golden
relations of neighbors, we complement our own and others' shortcomings, creating thereby
living harmony in the art of life, comparable to the harmonies created in music, dance, marble,
wood and clay. It is possible to live in this way because the proportions of reciprocal sharing,
nature's own golden proportions, are built into our own nature, into our bodies and minds
which are. after all, part of nature. The basic pattern-forming processes ot nature, which have
shaped the human hand and mind, lcvi continue to guide whatever the hand and mind are
shaping, when the hand and mind are true to nature.
Thus the best human creations are ageless and even holy, like a treshly opened flower.
Looking back to where we started, with Buddha holding up a flower (fig. 184), we see his hand
first in the gesture of teaching (A). As it unfolds, the index flnger moves along the same kind of
logarithmic spiral that unfolds in the myriad forms of nature (B). The combined movements of
all five fint?ers (C) create a picture of a thousand-petalled lotus, symbol of final attainment and
being.
But this hand is not only the hand of the Buddha; it is the hand of every human
wholeness^

Fig. 1H4. The liaiid unfolding
WISPOM ANP KNC^WLEDGF / 141

me/n.
Appendices

IS Z 2) 93>0 65J II > U V7si7 6»4

■ 8 = 0.7H
'S --(7.7(7 5"!
7 (47== 00.741
i'ia
78 12
46 7i O-SJ;

J.7 13 « = 0 £jo
6( S7-0.7

d:/i
[ j

z
3

i 221=0.61} 113 10.7=0 Si)A (2 (»7 • 0 «W
2:b

7 * '31 = 0 5a2 7- II (,-!> e03
(2 (6 t:0.777

6
7
8
10
11

ij 29./ = 0 fix (J 6 27=0 ro4
j/4 7-l'>»'0742
2<) l 44,^0 «>3J 27 4?e=<J6Ji Z4 S 38 r=0 6J6

/5

i< r 6i = 0 611
32 s ^%-0}ii 3o 1 }97>0 758 272 'iS%-0%0
76 );0.So6
42 « f)<):o J/o
k-l c( It S" 26 3 = 0*27
15 3 Itv :0 62/
lS
/3» 2X--0 627
lh 5 n 5-0 ro7 'S 5 io 1= <3 roi
k.L,
J')7-0 6/^
Lh
T
13
.
/<)7 3(.2-0p 5^ '»• 33 ■} = 0 Two 21 3S-.I: ■

17
/8

n-m

//
/4
13
/6

tn - 1Appcrulix I, ( omp.ir.ituc I able ot
1 limi.iii I'ropuriioiis
I 111- gr.ipli ot Appi iklix I slun\ s
cli.ii thoM- proportions v\ hit li rt lcr
to ilirci tl\ l oiiiR-t led iK ighhormg
hones I itfir.s 6-24) \ho\^' grf.itcT
iiiiit\ in v\(>nu-n .iiul nu n ot
ilittiM iH si/i-s til. Ill tin- rest ot tlupro|HM"tions iini'stig.iti J. (iriMtt-st
i.li-vi.ition is (.liiiKMision ii i tlu- I lim s
viTtu.il ilisi.iiui- troni tin- inn- of the
slioiikh rs ) u hit h is proportion. iti l\loiigiT 111 sill. ill iiu-n th.iii in ,ill
othe rs rlu- J. It. I h.ivuig hi-i-n
g.itlu r(.\l for iiiilit.ir\- piirposi s, ommight spt.1. ul.iti- tii.it sill. ill iiu-n
pi'rh.ips lioKl lip their t lims higher
th.iii others do.

\A2

I 111 I'OW 1 R OH I

1s

XIID

ml

/4.« 30 U0'»12
Zfeji 0 feol /i/.y 2VV'CI-567

4 =0 612.
/»8 t4 /3272=<l/»93
w- (7.605

iS7-3S'S'=o'i'iz
34-1
"/o y-o 6i2
2fc » Hi i--0.&iS
(6 7 33 r^oyjj ir,7,i< 4: o.r
II 4175 i <3 69/ 'OS /6 3:0 644
9 6 (5'2=0 6j2
'i'.i 3<»9--o'»12
ir s sss='i'iJ (6 3 35 '--(j4<)2
I7S' 2«1 = 0.6o6 (6 3 LiS- 0 6d$ (f 2 1* »=<7 6U
21 4 ^^f:ol',^ lol UJ-0 7rv

27

1 1 '<)3--o hli
9 ? lii$.o'(7'
g (. i72iO'*7'
// I7J-. S fcit ;o 2/6:0 (!J7 9 1 (43 -0 636

10 r 21 ''t;
12 li.7--0 6*1

26
28
1

4

?•< ^6 1:0 tit

lO.f It t-.o Sfcl <)9.i7 '•"H ST.<) («<546 avI6 2=5T»o
t-o 7575 9 9=0 757
J I'lo r=o7Ji
4 I q 'i ■0.729
II 1- 174 = 0 63?
lfl.3t it.l.-o«}6

11 = 0 »7.(79 49 1« y:0 610 (6.2
9.4 16n .r=7.-0.6e'il^II
li z Zt l-0S7Z
,'9 7 27f.O 6»
/74 273--ob37
ni 17Z-fl1 - a67^fcib 16 1 = 6" (4 3 2J3u<J.fc/4
»;/6
ri |B = 0.666
9 1 (42'0 640
10 3 (J = 0 6»7
II 1 16 ,1=0 6SS16 I Ui o r?! /4 7 U 1-0 «5
14 1 2J 4
r- 7 =0.5^56
16 s-sO S-<6
(6 1 22*73 S---0
(6.2.
= or?f6«3 (S/?, 1? 1- o.rv)
/4 ■) 25/' 0 r<)4 141 15 3 'VJ

j 17 J Zil-Oi>ll

/<Z<2 = (16lO lA 1 25 4 = 0^/;

■
0 kZt
Xf^.l 41 1 •, 0 6(0 2513 S^ .3737 tt---O.tlo
i7l
44
J
O
*"
'^■■^ 4< ^<?» f: 0^1 4(.l.»n>04^5
3;4 7tJ'<i444

pm

(6 8 53 1 = 0 yo7

(6.fe 2a.075'4
<) > 17 5-0 54(, Cfl It : 0 Sff 1 1 /4 3=-ii rfct
75- ') J''a7tr b<) 1 1- o ysi 6 X 8 1 - 0 74V

p-u.

i
■1I
j
i
i
i

j« ^ 93 3.<3ro6 47(6 8917=2<J=«0 ri262^ 434 844 = 0, r(/
iT7 1'' 8 = 0 653
le 28 9 = 0 SJJ

r.-v
fi:l

2S
o:t

1 30

<5 ^ w » ! 0 6"/^

o-.pigj 2fc5-.07J3

zi
21
2A

25

/0,3 /i= 0 fcV*

smallt ns--o M
e^s' S" 8 87^0.666 S 7: 5 =0 71
6S
8--=t'o
0053/
£63
Sz9 t99-8li.
(&.(.g = 0.762
3 /4 (=0^67
9 « IS iO 6S3
0 6 U r-'H = 0,726
16 / 21 k^onv (48 7fe(4205''2=0-723
(3 $" 27 6=(?4«^
li.l il.l-:0-^IA /4 6 29 l=oro2
z;'.6 45 ^'Otii.
79.
(
47;0
619
31 i » 3- 0 622
To 3 «l £'0 6(6
47 7^ 1= 0.61* 43io r4- 4071 '0r^a7J3
6i(
34 7 46 9=0740 32 r 43 6- 0.74r

075
(Xfpnjourtiajx nuiiicoL node kem/yfujiv-es
III
I II I iOJ>an.
III!
045
ff 0,6 " 0.(S 0.70
1 11 1
111
i
111 1
!
i

li.l 307.0

e 17 rro.65'4 2i r4<\7-0 fa3» 16J-4' '('O 640
3«7 48 7 -0 fc3o
27 r 4i7=<' (>sr 27,1 447=0 6/0
21 J 4( '*''> if5
44 7 9l7-a4«7
4»r 91 l-o'Wr

0.15

0.5

0.&I6

oz

= 22

22.Z-2Z ~

UA. AAJtra^csije. WOwul^; iz.i^ 0.P,I8 - 7.6 — 7.2-7.6=
StvicdL wavvteA^
: /2, X 0.6/8= 7.42— 7MZ-7-

ll.i X /.6/8 = /^.y

10.7- ICj.<):^

Im -tall mfrvL

; /5.2x 0. 6/5 -- 9.3'^- 5,^-9.39=1 0.a 42
^

I5.Z » l e/i =: 2'/.59 — 2V.5^-23.7i =

Mt 5m/Ui >vLe.H^

: /2,5;>

13.? X /.^/8 = 22,33 — 22M7-nM-iZ.Sy. I. (,16- Zo,t3—2J- 20.13^

i/Vt 'f'cUJL' Wffme^^

Appendix II. Human Proportions.
For numerical values see Appendix I.

; /3.^ x (7-6/8 .

o.z

= 7.72' g-7-7? - 0.28

/J. 6 X

0.77
0.8
066
0.72

.APPENDICES

Notes

\otes to (Chapter 1.

Wnes to (Chapter 3.

1. Prt)tcssor PcchiRr's cxpcriiiRiUs in 1876 were extcnsivf, showing that
over 7?>^/f lit a large number ai randomly selected people prefer rectangles in
the golden section's proportions to any other rectangles. See H.E. Huntley,
Y'/if Dit'irw I'roporiion: A Siiuly in Mathanaiual Bfauty (New York: Dover Publications, 1970), p. 64. This book gives a detailed discussion ot the golden
section.

12. " Lapu" or "taboo" have many positive connotations in tribal cultures.
See Kaj Birket-Smith, Primitive Man and His Ways (New York: New American
Library, Mentor, 1963) p. 189; Thor Heyerdahl, American Indians in the Pacific

2. A tew random samples, m inches:
Standard size paper: 8.5 x If, two golden rectangles (S.5 ^ 8.5 = 0.647)
Driver's license: 5.5 x 8.5 (5.5 ^ 8.5 = 0.647)
Credit card: 5. .3 x 8.6 (5.3 - 8.6 = 0.616
=± % = 0.625
U.S. paper money: 2.6 « 6.1 (2.6 h- 6.1 = 0.426) 0.447 is the ratio of a
Hank checks: 2.85 x 5.9 (2.85 ^ 5.9 = 0.483)
\/T rectangle's
two sides
3. C.H. Waddington, "The Modular Principal and Biological Form,"
Module, Proportion, .S'ywwcrry, Rhythm, ed. Civorgv Kepes (New York: (leorge
liraziller, 1966), p. 37.
4 Willi.im Bl.ike, "Auguries ot Innocence, " line 1.
5. In the Mkkllc Ages the pent.igram w.is often carved into doors in the
belief that it wiiuk! avert evil spirits. In (leothe's I-cimt, Mephistopheles says
he could pass by this symbol on Faust's door only because it was poorly carved —
one leg ot the pent.igram was askew, ('uriously, our own country's defenses
are housed in a building designed along the lines of the Pythagorean star: the
l\-ntagon.
6. See .dso Hugo Norden, "Proportions in Music," l-ihomint (Quarterly, vol.
2, no. 3, Oct. 1964; Paul Larson, "The Ciolden Section in the Earliest Notated
.Music." l-ihotuiiLi (Quarterly, vol. 16, no. 6, Dec. 1976; F.rno Lendvai, Bfla Bartok:
.•In .-hw/pr^ oj His Musu, trans. T. LJngar (London: Kahn & Averill, 1971).
Xoti's to (Chapter 2.
7 \\\\\ Holm, Sorthu'fsl (^oast Itidian Art: An Analysis of I'orm (Seattle: University otWashingti)n Press, 1965), p. 75.
8. j.iy Hambidge, Dynamic Symmetry: The (jreek I'ase (New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1920). A good ilescription and fair evalu.ition ot Hambidge s
work c.ui be found in Walter Dorwin League, Desii^n This Day (London:
Studio Public.itunis, 1947).
9. John Heniatield and C'hristine Davis, "The Golden Section and the
Structure ot (\>nnotation," V /ic Journal oj Aesthetics and (Iriticism, Summer 1978,
pp. 12.^-27.
10. Joseph Eppes Brown, ed.. The Sacred Pipe: Black i'lh's Account of the Seven
Rites of the Oi^lala Sioux (New York: Viking Penguin, 1971) pp. 95-98.
11. F.IL Gushing, "A Study ot Pueblo Pottery as Illustrative oLZuni Culture Cirowth," (W.ishington: Smithsonian Institution Bureau of Ethnologv,
1882-83) pp 510-11.
144

I Ht: POW hR

Ll.MlTS

(Oslo:
Gyldendal
NorskTheForlag,
p.' 144,
13. Frank
Waters,
Book of1952),
the Hopi
(New York: Random House, Ballantine Books, 1974) p. 29.
14. Robert Graves, White (joddess: A Historical (Grammar of Poetic Myth (New
York: Random House, Vintage Books, 1958) p. 98.
15. Loren Eiseley, 'The I 'nexpected I'niverse (New York: Harcourt, Brace,
1972) p. 288.
16. Julian Jaynes, The Orii^in of (Amsciousness in the Breakdown of the Bicameral
Mind (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1977).
17. " I'he (Canticle ot Brother Sun," 'The Writim^s of St. Trancis of Assisi,
trans. Benan Fahy, (London: Burns and Oates) p. 130.
18. Albert
'The U'orld As I See It (New York: Philosophical
Library,
1949) Einstein,
p. 5.
19. Willi.im James, The I 'arieties of Relij^icms Experience (New York: Doubleday, Dolphin Books, 1978) p. 55.
20. Abraham H. Maslow, Relij^ions, I'alues, and Peak Experience (New York:
Viking Compass, 1970) pp. 59, x— xi.
Sotes to (^licipter 4.
21. Einstein, The World As I See It, p. 1.
22. Miguel de Unamuno, The Traffic Sense of Life, trans. J. Crawford Flitch,
(New
Dover Publications,
25.'A Study in the Symbolism of Reason,
23. York:
Susan Langer,
Philosophy in a1921)
Xew p.
Key:
Rite and Art (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1957) p. 62.
24. Seattle Post Intelli(iericer, 11 june 1980, p. 16.
25. Herbert Kuhn, The Rock Pictures of Europe (Fair Law^n, N.J.: Essential
Books,
1956)German,
p. 99. Themeer;
word
for "sea"
starts withmajint.
"m" in many languages —
Latin, mare;
French,
mer; Hebrew,
26. Franz Boas, Primitive Art (New York: Dover Publications, 1955) p. 92.
27. Ibid, p. 99
28. Gordon Childe, Man Makes Himself (New York: New American
Library, Mentor, 1951), p. 150.
29. Micah 6:8.
30. Gerald S. Hawkins, Stonehemie Decoded (New York: Dell Publishing,
Delta Books, 1966). See also Evan Hadingham, (Jircles and Standing Stones (New
York: Doubleday Anchor, 1975).
31. Hawkins, Stonehem^e, p. 47.
32. Livio C'atullo Stecchini, "Notes on the Relation of Ancient Measures to

the Great Pyraiiud," in Peter S. Tompkins, 77(c Secrets of the (jreat Pyraiiiid
(New York: Harper & Row, 1978) p. 368.
33. Tompkins, Secrets oj the Creiit Pyramid, p. xiv.
34. Ibid., p. 157.

56. Huntley, Divme Proportion, p. 14.
57. Ibid., p. 33.
58. tions,
Thecidore
Andrea Cook, 'Lhe (hirves of Life (New Ycirk: Dover Publica1979).

35. Manuel Amabilis Domingucz, La Architectura Precohiiiihina I'.ii Mexico
(Mexico, D.F.; Editorial Orion, 1956).
36. Genesis 28:12.

59. Samuel Colman and C. Arthur C'oan, Witure's Harmonic L'mty (New
York: nam's
G.P.Sons, Putnam's
Sons, 1912) and Proportional L'orm (New York: G.P. Put1920).

37. Tompkins, Secwls of the ( ]reat Pyramid, p. 186—87.
38. James Jeans, Science and Music (New York: Dover Publications, 1968).

60. \hmtai<ine's Llssays and Selected ll'ritun^s. ed. Donald M. Frame (New
York: St. Martin's Press, 1969) p. 413.
61. Thompson, On (Jrowth and L'orm, pp. 268—325.
62. Ibid., p. 321.

39. lean Dauvcn, "Sur la corrvspimdence entre sons musicaux et la couleurs,"in P.W. Picktord, Psycholoi^y and ] 'isiial Aestlietics (London: Hutchinsmi
Educational, 1972) pp. 81-85.
Notes to Chapter 5.
40. Jay Hambidge, The F.lements of Dynamic Symmetry (New York: Dover
Publications, 1967) p. 10; Matila Ghyka, The (Geometry of Art and Life (New
York: Dover Publications, 1978) pp. 94-97; Huntley, Divme Proportion, p. 165;
and D'Arcv Thompson, On (jrowtli and Lorm, abridged ed. (Cambridge: ("ambridge University Press, 1968) ch. VI.
41. Peter Kropotkin, Mutual Aid: A I-actor of Lj'ohition (Boston: Porter Sargent Publishers, Extending Horizons Books, 1976) p. 25.
42. Karl von Frisch, Lhe Dance Laniiuaile and ( Orientation of Bees, trans. Leigh
E. Chadwick (Cambridge: Harvard LIniversity Press, Belknap Press, 1967).
43. Kropotkin, Mutual Aid, p. 56.
44. Edward O. Wilson, Sociohiolo(iy: 'Lhe Ahridi^ed T.dition (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, Belknap Press, 1980) p. 220.
45. Kropotkin, Mutual Aid, p. 37.
46. Wilson, Sociobiology, p. 475.
47. Kropotkin, Mutual Aid. p. .^0.
48. Ibid., p. xii.
49. Ashlev Montagu, ed., Learniini Xon-Acii^ressioii: Lhe Lxperience of \'onLiterate Societies (New York: Oxford University Press, 1978) p. 6.
50. Sally Carrighar, "War Is Not in Our Genes," .\/(»/ and A(i(,;ression, ed.
Ashley Montagu (New York: Oxford University Press, 1973) p. 122.
Rene Dubos,
no.51.
4, Autumn
1971 . "The Despairing Optimist," 'Lhe American Scholar, vol. 40,
52. W.C. Allee, "Where Angels Fear to Tread," Lhe Direction of Human
Development, ed. Ashley Montagu (New York: American Elsevier Publishers,
Hawthorn Books, 1970) p. 25. '
53. Colin M. Turnbull, "The Politics ot Non-Aggression," Learmmi
Non-A(i(iression.

63. Paul Weiss, "Beauty and the Beast: Lite and the Rule ot Order." The
Scientific ALnithly, Dec. 1955.
64. A good description ot various harmonograph patterns as well as ot
harmonograph
constructions can be tound in H.M. Cundy and A. P. Rollett,
1961).
\Uitliematical Models (New York: Oxtord University Press, Clarendon Press,
65. Simone Weil, (Parity and (jrace (New York: Octagon Books, 1979).
66. Donald ]. Borror and Richard E. White, A Lield (]uide to the Insects
(Boston: Houghton Mittlin Co., 1974).
67. Vitruvius Pollio, lhe 'Len Books on Architeiture, trans. Morns H. Morgan
(New York: Dover Publications, I960).
68. tions,
foscelyn
Cnidwin, Robert L'ludd (Boulder, Colo.: Shambhala Publica1979).
69. Rudolt Wittkower, Architectural Principles in the .-li;c ('/ Liumamsm (London: Alec Tiranti Ltd., 1962) quoting William Hogarth, David Hume,
Edmund Burke, and )ohii Ruskin.
70. Ibid., p. 33.
71. Simone Weil, 'Lhe Seed for Roots, trans. Arthur Wills (New York: C.W
Putnam's Sons, 1952) pp. 285-87, 293.
Notes to (Chapter 7.
72. (iyorgv Kepes, ed.. Module, Proportion, Symmetiy. Rhythm (New York:
Braziller, 1966).
73. (Jeorge E. Duckwi^rth, Structural Patterns and Proportions iii l ir^iil's Aeneid
(Ann Arbor: University ot Michig.m Press, 1962).
Benjamin
Evolution
ot the1976).
Buddha Im.ige," 'Lhe
Asia74.House
(cilleryRowland,
Publication [r.,
(New"The
York:
Arno Press,
75. Kakuzo Okakura, 'Lhe Book of'I'ea, (N.Y.: Dodd, Mead, 1926) p. 6.
76. Harold G. Henderson, An hitrodiulion to LLiikii, ((ianlen Citv, N.Y.:
Doubleday Anchor, 1958).

54. Barbara Ward, 'Lhe Rich Xations and the Poor Xations (New York: W. W.
Norton & Co., 1962) p. 150.
Notes to Chapter 8.
Notes to Cliiipter 6.
55. George D. Birkhott, Aesthetic Measure (Cambridge: Harvard University
Press, 1933)!

77. Erwin Schriidinger, What Is Life' (Cambridge: Cambridge LJnivcrsity
Press, 1962) p. 140. While tully rectignizing the need tor such a cultural blood
transtusion, Schrodinger <tlso urged tlhit precautions be taken. He saw the
NOTES / I4.S

niaiii Llitticuhy m the Western e.igerness to imitate the East instead ot integrating Itsvvisiioni into our own knowletlge.
7H. Leviticus 9:18.
79. Matthew 5:44
HI). Lao Lzu,
1411.

Ic ( :lim<^ (New York: Vikmg Penguin, 1964) pp. 121, 81,

81. I'lif I (.'liiin^, tr.uis. Ruh.ird Wilhelni ( Princeton, N.j.: Princeton University Press, 1967).
82. Kelemen Mikes participated in the Pakoczy rebellion <igainst the
Habsburgs and spent the last vears ol his lite as a political refugee in Turkey.
He tells the story in one ot his letters home.
8.V rhoiutis jftti-rsoii. I.iff aiiJ Sflft lai li rinw^i, eds. Adrienne Koch and William IVdeii (New York: Randon^^ House, Modern Library, 1944) pp. 22,
729-.^().
84. Dante Alighiere, I'linulist'. trans. |ohn Cli.irdi (New York: New American Library. Mentor. 1970).
8.T Author's tr.iiislation.
86. See |ohn Lot/. 7'/;c Strtuturf ilw Souufni <; ( 'oroiui of AnILi lo~<fl (Stockholm: AlnK|vist & Wiksell. 1965).

14(.

1 HI- IHIV^ 1 U Ol 1

Is

Credits

Fig. 8: Bryant Brewer, Sc.ittlc; Fig. 12: After K.irl Blos.st'clJt, I'rforwcu dcr
Kunst; Figs. 22, 24 & 25: After specimens .it tlie "fhiimas Burke Meninri.il
W.ishington State Museum, Seattle; Fig. 2(): Museum tur Deutsche Volkskunst, Berlin; Figs. 28 & 29: After Bill Holm, Xortlni'Cit (auisi Imiiaii An; Figs.
30 &' 32: Seattle Art Museum; Fig. 33: After R. Higgins, Mmoau and Myiniavau
An; Fig. 34: After ). Bazley and I'. |aciihsthal, "Preitogeometric l*otterv,"
American Journal oj Arilwohniy, 1940; Fig. 35: After Higgins, Minoan and Myccnacan Art; Figs. .36, 37 & 38: After specimens at the Thomas Burke Memorial
Washington
State
Fig.,ui40:illustration
At'ter (Oswald
Bear Fredericks, Book oj
the Museum,
Hopi; Fig. Seattle;
41: After
from White
the Victoria
.ind
Albert Museum, Lond(^n; Fig. 42: Archaeological Museum, Her.tklion; Fig.
43: Cartan, "Le imagini de i dei"; Fig. 44: After Lommel, Prehistory and
Primitive Man; Fig. 46: Nation.il Museum of Antiquities of Scotkmd; Fig. 48:
At'ter Vesalius and de Burlet; Fig. 49: Af'ter James D. Watson, The Douhk
Hehx; Fig. .SO: Dr. L. E. Roth, Dr. Y. Schigenaka, and Dr. D. j. f^ihlaja; Fig.
52: Inside of a terracotta drinking cup from (Jreece, 6th ceiiturv B.(!. in the
Museu Nazionale, Tarquini.i; Fig. 53: Musee (iuimet, I'aris; Fig. 54: R.idost
Folk Ensemble, Seattle Fheatre Arts, Seattle; pln>togr<iph by (dins Benmoii;
Fig. 55: After Evan Hadrmgham, C/rc/cs and Standiin; StO)ief; Figs. 56, 57 58:
After Franz Boas, Primitive Art; Fig. 59: The University Museum, The L'niversity of Pennsylvania; Fig. 61: After l^onald Antlerson, The Art of Written I'ornis;
Fig. 63: British Museum, London; Fig. 64: Nation, d Museum, Fai-chung; Fig.
65: From E. L. Sukenik, Treasures oj the Hidden Sirolls ([erusalem, Bialik institute); Fig. 69: After S. (iiedion, T.ternal I'resence; Fig. 70: Ashmolean Museum;
Figs. 71, 72 & 73: Af'ter Herbert Kiihn, 77/c Roih Putnres oj Ijirope; Fig. 74:
British Oown copyright, reproduced with the permission of the ("oiitndler
of Her Brittanic Majesty's Stationery Office; Fig, 75: After Hadringh.iin,
(Jirch's and Slandin'i Stones; Fig. 76: British Crown copyright, reproduced with
the permission of the Controller of Her Brittanic Majesty's Stationery Office;
Fig. 77: Illustration from Stonehein^e Decoded hy (ierald S. Hawkins in coll.iboration with John B. White. Copyright © 1965 by (ierald S. Hawkins ,ind John
B. White. Reproduced by permission of Doubleday & Company, Inc; Fig. 78:
After Hawkins, StO}ielie)n^e Deioded; Fig. 80: After Peter Tompkins, SoLrets oj tlie
(]reat Pyraniid dud Bannister Fletcher, A History oj' Arcliitettiire; Fig. 84: After
Jorge A. Actnt.i, Teotihtiaiaji Ojjuial (inide; Fig. 85: After Dons Hevden and
Paul Gendrup, Precohimhian Anhnature oj MesoAmerna; Fig. 86: After Ign.izio
Marquinas, T.sludio Arehitet tonico ( Avnparativo de h^s Mominientos Areheolooii O'^ de
Mexico; Fig. 87: The Universiry Museum, the University of PennNvlv.ima; Fig.
88: After Leon.ird WiHiley, I'r P^xcai'ations; Fig. 89: Ciemalde (i.illerie, Kunsthisttirisches Museum, Vienna; Fig. 90: After Stecchini's reconstruction in
Tompkins, Secrets oj the C.teat Pyraitiid; Fig. 91: Af'ter Cliedion, T.ternal Pteseiiic;
I^gs. 92, 93: Af'ter Woolev, (V Txtavatwns; Fig. 95: Af'ter Sir |ames [cans,
Seience and .Mush ; Fig. 96: After Jean Dauven "Sur la correspontlence entre les
.sens musicaux et la couleurs," C^mlenrs (Pans) no. 77, Sept. 1970; Fig. 97:
Pi-escolite Co., Seattle; Fig. 108, 109 & 111: Af'ter drawings by D. R. Harriot
in Bulletin 180, "Pacific Fishes tif C.mada" by J. L. Hart. Reproduceti bv

permissiiin of the Minister of Supplv and Services, ( !an<ida; Fig. 110: After R .
McN. Alexander, 'Tunction.d Design m Fishes"; Fig. 112: Altera specimen .it
the Fhom.is Burke Memori.d W.ishington St.ite .Museum, Se.ittle; Fig, 119:
Americ.iii Museum of N.itur.il History; Fig. 120: After W. Fllenberger et ,il.,
.-1» Athis oj Animal .inalomy jor .-\rtists; Fig. 121: After D.irwm; Fig. 122: After
K.irl von Frisc h, The Dame I.aniinaiie and ( )rientation oj Bees, F'lg. 123: Dr.iwing
bv S.irah L.mdrv in .m account h\ Pilleri .iiul Knuck.iy, /.eitschnjt jur lierpsycholoi^ie, 26 (1); Fig. 124: After photogr.iphs bv Alex.mdr.i Kruse <ind Eliot
Porter; Figs. 125, 126: After <i photogr.iph bv (ir.int lleilman; Fig. 129:
P.doni.ir Observ.itorv, C.ditorm.i Institute of fi't hnolog\'; Fig. 132: After
D'Arc\' I hompson, ()/; CV(iir/// !//;(/ / (inf;; Fig. 135: After D. |. BorrorandR. E.
White, .^ l-ield (hiide to the //;sc(/v <>/ .litierica .\'orth oj Mexuo; Fig. 136: After
Borror et ,il., .-in Introdiit tion to the .'■^liidy oj Itisects; Fig. 137: After Borror .md
White, A Tield ( hiide to the Inscits oj .\nieriia Sortli oj .Mexuo; Fig. l.W 141:
After specimens from the collection of Don.ild (Collins; Fig. 140: After .i
specimen .it the Americ.m Museum of N.itur.d Historv, New York; Fig. 143:
C;.ipotliiiionte Museum, N.iples; Fig, 144: From The I.neriiry Remains oj . \ . Di'irer;
Fig. 145; From |i')scelyn (iodwiii, Rt^l<ett I'liidd; Fig. 146: After Ves.iliiis, .-l;/>jtoniic .Itlas; I homson, .1 I landhooh oj .Inati^my; Cir.i\-, Anatomy oj the Human
I^ody; .md Drevfuss, The .Measure oj .Man; Fig. 150: Photogr.iph bv [im CAimmiiis; Fig. 151: Museo N.izion.ile, N.iples: Fig. 152: Museo N.izion.ile, Rome;
Fig. 153: N.ition.il Museum, Athens; Fig. 1.54: After Vitruvius, 7c/; Boohs on
.Architecture, Fig. 155: After ]. Buhlm.mn, l^ie .irchiteLiur des ( dassisclien Altertums
und der Renaissaiue And F.rik Lundberg, .irhitekturens P'ormsprah; Fig. 156: After
Kohte, /)/(■ Bauhunst des ( 'Lissisi hen .lltertuiiis .iiid Lundberg, .irhitehiureiis
1-ormsprah; Fig. 157: After photogr.iphs .uid (.Ir.uvings in .irio di (lonstantiuo,
Editon.d Domus, Mil.m, .md Fletcher, .^ Hi^^tory oj .Architecture; Fig 158:
After Fletcher, .A History oj .An liitec ture; Fig. 159: After Ben|,imin Rowl.md,
The T.voiulion oj the Buddha Inun^e; Fig. 160: N.itioii.d Museum, Seoul, Kore.i;
Fig. 161: After .i photogr.ijdi by Rm.d Dutch liuli.iii Airw.ivs, .md B. N.miik.iw.i et .il., Borohiidiir; Fig, 162: After l undberg, .Athitehtiirens l-ornispriiL. .nul
(Xu'.ikl Siren, Histoire des arts atuiens de la ('liine; Fig. 163: After Ok.imoto, 7 /;c
y.en < iarden, .md Teiji Ito et .il., /'/;(' jaj'anese (iaiden; Fig. I(i4; After Arthur
Drexler, / //(■ .Architecture oj japan, .nul Werner Bl.iser, japanese Temples and
Tciihoiises, Fig. 165: After Drexler, 7/;c .Architecture oj ]apan; Fig. 166: After
N.ioim Ok.iw.i, I 'do .Architci lure: Kiitsiiia ami Xikho. Fig. \(i7: After Drexler. The
.Anhiieitiire oj japan; Fig, lf)8: Se.ittle Art Museum; Fig, 169: After Rich.ird
Wilhelm's tr.iiisl.ituMi of the / ( Hiimi; Fig. 170: After tlr.iwmgs provided bv the
iioeing Comp.iiiv, Se.ittle; Figs. 172, 173, 174 t\ 175: C'.irl Striiwe, Tormen des
.Mil ro( osinos (Munit h: Pri'stel Verl.ig, 1955). Reproduced with permission. Fig.
17(): After H.ins Jenny. Cymatus; Fig. 177: Ervvin W. Muller, " Lhe Fiekl Ion
Microscoju," I'he Ameiicaii Siienti'^t, vol, 49, no. 1, M.inh 19f)l, Reproduced
witli permission. Figs. 178, 179 t\ ISII: After tr.uisl.ituMis of the- Diviue ( '.omedy
by Dorotliv S,i\crs .nul |ohn Ci.irdi; Figs, ISl, 1S2: After |ohn Lotz, 'Ihe
Structure oj the Sonnet ti a ( A'tona oj .Attila jo~sej ( Stot kholm: Almqvist iS. Wiksell,
i'\<V\)\ I s i r
19()5); Appendix I: D.it.i from Henry Dreyfuss, I'he .Measure oj .Man.

("arrighar,43 Sally. 76
("artari,
Index
\'umhfrs ift boUliUt" typf refer to /i^wrM.
Accmi... 22, 36,37,38
I he AnmJ. 112
Albcrti, Lc-on Battista, ]()2
Alcx.imk-r the- (ircit, 114
Alice, WX;., 76
ailosaurus, M, 6'>, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116
Anaximcncs, 7'>
animism, 24
AphrDditc, \irr>. 106, 152
apsara, 31 , 53
Arabic: (Janccb, 36, writing, 67
Arch ot ('onstantmc, I riumphal, 11(1, 157
ArcJrc-y, Robert, 76
Assyrian bas reliel, 45
Athena, 110; temple, KW, 110, 156
Athens, 109, 155
Attic amphora, 20, 24. 32
Audubon, 75
axoneme 28, 50
Babylon, 45
ballet, 99, 102, 150
basket weavers, 14, 16
basketry hats. 14, 16. 23, 24, 25
Henjafiekl, John, 22
biorhvthm. 49, 52
birds: lapwing, 74; peacock, 77, 125, 126
skimmer, 8H, 137; tern, Artie, 75
Birket-Smith, Ka), 25
BirkhoH, (;.L)., 79
Black hlk, 24
Blake, William, 5
blankets: chilkat, 17, 28; Northwest Americin Indian. 17
Boas. Franz, 32
Boeing 747. 130. 170
Borobudur, 114, 128, 133, 161
Bosen tearoom. 123, 165
brain, 27, 48
Bronowski, )., 79
Bronze age, 21
Brueghel, I'leter the Hlder. 89
Buddha, 1. 104. 113, 114, 128, 141 . 159; I ibetan, KM, 113.
159
Burke. F.dmund. 96
Buson. 125
butterlly, 88-92; Clodius parnassius. 90, 139; clouded
swallowtail, 91, 140; zebra, 92, 141
caduceus. 26
Calitonua, 77, 124
carpet: East Prussian. 16. 26; Mexican, 16, 27
148

THE POWER OF LI.MITS

(!asa (irande. 25
C!asulla Gorge, 51
Catullus, 112
chakars. 74
(Jieops. 80
Chichen Itza. 43, 86
("hilde, Gordon, 34
C:hina, 33, 35, 102. 128
C'hinese: ideograms. 35. 62, 63; monk. 168
('lardi. John. 1.34
circadian rhythms. 49
circle and square. 93, 177
Coan, C. Arthur, 82
Coleridge. 79
C!!olman. Samuel. 82
Cologne, 68
C'olorado, 77. 124
Colosseum. 110. 158
Confucius. 128
Cook, T.A.. 82
counterpoint, 1 1
crab, Dungeness, 57, 107
Oetan: amphora. 21. 34; culture. 21; krater, 21. 22, 33;
mother goddess, 42
Crete, 25, 26, 41
cubit, 36; Egyptian, 37; Roman, 37; Royal, 37
The (Atri'es of Life, 82
Cyrene.
'24 152
F.H..106,
Cushing, 105.
Dante Alighieri, 134
Dante's: Hell, 1,34, 178; Paradise, 1.34, 180; Purgatorv,
134, 179
Darwin, 74, 76, 121
Dauven. J.. 51
da Vinci, Leonardo. 93. 95. 99. 142
Davis. Catherine. 22
Dead Sea scrolls, 36, 65
diapason. 8, 20. 40. 57. 89, 90. 91, 110, 111, 114. 116
diapente, 8,11, 14. 20. 45, 52, 57, 64. 86. 90-92. 1 10. 111.
114, 123
diatcssaron, 8, 11, 14, 40, 45, 57, 64, 86, '>0-92, 110, 116
diatom, 113. 175
dichotomy. 3
dinergy: meaning ol. 3
Dii'imi Proporlwne, 95. 143
I'he Dwme Comedy, 134-.36
DNA molecule. 28. 82. 49
dog. 121
doiphin. 75. 123
dominant, 10
Dominguez, Manuel Amabilis, 43
Doric order, 109
Doryphoros.
104, 106, 151
duality,
3

Dubos. Rene. 76
Duckworth. G.E.. 112
Durer, Albrecht, 95, 144
ear, 27, 48
Egyptian: triangle. 41; measures, 69. See also rope
Egypt,
33. 41 triangle
stretcher's
Einstein, Albert, 28, 29
Eisley, Loren. 27
El Tajin. 43. 85
England.
enthusiasm..38. 3182
'I'he F.voh4tiou of the Buddha linage, 113
fathom. 37. 70
Fibonacci series. 5. 7. 10. 52-54. 92. 112, 114, 8, 100
fifth. oVc diapente
fingertips, 27, 47
fish: calico surtperch, 59. 61, 108; Coho salmon, 59,
61, 108, 109; curlfin sole, 61, 109; opah, 59, 108: Pacific
pompano, 61, 109; porcupine. 83, 132; quillback
rockfish. 59. 108; ribbon barracudina. 61. 109; sunfish.
83. 132
Florence, 102
flowers: apple blosson. 10;daisv. 1-4, 6, 11,13, 14,55,77,
92, 99. 100, 1, 2, 3, 126; Horets, 1, 4; lily, 133. 172;
loganberry bush, 10; poppy, 133. 173; sunflower. 4-6.
11, 13, 14, 55. 92, 99, 6, 7; seeds, 52, 98; thistletlower,
133, 171
Fludd, Robert. 96. 145
fourth. ,SV(- diatessaron
Frisch. Karl von, 74
frog, 70, 117, 118
Gizeh. 80
galaxy. 80. 129
Glas Towie, Scotland, 27
C;len Canyon, 124
golden rectangle, 3, 6,8, 16, 17, 19-22,41.43,52,53,55,
57, .59,62,64,69,80,83,87-89.92.99, 109-11, 113, 118,
120, 123, 125, 130, 4, 5, 81
golden section, 2-5, 13,14, 16, 17.20,22.29,37,40,41,43,
47, 53. 55. .56. 64. 79. 82. 83. 86. 87. 93. 95, 105, 1 18, 3, 5,
8, 9, 11, 14, 15, 75, 80, 98; formula. 2; point of, 2, 14, 62
64, 67, 88, 89. 105. 109. 117; ratio. 8. 10, 11
Golding, William. 76
Gravity and Grace, 84
Greece, 5. 20, 93. 102
Greek, 110; Apollo, 104; architecture, 110, 154, 155, 156;
art, 32, 52, 113, 114, 151, 152, 153; cup, 31, 52; metrological relief, 70; writing, 34
Gutenberg bible. 36. 68
Hadley. Deborah. 150
haiku,' 104, 125
Hambidge, Jay, 21. 53
harmonic, 10; pattern, 49. 95: progression, 52
harmonograph, 84, 133, 134
Hawkins, Gerald S., 40

Hebrew writing, 36, 65
helix, double, 28, 49
Hercules, 31, 52
Hermes, 26, 27, 43
hexagonal pattern, 79, 80
hieroglyph, 33, 60
Hogarth, 96
Horace, 1 12
horse, 72, 99, 110, 119, 120
Hudson, W.H., 74
Hui-tsung, Emperor, 64
Hume, 96
Huntley, H.E., 79
Hygeia, 7, 106, 153
Hypnos, 106, 153
I Clung {Book of Changes), 128, 169
icosahedron, 80, 128
Indians: Arapaho, 32, 57; Brazilian, 32, 56; Haida, 16, 22;
Hopi, 25, 40; Kwakiutl, 16, 22; Makah, 14, 22; Nootka,
14, 22; Northwest American: art, 18, 29; blanket, 17;
Pueblo, 22, 25, Tlingit, 16, 22; Zuni, 22, 32, 37, 58
Indo-European root language, 29
insects: bees, dancing, 74, 122; beetle, 86, 135; damselfly,
88; darner, 88; dragonfly, 88; mydas tly, 87, 88, 136
Ireland, 27
irrational numbers, 5
Ise shrine, 120, 164
isocandle light distribution patterns, 51, 70, 97
Jackson, Reverend [esse, 29
28"
William,
James, 116,
Japan,
118, 123
Japanese; tea ceremony, 123; tea room, 165
Java, Indonesia, 114, 161
Jaynes, Julian, 27
Jeans, Sir James, 49
Jefferson, Thomas, 130
Jesus, 77
Joso, 125
Jozsef, Attila, 135, 181, 182
Jung, C.G., 25
Kabbalah, 96, 139
Katsura Imperial Villa, 125, 166, 167
Keller, Helen, 29
keyboard, 13, 16
Knossos, 41
Koburi Enshu, 123
Kropotkin, Peter, 74, 75
Kyoto, 118, 125
labyrinth, 25, 27
Langer, Susan, 29
Lao Tzu, 102, 128
leaves: begonia, 13, 18; bloodleaf, 13, 18; Concord grape,
13, 18; Japanese maple, 13, 18; lanceolate pattern, 13;
lilac, 11, 13, 52, 17; pelargonium, 13. 18; rhododendron,
13, 18
Leonardo of Pisa, 5

Lorenz, Konrad, 76
Lotz, Dr. Janos, 136
Lucretius, 1 12
Lung Chuan celadon vase, 19. 30, 31
Lyre, 8
Maitreya, 113, 160
mana, 25, 31, .34, 77, 1.39
M(in and Aggression, 76
mandala, i.33-.36, 171, 172, 173, 176, 178, 179, 180, 181,
182
Maori, 25; tattoo, 27, 28. 39
Maroni, 33
Maslow, Abraham H., 28
Mercury, 26, 43
Mesopotamia, 33. 44
Mexico, 42, 83; pyramids, 84, 85, 86
Mikes, Kelemen, 129
Minoan kantharos, 21, 35
minor and major parts, 3, 5, 10, 11, 22, 116
Minotaur. 25
modulation, 10
module, 106
Montagu, Ashley, 76
Montaigne, 82
Moritake, 125
Morris, Desmond, 76
Mother Earth symbols, 25, 28, 40
Mother goddess ot Crete, 26, 42
Mutual Aid, 74
Mycenaean culture. 21
Naturalist on the La Plata, 74
Nature's Harmonic Vnily, 82
Neanderthal man, 27
Neolithic, 27
nervous system, 27
New Testament, 128
New Zealand, 56, 39
Nile, 41
octave. See diapason
Old Testament, 102, 128
Oraibi, 25
Pacific Northwest Ballet, 150
Pacific Ocean, 49, 124
Pacioli, Luca, 95, 143
pagoda,
116.109.
162 110. 155
Parthenon,104,104,
partial,
pendulum,10 84, 95
pentagon, 6, 7, 16, 79, 80, 113, 11
pentagonal
pentagram
5,'"l7, 18,star. See
8 20, 25, 113, 116, 9, 11
pentagram, 6, 55,
7, 16,
pinecone, 82, 130; Jeffrey 82, 131
Plato, 102
Point Reyes, 124

polarity,
3
Pollio, Marcus
Vitruvius. 93. 99, 106, 110, 142, 154
Polycleitos, 104
Polynesia, 25
Pompeu, 36, 66
pottery, 19-24; Acoma; 22, 36, 37, 38; Chinese. 19. 30;
classical Greek, 20, 21 . 32; Cretan. 21 . 33, 34; .Minoan,
21, 35; Mycenean, 21
power ot limits, 7, 102
Priene, 109, 110, 156
Proctor, Richard A., 42
Proportional Form, 82
Protagoras, 104
Pyramid: Great, 41, 42, 114, 80, 82; of Castillo. 43. 86;
of
114,the83 Moon, 42, 83; of Niches, 43, 85; of the Sun 42,
Pythagoras, 7, 8
Pythagorean, 5, 7, 13, 25, 102, 106; fellowship, 7; musical
harmonies, 14; theorem, 7; triangle, 7,8,11, 14. 16. 18,
40, 45, 47, 64, 86, 95, 110, 116, 9, 11, 12, 14
Radost Folk Ensemble, 54
ratio, logarithmic, 16
relationsofneighbors,3,6,7, 18, 19,21,67,69,87, 141.98
Renaissance, 93-95, 102, 136
rock engraving: Irish, 27, 32, 45, 55; Swedish, 38, 71, 72,
73
Roman, 110; architecture, 110, 157, 158; cubit, 37; graffito, 36, 66; poets, 112
Rome, 110, 157, 158
root harmonies, musical, 8, 10, 11, 13, 19,22,43,45,52,57,
64,68,72,92,96, 100, 110, 111, 113, 114, 117, 118, 123,
125, 130, 13, 14. See also diapason, diapente, diatessaron
ropestretcher's
triangle,
Rowland, Benjamin,
Jr., 41,
113 81
Ruskin, |ohn, 96
Ryoanji temple garden, 118, 128. 163
sacrum, 99, 101, 102
St. Francis ot Assisi, 28
St. Paul, 77
satori, 128
scale, logarithmic, 1
Schrodinger, Erwin, 127
Scotland, 27
seeds, 4-6, 6, 7, 98; maple tree, 88, 89, 130, 138; suntlower,
52, 98 45
Semiramis,
shaman, 38, 73
shells, 53-56, 84, 99-106; abalone, 54-56, 102, 103; clam,
bear's paw, 56, 106; nautilus, chambered, 84, 134;
sundial, Atlantic, 54-56, 101, 104; whelk, dilated, 56,
105
Shiki, 125
Shipaluovi, 25
sine curve, 49
Siu, R.G.H., 127
skate, 62, 64, 111; black, 62. Ill; deep-sea, 62, 64, 111;
longnose, 62, 64, 111; starry, 62, 64, 111
149 / INDEX

Sniiili I .ihk t, 4t
Ml..kc. 2(,
siiuwn..k<,-. 7'). M. 127
"Sotii; ot tlu- ( osiiios", 13S, 13'). 181, 182
spkUr, 14
spklcTW.I., 19
spir.il: iijui.iiij^ul.ir . 1, 4. 2; li>t;,iritlunic . I. 4.
211. 22.
S3.
141. 2, 99, 100, 125
StL-ccliini. Livio ( .millo. 4S, 90
Minur.,v. ^2, M, 111
Stom lu-iiiii-, .^H, 4n. 41 . 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79; I k-L-lsHMK-.
3«. 76, 79. S.irsi ii SuiiK s. W. 4it. 75, 79
Mup.i. 1 14. 161
siihdiiiiiin.ims, in. 11
Sumcn.iii niiR iloriii \s rmiin, ^^, 59
Suiiicn.iti, 44
suiiHii.inoii scrk s. T
Suii^ Dynasty, IV, 20, 30
svinbnl, 2!i-27; .irchctN p.il, 2S; ot dcMtli .itiJ rchirth. 27; ot
tcriilits , 26
Syiiijh'^iiDii In2
sviiiTiiy, ^
i.ibiHi, 25
1 .,1 C lii, I2'>
Ilk- 1, 10 .>/ S.iauc. 127
r.k. 1 c- Chmi;, 12H
t.ipii, 2S
/1 i.ipu'.ii,
M 2xI'll 27
. IrJiifi'. (life, V.^
I l ilt ilui.it .ill. 42. 83
rli.iK-s, 7'>
I lioiiipMin.
tuiilnc.
Hi Sir l)'Ari\ W't ntu orili, H."^
I nwi r ot H.ilx l, 4.S. 89
I ii\o-uki--hiiiR-iio-k.uiii. 12ii
mniiii; (nrk. 95
1 urnhull. ( oliii \1 ,
I 'll.inuilio. |)oii .Mii;ucl Jr. 2''
unison. H
LIr N.imnui. Kmii. 4~. 88, 92
V s A . I .io
Li S.s.K , l.^ii
( trills. jilt- ( \'SII1I //l-fiTi,;, 145
Vc-a.i,
Vikiiii;.12'", 12«
Vir^il, 1114. 1 12, I M
V'ltruvius. ,SV:' Polho. .M.irtus V'uilu ius
W'.KklMigion. C M .
W'.ilumgwi-. 2(), 44
W .nd. H.irKir.i. "
w.ivc- Ji.iijr.iin. 1'). 20. 22. .v , 4.\ Vi. x. (.1 , M. f>7, f>8, 7n,
~2, S-,"|iMi,
Itil,14.1U(,.16.112-14,
116-18,
121, 28;125,w.irp.
131) 14.
wc.ivini;;
h.iskct.
20; t.ibrk:
16. 27,
16, 20, 21; writ. 14. 20, 21. \soi>t. 16
1 ilf l>cn\ 1 R Ol I

Is

W'c-il. Siinonc. 84. 102
Weiss. P.iul. 8.^
uli.ili-. luiiiiph.it k. 74
w liirlint; stju.irt s, S3
Woollcv, Sir I ciMLird, 44, 47, 88
rlic W orld. -Is I Sec li. 29
Y.ikuslii)! temple-, 1 16. 128. 162
Yin .niJ Y.ing. 3. 128. 129, 169
ZA-n Hiukiliisni. 123, 128
/iiiiiur.it, 44, 47. 91; ot'H.ibvlon. 89, 90, 91; ot'Ur, 44, 47,
87, 88, 92, 93
Zmili.ilnvf, 26, 44

$24.95

ONE OF THE DELIGHTS OF LIFE is the discovery and rediscovery of patterns of order and
beauty in nature — the designs revealed by slicing through a head of cabbage or an orange,
the forms of shells and butterfly wings. These images are awesome not just for their beauty
alone, but because they suggest an order underlying their growth, a harmony existing in
nature. What does it mean that such an order exists; how far does it extend?
The Power of Limits was inspired by those simple discoveries of harmony. The author then
went on to investigate and measure hundreds of patterns — ancient and modern, minute
and vast. His discovery, vividly illustrated here, is that certain proportions occur over and
over again in all these forms. Patterns are also repeated in how things grow and are made —
by the dynamic union of opposites — as demonstrated by the spirals which move in opposite
directions in the growth of a plant.
The joining of unity and diversity in the discipline of proportional limitations creates
forms which are beautiful to us because they embody the principles of the cosmic order of
which we are a part; conversely, the limitlessness of that order is revealed by the strictness
of its forms. The author shows how we, as humans, are included in the universal harmony
of form, and suggests that the union of complementary opposites may be a way to extend
that harmony to the psychological and social realms as well.
Gyorgy Doczi has practiced architecture in Hungary, Sweden, and Iran, and now is a
senior design consultant in Seattle, Washington. He initiated a permanent exhibit on form in
nature and art at the Pacific Science Center in Seattle, and is a founder of the Friends of
Jungian Psychology Northwest.
SHAMBHALA

BOSTON

&

LONDON

