Containing Ecstasy: The Strategies of
Iamblichean Theurgy*
Gregory Shaw
STONEHILL COLLEGE
“I spoke a different language? But I didn’t realize—how can I speak a language without
knowing I can speak it?”—Harry Potter in Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets
“The method of active imagination … is not a plaything for children.”—Carl Jung

Late Antiquity’s definitive text on divination, sacrifice, and spirit possession must have been missing from the library at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry, or left unread. For if Harry Potter and his friends had
studied Iamblichus’ De Mysteriis,1 they would have understood what happened when Harry involuntarily moved across a room “as though he were
on castors” and spoke Parseltongue (snake language) to prevent a giant snake
from attacking a classmate.2 What remained a mystery to Harry, and made
him suspect in the eyes of his classmates, is explained by Iamblichus as a
form of divination, for which, he says, “the more simple and the young have
a greater aptitude.”3 He also explains that the causes of divine possession are
lights and spirits that descend from gods. When they penetrate us, he says,
we are entirely under their domination and control: “[T]hey surround everything in us and completely expel our own thinking and movement, speaking words that are not understood by those who pronounce them.” 4 Harry’s
disturbing sensation of being involuntarily moved and spoken through was
an experience of otherness and displacement that was quite familiar to antiquity’s theurgists.

* I would like to thank Peter Durigon and Richard Frankel for their comments and questions. Most especially thanks to Dan Merkur for his editorial suggestions; all flaws and errors in
the essay are my own.
1. The standard edition is E. des Places, Jamblique: Les mystères d’Égypte (Paris: Les Belles
Lettres, 1966). It will be cited as DM with the Parthey pagination supplied in des Places’ text.
2. J.K. Rowling, Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets (London: Bloomsbury, 1998) 145–
46.
3. DM 157,16–20.
4. DM 117,4–7.
Dionysius, Vol. XXI, Dec. 2003, 53–88.

54

GREGORY SHAW

Explanations cannot remove the terror of being invaded and possessed by
an invisible presence, but they do provide a theoretic context to help contain
the trauma of such events. In the De Mysteriis Iamblichus not only provides
an outline of ecstasies and states of spirit possession, he also provides guidance to distinguish true possession from false and outlines an itinerary for
those who are attracted, or forced, to experience such mysteries. In the following essay I will examine the role of ecstasy and possession in Iamblichus’
theurgic itinerary and explore how his doctrines on the embodied soul and
his theurgic practices allowed theurgists to contain these radical shifts in
consciousness and—by enduring them—to deepen their spiritual practice.
In this regard, I will conclude by comparing Iamblichus’ theurgical practices
to contemporary dreamwork, specifically to disciplines that employ Carl
Jung’s practice of active imagination.
I. ECSTASY AND THEURGIC DIVINATION
The De Mysteriis, Iamblichus’ masterwork on theurgy, was written in response to a series of questions posed by his former teacher, Porphyry. This
exchange, which occurred sometime between 280 and 300,5 not only reflects fundamental differences in their respective spiritual itineraries, it also
reveals critical issues concerning the role and significance of ritual for all
thinkers in Late Antiquity.6 The methods adopted by Iamblichus incorporated traditional forms of divination and sacrifice that Porphyry deemed
unworthy of a philosopher. Drawing support from Plotinus’ evocative portrayals of an essentially undescended human soul, Porphyry challenged the
necessity and legitimacy of performing traditional rites. He posed a series of
pointed questions to which Iamblichus replied at length, explaining the science of sacrifice and divination, and chastising Porphyry for his spiritual and
philosophical ineptitude. Iamblichus called traditional rituals “theurgy”
(qeourgi/a), borrowing a term from second-century Chaldeans to designate
the “work of god” (e0/rgon qeou=)7 and to distinguish this work from merely
human rituals and especially from the work of sorcerers.
At the heart of the disagreement between these leading Platonists was the
question that faced young Harry Potter or anyone who suffers the profound
disruption of being possessed: What happened to me? How can I speak
5. Iamblichi Chalcidensis: In Platonis Dialogos Commentariorum Fragmenta, ed. with trans.
and commentary by John Dillon (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1973) 18; Emma C. Clarke, Iamblichus’ De
Mysteriis: A Manifesto of the Miraculous (Burlington, VT: Ashgate Press, 2001) 6–7.
6. Naomi Janowitz, Icons of Power: The Pragmatics of Ritual in Late Antiquity (University
Park: Penn State Press, 2002) 5–12.
7. Hans Lewy, Chaldean Oracles and Theurgy, ed. by M. Tardieu (Paris: Etudes Augustiniennes,
1978) 461–66.

CONTAINING ECSTASY: THE STRATEGIES OF IAMBLICHEAN THEURGY

55

languages I do not know? How did I do things I did not choose to do? The
answer, both Platonists knew, was to be found in the uniquely powerful
experience of ecstasy, an experience rejected by Porphyry and embraced by
Iamblichus. Literally meaning “to stand outside oneself ” or to be removed
from oneself, ecstasy (e0/kstasij) describes the eclipse of personality that
occurred to all theurgists of Late Antiquity. For Iamblichus, ecstasy was required for making legitimate contact with the gods, so Porphyry’s remarks
about it and Iamblichus’ response are of critical importance for understanding the role of ritual among later Platonists.
Porphyry’s critique of ecstasy and divination (mantikh/) follows two trajectories familiar to late antique philosophers. He suggests, on the one hand,
that the source of mantikh/ is entirely human, the result of disturbances in
the soul or, more positively, the inductive art of dream interpreters or astrologers.8 On the other hand, Porphyry suggests that mantikh/ and the states
of possession accompanying it are caused by evil daimones.9 In either case
divination is, at best, a human skill or folly and, at worst, the misguided
attempt to attract the influence of demonic powers. Although Iamblichus
argues extensively and coherently against both the human and demonic interpretations, theurgy has been understood almost exclusively in these
Porphyrian categories. Augustine, who accepted Porphyry’s definition, condemned theurgy as a form of demon worship, and after the fifth century the
Church characterized theurgical mantikh/ as a demonic practice, one of the
dark arts.10 Until recently, classical scholars have followed Porphyry’s other
trajectory, explaining theurgy as a form of superstition and folly; they have
contrasted the irrationalism of Iamblichus with the preferred rational mysticism of Plotinus who disdained the divinational practices that Iamblichus
embraced.11
According to Iamblichus, theurgical mantikh/ requires the human soul to
be eclipsed by the descending god, but for Porphyry e0/kstasij was merely a
symptom of psychic illness. The diviner’s consciousness is not eclipsed by a
god but by an irrational passion or delirium that replaces his own mind with

8. DM 158,3–10; 158,13–16; 278,15–18. Porphyry’s letter is reproduced in the De Mysteriis
and will be cited according to des Places’ text.
9. DM 179,13–15. Iamblichus replies that this is opinion “of the atheists” (i.e., Christians)
and is not worth addressing. See J. Carlier, “Science divine et raison humaine,” Divination et
Rationalité, ed. by J.P. Vernant (Paris: Éditions du Seuil, 1975) 252–54.
10. Augustine, City of God, Book 10. It would be more accurate to say that the Church
considered its own rituals to be the acts of god (qeourgi/a), while rites performed outside
ecclesiatical authority were considered demonic.
11. The most articulate spokesman for this view was E.R. Dodds, The Greeks and the Irrational (Berkeley: U of California Press, 1941/1949) 238–311, esp. 288.

56

GREGORY SHAW

an inferior mental state.12 Ecstatic possession, Porphyry says, is a delusion
like that caused by an “excess of black bile, the aberrations of drunkenness,
and the raging fury caused by rabid dogs.”13 Porphyry’s etiology draws from
cultural associations far different from our own, but his reduction of ecstatic
states to causes found in psychic or chemical imbalance is entirely consistent
with our current psychiatric manuals which employ terms like “depersonalization disorder” or “dissociative identity disorder” to describe the eclipsing
of the self that occurs in ecstasy.14
Iamblichus recognizes the aberrations associated with some forms of ecstasy but distinguishes these from the theurgic. He explains:
From the beginning it is necessary to divide ecstasy into two species: some are turned
toward the inferior [and some reach up to the superior]; some are filled with foolishness
and delirium, but others impart goods more honorable than human wisdom. Some
degenerate to a disorderly, confused, and material movement, but others give themselves to the cause that rules over the order of the cosmos. The former are separated
from understanding because they are deprived of knowledge, but the latter are separated from understanding because they are attached to Beings that transcend all human
understanding. The former are unstable, the latter unchangeable; the first are counter
to nature (para\ fu/sin), the latter are beyond nature (u9per th\n fu/sin); the former
make the soul descend, the latter raise it up; and while the former entirely separate the
soul from a share in the divine, the latter connect the soul with the divine.15

Iamblichus’ distinctions were surely familiar to Porphyry since they elaborate the distinction already made by Plato in the Phaedrus. “There are two
kinds of madness (mani/a),” Socrates says, “one resulting from human illness, the other from a divine disruption of our codes of conduct.”16 Plato
suggested an etymological link between mani/a and mantikh/ and argued
that divine mani/a comes from the gods and is superior to reasoning, which
comes from men.17 In the De Mysteriis Porphyry is portrayed like the “merely
clever” man of the Phaedrus, using human reason, while Iamblichus—under
the pseudonym of an Egyptian seer Abamon—assumes the role of wise spokesman for theurgy, the qei=a mani/a of the fourth century.18

12. DM 158,4–7.
13. DM 158,7–10.
14. Quick Reference to the Diagnostic Criteria from DSM-IV-TR (Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association, 2000) 240–41.
15. DM 158,11–159,6.
16. Phaed. 265a,9–11.
17. Phaed. 244d,3–5.
18. Phaed. 244d,1–4. Iamblichus goes so far as to employ Plato’s term: qei=a mani/a, to
characterize theurgic mantikh/ (DM 117,1).

CONTAINING ECSTASY: THE STRATEGIES OF IAMBLICHEAN THEURGY

57

While acknowledging that many forms of ecstasy are precisely as Porphyry has described, Iamblichus contrasts them with ecstasies that lift the
soul above nature (u9per fu/sin),19 attach us to beings that transcend human
understanding, and unite the soul with the gods. From Iamblichus’ point of
view, Porphyry was not only ill-informed concerning the details of ecstatic
practices, he was ignorant of their purpose so asked questions about their
material and mundane aspects while overlooking their essential function. To
Porphyry’s request that he explain how divination could foresee the future,
Iamblichus sharply replies:
What you seek to learn is impossible! For you think—following the sense of your question—that prognosis is something that can be developed, something that exists among
things in nature. But it doesn’t belong to the generated world, nor is it effected by a
physical change, nor is it an artifice invented to improve our life. It is not a human work
at all but divine and supernatural and sent down to us from heaven.20

For Iamblichus, ecstatic mantikh/ has only one purpose: to deify the soul,
so Porphyry’s interest in foreknowledge is misdirected; knowledge of the
future is merely incidental to divination, or irrelevant.21 The sole purpose of
mantikh/ is to unite the soul with the gods, something that human reason
cannot do. Iamblichus explains: “Only divine mantikh/ unites us with the
Gods, for it genuinely gives us a share in the divine life; it shares in prognosis
and divine intellections and makes us truly divine.”22
While Porphyry imagines mantikh/ as a human art designed to improve
our existence, Iamblichus sees it as a supernatural gift of the gods, bestowed
only upon those prepared to receive the divine efflux. Iamblichus, therefore,

19. Its cognate, u9perfu/hj, is accurately translated as “supernatural,” but the Iamblichean
supernatural should not be confused with its later Christian expression. As a Pythagorean,
Iamblichus’ u9perfu/hj was never removed from nature but was invisibly present in it as its
principle. Indeed, material nature is rooted in the immaterial even as it unfolds its powers into
temporal reality. I therefore disagree with A.H. Armstrong’s characterization of u9perfu/hj because he interprets its use by Iamblichus through the lens of the Christian myth, reading back
into Iamblichus’ Pythagorean metaphysics a decidedly Christian understanding of the “supernatural” with all its metaphysical and social consequences (A.H. Armstrong, “Iamblichus and
Egypt,” Les Etudes philosophiques 2–3 [1987]: 186–87). See my remarks on the Christian and
Pythagorean uses of u9perfu/hj in Shaw, “Neoplatonic Theurgy and Dionysius the Areopagite,”
Journal of Early Christian Studies 7:4 (1999): 595–99.
20. DM 100,1–9.
21. Knowledge of the future was not essential to theurgic mantikh/. Iamblichus says: “Whenever it is necessary for the soul to exercise virtue, and ignorance of the future contributes to this,
the Gods conceal the things that will happen in order to make the soul better” (DM 289,17–
290,1).
22. DM 289,3–6.

58

GREGORY SHAW

dismisses all forms of human divination as “false and deceptive”23 while “the
divine kind of divination” precedes our very existence and engages “a certain
divine good pre-established as more ancient (presbu/teran) than our nature.”24 To participate in this “more ancient” presence through ecstatic
mantikh/ is to become possessed by the god, a condition that Iamblichus
says should not be confused with any kind of human accomplishment or
even daimonically inspired thought. “For if one is truly possessed,” he says,
“human thinking is not stirred and the inspiration (e0pipnoi/a) comes not
from daimones but from the Gods.”25 In a state of enthusiasm the soul is
lifted into the god and transformed into a vehicle (o0/xhma) or organ
(o0/rganon) of the deity.26
How does the soul enter this condition and become possessed? Iamblichus
tells Porphyry that he will never grasp this unless he enacts the rites himself,27 for theurgy can be understood only through practical experience. It is,
in fact, a central thesis of Iamblichus that Porphyry and other Greek philosophers had become far too cerebral and conceptually oriented to be able
to understand this ancient practice. According to Iamblichus, the Greeks
had become masters of discursive complexities and subtle philosophic terminology, but at a high cost. In their attraction to the latest intellectual
fashions they became spiritually shallow and lacked the depth and stability
to recognize—let alone contain—the power of theurgic rites.28 This,
Iamblichus believed, was because the Greeks presumed themselves intellectually self-sufficient and had forgotten the divine presence that pre-exists in
the soul. It is only by entering this pre-conceptual level, however, that the
soul may recover its connection with the presence “more ancient” than
thought, and an intellectual like Porphyry was unlikely to understand this.
For the theurgist, it is not what we know, it is not our thinking that unites us

23. DM 165,2–3.
24. DM 165,18–19.
25. DM 114,7–9.
26. DM 109,13; 115,3–7; 157,8–15.
27. DM 6,7–8; 114,3–5.
28. See Iamblichus’ tirade against the Greeks and his praise of ancient barbarian practices
(DM VII,5). The sixth-century Neoplatonist Damascius, who followed Iamblichus’ teachings,
reiterates this critique: “I have indeed chanced upon some who are outwardly splendid philosophers in their rich memory of a multitude of theories; in the shrewd flexibility of their countless
syllogisms; in the constant power of their extraordinary perceptiveness. Yet within they are poor
in matters of the soul and destitute of true knowledge” (my emphasis). Damascius, The Philosophical History (frag.14), text, trans. and commentary by Polymnia Athanassiadi (Athens: Apamea
Cultural Association, 1999).

CONTAINING ECSTASY: THE STRATEGIES OF IAMBLICHEAN THEURGY

59

with the gods but our capacity to enter states of not-knowing receptivity: an
almost impossible task for those who pride themselves on intellectual sophistication.29
Iamblichus’ critique of Porphyry’s intellectual approach makes it clear
that theurgy was not something one could conceptually grasp; it was transmitted only in the experience of those who performed the rites and had,
themselves, become vehicles of the gods. Knowledge was nevertheless important for theurgists. Apart from knowing the order and mechanics of the
ritual process, the theurgist required an acute awareness of his or her impulse
to direct the outcome of the ritual, for it was precisely this impulse that
could subvert the work. Iamblichus explains:
Divine possession is not a human action nor does its power rest in human attributes or
actions, for these are otherwise receptively disposed, and the God uses them as instruments (o0rga/noij). The God completes the entire work of divination by himself, and
being separated from other things and unmixed—with neither the soul nor the body
being moved at all—the God acts by himself.… But whenever the soul takes the initiative or is moved during the rite or the body interrupts and disturbs the divine harmony,
the divinations become turbulent and false and the divine possession is no longer true
nor genuinely divine.30

The specific skill required of the theurgist is the ability to enter a state of
quiet receptivity—like the primal matter that receives the Forms31—and to
surrender every impulse that would pre-empt the god’s orchestration of the
rite. As long as the soul attempts to direct or take the initiative, the divination reflects only the impulses of the soul, or worse: it attracts like-minded
and impulsive spirits. Iamblichus insists that rituals of ecstatic possession
require long training and perseverance, and those who neglect such preparations fail to accomplish anything.32 Those who recklessly perform these rites,
he says, “become wicked and unholy, glutted with undisciplined pleasures,
filled with evil, and affect habits foreign to the Gods.”33

29. This may be why Iamblichus and theurgical Neoplatonism remain elusive subjects,
especially for those who find themselves described in Iamblichus’ tirade against the Greeks.
30. DM 115,3–15; see also the translation and explanation by E. Clarke, op. cit., 71.
31. See Timaeus 49a–b; 52a for the receptacle as a “space” (xw/ra) that receives and transmits the Forms. At DM 86.6 the verbal cognate xwrei=n is used to describe how theurgists
“receive” the light of the gods; cf. 87,7; 125,7; 173,5 all in reference to receiving the gods or
divine power in a divinational context. See E.C. Clarke for references to xwrei=n and discussion, op. cit., 86, n.4. Cf. G. Shaw, Theurgy and the Soul (University Park, PA: Penn State Press)
55.
32. DM 131,3–132,2.
33. DM 177,1–4.

60

GREGORY SHAW

Those who successfully persevere develop the capacity (e0pithdeio/thj)
to become vehicles of the god,34 and theurgists can discern both the deity
who possesses—by its effects on the soul—and the degree to which the soul
is held by the god. Iamblichus says:
For either the God possesses us, or we become wholly the property of the God, or we
act in common with him. Sometimes we participate in the last power of the God,
sometimes in the middle power, and sometimes in the final power. And of these
enthusiasms, sometimes it is a bare participation, sometimes a communion, and sometimes even union.35

Emma C. Clarke has noted the parallels between these degrees of possession and the stages of prayer discussed by Iamblichus in the De Mysteriis V,
26.36 Iamblichus distinguishes three levels of prayer with each degree expressing an increasing intensity of communion with the gods. The first stage
is called “gathering together” which establishes contact with and awareness
of the gods. The second stage, called “binding together,” brings the soul into
a common mind with the gods and provides divine gifts even before we
think of them. The third and highest stage is called “ineffable union” which
establishes all power in the gods and allows the soul to rest in them perfectly.37 Iamblichus then describes the benefits of prayer: “The time we spend
in prayer nourishes our intuitive mind, greatly enlarges the soul’s receptacle
(u9podoxh\n) for the Gods … and accustoms our eyes to the flashing of
divine light.”38
Prayer, therefore, plays an essential role in a divinational itinerary.
Theurgists must present the gods with a receptacle both subtle and strong
enough to contain their light, for only with a properly prepared receptacle
does the soul have the capacity (e0pithdeio/thj) to experience the divine
efflux without distortion.
With this ecstatic capacity developed, theurgists used various forms of
sacrifice and divination to enter into communion with the gods. Each soul
performed rites commensurate to its capacity, and Iamblichus outlines an
itinerary of worship from material to immaterial rites corresponding to the
different capacities of souls to receive the divine light. In every case, however, it is not our thinking that initiates contact with the gods but the gods
34. On the role of e0pitheio/thj in theurgy, see Shaw, Theurgy and the Soul 87.
35. DM 111,9–15.
36. Clarke, op. cit., 93, n.76.
37. DM 237,16–238,6; See John Dillon, “‘A Kind of Warmth’: Some Reflections on the
Concept of ‘Grace’ in the Neoplatonic Tradition,” The Passionate Intellect: Essays on the Transformation of Classical Tradition (London: Transaction Publications, 1995) 331.
38. DM 238,15–239,2.

CONTAINING ECSTASY: THE STRATEGIES OF IAMBLICHEAN THEURGY

61

themselves awakening the older (presbu/teran) presence in the soul. Referred to by Iamblichus as “the one of the soul,” 39 “another principle of the
soul,”40 or “the one in us,”41 this divine presence is connected with the soul’s
“innate knowledge” (e0/mfutoj gnw=sij)42 of the gods and exists prior to
self-consciousness. For Iamblichus, this divine element reveals itself in our
“essential desire (e0fe/sij) for the Good,”43 a desire which the Chaldean Oracles say is implanted in us by the Demiurge prior to our embodiment.44
The most spectacular possession in the De Mysteriis describes entranced
subjects who become insensitive to fire, to water, and to knife wounds because they no longer “live a human or animal life … but have taken in exchange a more divine life from which they are inspired and perfectly possessed.”45 This dramatic possession exemplifies what occurs in every theurgic
ecstasy: the soul, having attained a sufficiently receptive state, takes in the
power of the god and is made other to itself, indicated in Iamblichus’ use of
the verb a0lla/ssw in middle voice, meaning “to be made other,” “altered,”
or “take in exchange.” In a divine ecstasy and possession, Iamblichus says:
“The soul is entirely separated from those things that bind it to the generated world. It flies from the inferior and exchanges (a0lla/ttetai) one life
for another, having entirely abandoned its former existence.”46
Among the most objectionable theurgic practices to Porphyry was chanting the names of barbarian gods or unintelligible sounds. Yet, for Iamblichus
it was precisely the strangeness of these names that made them valuable.
“This very unknowableness,” he says, “is its most venerable aspect, for it is
too excellent to be divided into knowledge.”47 Preserved by ancient theurgists,
these invocations awaken the “deep eros” seeded by the Demiurge and lift
the soul into the activity of the gods. “At the moment of prayer,” Iamblichus
says, “the divine itself is truly joined with itself, and it is not as one person
speaking with another that the God shares in the thoughts expressed in
39. In Phaedrum 6; Iamblichi Chalcidensis, trans. by Dillon, 96–97.
40. DM 270,9.
41. DM 46,13.
42. DM 7,14
43. DM 8,1–2.
44. They refer to a “deep desire” (baqu/j e0/rwj) implanted in souls by the Creator to stir
our desire for him. Chaldean Oracles, frag. 43, text, trans. and commentary by Ruth Majercik
(Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1989).
45. DM 110,5–111,2.
46. DM 270,15–19.
47. DM 255, 12–14; cf. 42,9–14: “[An invocation] does not, as the name seems to indicate, incline the intellect of the Gods to men, but according to the truth … the invocation
make the intelligence of men fit (e0pithdei/an) to participate in the Gods, elevates it to the
Gods, and harmonizes it with them through orderly persuasion.”

62

GREGORY SHAW

prayer.”48 To invoke the ancient names of the gods does not call the divine to
us but awakens the “one in the soul” so that the god reunites with itself
through us. The soul’s role in this theurgic union requires a receptive capacity
to contain the divine power and allow the “one in us” to awaken the soul
from the slumber of habitual self-consciousness. Exchanging “one identity
for another” (a0lla/ttetai)—human for divine—the soul then becomes a
vehicle for the will and the activity of the gods. Without this receptivity and
the ekstasis of habitual self-consciousness no theurgy was possible.
Despite Iamblichus’ emphasis on ecstatic self-displacement, when the
divine lights descend a residual awareness may follow what happens. In several rites of divination, which Iamblichus describes as techniques of “light
gathering” (fwtagwgi/a), the soul remains aware while its imagination
becomes filled with light and moved by the will of the gods. He explains:
This [light-gathering] occurs in two ways: either the Gods are present in the soul or
they shine an advance light from themselves into the soul. In each case, the divine
presence and the illumination are both separate [from our control]. The attention and
awareness of the soul follow what happens since the divine light does not touch them,
but the imagination is divinely inspired for it is stirred into modes of imagination from
the Gods, not from itself, and it is utterly changed from what is ordinarily human.49

Of the two kinds of possession: conscious or unconscious, Iamblichus
says the “more perfect” occurs “when the sound mind follows the events,”
attending to the visual and auditory images inspired by the gods.50 Consistent with this distinction is Iamblichus’ reply to a question about dream divination where he says that theurgic, or god-sent dreams come not when we
are unconscious but when we are “between waking and sleeping,” that is, in
a hypnagogic state.51 This “in-between” awareness is conscious but not active, it perceives but does not analyze or evaluate, and while being extensive
it does not focus on specific objects or exert its will.
What kind of awareness is this? For theurgists of Late Antiquity it is both
the awareness necessary to receive the gods in ecstatic mantikê and—in its
most developed form—the awareness needed to perceive the divine Intelligible. Fragment 1 of the Chaldean Oracles states:
48. DM 47,9–11.49.
49. DM 133,19–134,8.
50. DM 104,10–11, trans. by E. Clarke (83). Clarke (83–86) has carefully examined this
distinction in the De Mysteriis and has demonstrated its importance for understanding how
Iamblichus conceived of theurgic possession, including his differences with Proclus and Plotinus
on the role of self-consciousness in one’s contact with the divine. For unconscious possession see
DM 109,16–110,2.
51. DM 103,13. See Clarke, op. cit., 81.

CONTAINING ECSTASY: THE STRATEGIES OF IAMBLICHEAN THEURGY

63

There exists a certain Intelligible which you must perceive with the flower of mind. But
if you turn your mind to it and perceive it as a specific thing you will not perceive it….
You must not perceive that Intelligible with vehement effort but with the extended
flame of an outstretched mind that measures all things except that Intelligible. I ask you
to perceive this in a simple and direct way: bring back the sacred eye of your soul and
extend an empty mind into that Intelligible to know it, for it exists outside the grasp of
mind.52

For Iamblichus, the abstract speculations of philosophy converge with the
practice of theurgic divination, for in his commentary on Plato’s Parmenides
he reiterates these restrictions and emphasizes even more than the Oracles
our inability to grasp the Intelligible. Iamblichus says:
Neither by opinion, nor by discursive reasoning, nor by the intellectual element of the
soul nor by intellection accompanied by reason is the Intelligible to be comprehended,
nor yet is it to be grasped by the perfect contemplation of the intellect, nor by the
flower of the intellect, nor is it knowable by a mental effort at all, neither along the lines
of a definite striving, or by a grasping, or by any means such as this ….” 53

For Iamblichus, philosophic reflection can never grasp the Intelligible but it
can lead the soul to a profound and creative aporia that culminates in theurgic
union.54 No longer distracted by abstract formulations or the seductions of
discursive thought, our “sacred eye” turns back to its deeper affinity with the
gods. Yet this contact with the divine occurs only with an ecstatic exchange
that transforms our imagination into an organ of the god while the soul—
with empty mind—follows the visions and witnesses the divine reunions.
Iamblichus’ philosophic commentaries are therefore not at odds with his
theurgic practice but play an essential role in preparing the soul for theurgy.
If, as Iamblichus maintained, an excessive dependence on thinking alienates
us from the gods, it is essential to engage our discursive capacity in order to
address this. Iamblichus’ doctrines on the embodied soul, therefore, form an
important part of his philosophic and theurgic itinerary, and his disagreement with Porphyry on the status of the soul directly reflects their disagreement concerning theurgy.
52. Chaldean Oracles frag. 1, text, trans. and commentary by Ruth Majercik (Leiden: Brill,
1989). I have drawn from Majercik’s translation as well as from Sara Rappe’s; see Rappe, Reading Neoplatonism: Non-discursive Thinking in the Texts of Plotinus, Proclus, and Damascius (New
York: Cambridge U Press, 2000) 224.
53. In Parm. frag. 2A, translation by Dillon (modified slightly) in Iamblichi Chalcidensis,
op. cit., 209. Dillon (300) explains that the contradiction concerning the capacity of the flower
of the mind with the fragment from the Oracles is “more apparent than real, and … depends
on the text which Iamblichus is commenting on in each instance.”
54. See Shaw, “After Aporia: Theurgy in Later Platonism,” The Journal of Neoplatonic Studies V.1 (1996): 3–41.

64

GREGORY SHAW

II. EMBODIMENT AS SELF-ALIENATION
In the De Mysteriis Iamblichus reprimands Porphyry for posing questions
about the gods and theurgy as if they could be explained conceptually. Even
Porphyry’s initial concession that the gods exist 55 is considered inappropriate since it implies that the existence of the gods could be questioned and
examined in the style of a philosophic exercise. This is not possible, Iamblichus
says, “[because] an innate knowledge (e0/mfutoj gnw=sij) of the Gods exists
in our very essence, and it is superior to all judgment and choice and prior to
reasoning and logical demonstration.”56 Iamblichus criticizes Porphyry for
applying contrary and logically opposed terms to the gods, for they cannot
be understood “by opinion or any deductive reasoning process”57 but only
by participation in their undivided sameness. Iamblichus continues:
You seem to think that the same knowledge exists for divine things as for any other sort
of thing, and that one may deduce some part of the answer from contraries, as is the
habit in dialectical propositions. But there is no resemblance whatsoever! For knowledge of the Gods is completely different and is removed from all opposition; it does not
subsist by our granting that it exists now or will exist, but from eternity it has uniformly
co-existed in the soul.58

While granting that Iamblichus writes in a polemical tone and is eager to
take advantage of Porphyry’s questions to further his arguments, there is a
profound difference in their in their views of philosophy and the spiritual
life. In Iamblichus’ estimation, Porphyry was wedded to habits of discursive
reason that are dangerously misleading if one does not recognize their limitations. Iamblichus’ critique of the Greeks for their shallowness and instability—always shifting from one side of an argument to another—is an apt
description of the soul caught in the dyadic oppositions of discursive thought,
and Iamblichus clearly thinks that Porphyry fits the description. There is
some irony in this, because Porphyry’s master Plotinus was well aware of
how discursive thinking counterfeits intelligible realities. Discussing this in
his treatise on intelligible beauty, Plotinus says:
… you can explain the reason why the earth is in the middle, and round, and why the
ecliptic slants as it does; but it is not because you can do this that things are so…the
[beauty of the world] is not the result of following out a train of logical consequences
and purposive thought: it is prior to consequential and purposive thinking, for all this
comes later ….59
55. DM 7,12.
56. DM 7,13–16.
57. DM 9,14.
58. DM 10,1–9.
59. Ennead V.8.7. 37–43, trans. by Armstrong (modified slightly). Those who are satisfied

CONTAINING ECSTASY: THE STRATEGIES OF IAMBLICHEAN THEURGY

65

The priority of the Intelligible, Plotinus argues, is accessible to us only by
freeing ourselves from the lure of discursive thinking and entering a state
that no longer sees one thing after another, i.e., discursively, but sees “all
together at once” as do Egyptian wise men who enter the “non-discursiveness of the intelligible world” through the images engraved in their temples.60 Sounding very much like Iamblichus, Plotinus says that this intelligible knowing “exists before research and before reasoning”61 and he insists that
we engage it through the soul’s “more ancient, unperceived desire (e0/fe/sij)
of the Good.” 62
Plotinus’ descriptions of being lifted by this desire into union with the
One are among the most arresting mystical testimonies of antiquity or of
any age.63 The result was a divine dissociation which estranged Plotinus
from his embodied self, for after dwelling in the divine realm he says: “Then
after that rest in the divine, when I have come down from Intellect to discursive reasoning, I am puzzled how I could, even now, descend, and how my
soul has come to be in the body.”64
Plotinus’ response to these experiences was Platonically unorthodox but
poetically compelling. He imagined himself to have two identities: one in
the body, the “inferior companion,” 65 and the other, his true self, outside
the body in the intelligible world. Plotinus proposed that “our soul does not
altogether come down, but there is always something of it in the Intelligible,”66 and he shared the intensity of this divine identity with his students,
inviting them to experience their “head in heaven,” “illuminating” the body
from above.67 Porphyry attended the seminars of Plotinus, whom he revered
as an enlightened sage, and was deeply moved by his master’s evocations of
divine experience.68 Yet these poetic images were received by Porphyry, if not
by Plotinus himself, as doctrine, and it is with the doctrine of an undescended
soul that Iamblichus disagreed. The specifics of Iamblichus’ psychology are
with descriptions of intelligible reality, Plotinus says, are “like people at [religious] festivals who
by their gluttony stuff themselves with things which it is not lawful for those going in to the
Gods to take, thinking that these are more obviously real than the vision of the God” (Enn.
V.11.12–15, trans. by Armstrong, modified).
60. Ennead V.8.6.8–9; on Plotinus’ critique of discursive thinking see Rappe, 104.
61. Ennead V.8.6.18–19.
62. Ennead V.5.12.17–19; cf. the soul’s “essential desire (e0fe/sij) for the Good” (DM 8.1–
2).
63. Ennead VI.7.35.20–28.
64. Ennead IV.8.1.8–10
65. Ennead I.2.6.28.
66. Ennead IV.8.8.2–4.
67. Ennead IV.3.12.5–6; I.1.12.25–29.
68. See Porphyry’s adoring comments in his Life of Plotinus 13.

66

GREGORY SHAW

detailed and complex, but the difference between Plotinus and Iamblichus
on the soul’s status may be characterized quite simply: what Plotinus came to
identify with as his own undescended soul, Iamblichus left as the property of the
gods to be received—in ecstatic exchange—in theurgic ritual.
Porphyry appropriated Plotinus’ rhapsodic testimony as fact; he assumed
that the soul and the Intellect were essentially identical and, consequently,
the philosopher’s task was simply to withdraw into himself, to return “alone,
through himself, to God alone.”69 Divinational rites and sacrifices were still
useful, but only as a means to purify the lower (inferior) soul and were eventually discarded because they kept the soul bound to daimones who feed off
the vapors of blood sacrifice. Expressing an attitude that is the antithesis of
Iamblichus’ position, Porphyry says: “In every respect, the philosopher is the
savior of himself.”70
The hubris and impiety that Iamblichus recognized in Greek intellectuals could not find a clearer expression. In contrast, Iamblichus paints a picture of the human soul that emphasizes our difference from the gods: “The
human race is weak and small, it sees but little and is possessed by a congenital nothingness … when compared to the divine, the human race is ugly, of
no value, a mere toy.”71 Iamblichus strongly objected to the notion of an
undescended soul and argued that the soul comes down completely and is
confined to the single form of its physical body.72 In the De Anima, Iamblichus
criticizes those who disregard the ontological distinction between the soul
and the gods. Discussing the soul’s essence (ou0si/a), he says:
There are some who maintain that all parts of this essence are one and the same, so that
the whole exists in any part of it. They even place in the individual soul the Intelligible
World, Gods, Daimones, the Good, and all Races superior to the soul …. According to
this view, the soul, considered in its entire essence, is in no way different from the
Intellect, the Gods and the Superior Races.73

Iamblichus says that Numenius held this opinion, while Plotinus was drawn
to it and the unstable Porphyry sometimes rejected it, sometimes revered
it.74 Iamblichus, however, maintained that because of its mediating function
in the cosmos, the human soul, although divine, has the burden of identify69. Porphyry, On the Abstinence from Animal Food II.49.1 in Porphyre. De l’abstinence, text,
trans. and intro. by J. Bouffartique and M. Patillon (Paris: Les Belles Lettres, 1977).
70. Ibid. II.49.2
71. DM 144,12–14; 146,10–12.
72. DM 148,12–14; in his De Anima Iamblichus says individual souls are “confined to a
single form and divided out among bodies” (Stob. I.373,5–8).
73. Stobaeus I.365,7–21.
74. Ibid. I.365,14–21.

CONTAINING ECSTASY: THE STRATEGIES OF IAMBLICHEAN THEURGY

67

ing with a mortal life. Distinguishing the soul from superior races, Iamblichus
defines its essence as
either the mean (me/son) between divisible and indivisible, corporeal and incorporeal
beings; or the totality of the universal ratios (lo/goi); or that which, after the Forms,
serves the work of creation; or that Life which, having proceeded from the Intellect, has
life itself; or the procession of the classes of Real Being as a whole to an inferior status.75

Iamblichus believed that his definition accurately reflected Plato’s account
in the Timaeus (34c–36e) where the World Soul functions as a cosmogonic
mean that unites opposites in mathematical proportions (lo/goi). In the
case of human souls, however, the trauma of embodiment severs their continuity with the Forms and the divine lo/goi are unknowingly discharged
into the material world. Embodied souls lose awareness of this projection,
become self-alienated, and identify with a single mortal body; to deny this,
as the doctrine of the undescended soul seems to do, would deny to the soul
its cosmogonic and mediating function.76 For Iamblichus, the dividedness
and mortality of the embodied soul was not an error that could be erased by
spiritual insight, for embodiment was the expression of divine activity. To
escape from the body and the material world, therefore, was to forfeit one’s
participation in cosmogony. In Iamblichus’ psychology the condition of mortality and self-alienation constitute the soul’s very essence as human.
Iamblichus’ teachings on the soul were admired for their subtlety and
were often cited by later commentators. Priscian reports that according to
Iamblichus,
the soul is a mean (me/son), not only between the divided and undivided, the remaining
and the proceeding, the noetic and the irrational, but also between the ungenerated and
the generated…. Thus that which is immortal in the soul is filled completely with
mortality and no longer remains only immortal.77
75. Ibid. I.365,25–366,5; trans. by John Dillon, modified slightly, “Iamblichus of Chalcis,”
Aufsteig und Niedergang der Römischen Welt, Part II, 36.2 (New York: de Gruyter, 1987) 893.
This teaching, Iamblichus said, was shared by “Plato, Pythagoras, Aristotle, and all of the Ancients .…” (I.366,6–8).
76. It should be noted that Iamblichus characterized Plotinus’ position on the undescended
soul in a one-sided way, as if Plotinus defined each human being entirely by its unfallen essence,
but there are many passages of the Enneads that do not allow for this view. As Carlos Steel puts
it, “Plotinus always attempts to express simultaneously both the immanence and transendence
which constitute the relationship between the higher and the lower orders of being” (Steel, 31;
cf. 44–45). Plotinus says that the Intellect “is ours and not ours” (Enn. V,3,3,27–28), so there is
a tension and subtlety in Plotinus’ psychology that Iamblichus’ polemic does not take into
account. The author is indebted to Peter Durigon for pointing this out.
77. Simplicius [Priscian], In De Anima [DA] 89,33–37; 90,21–23. Carlos Steel has argued
persuasively that the author of the Simplicius commentary on Aristotle’s De Anima [CAG XI]

68

GREGORY SHAW

He adds that for Iamblichus although the soul is “self-alienated” in embodiment,78 it “can never become entirely self-alienated or it would cease to be
soul.”79 This identity-in-alienation, in which the soul’s immortality is accessible only in mortality, suggests the difficult and paradoxical nature of
Iamblichus’ teaching.
Because the embodied soul is not only alienated from the gods but from
its own divinity, all contact with the divine must come to it from “outside”
(e0/cwqen) itself,80 and this is why ecstasy was necessary for the soul to recover
its divinity. As self-alienated, the soul requires an exchange of identity to
recover its divine self: theurgic ecstasies, therefore, were visionary retrievals
of the divine lo/goi projected in the soul’s descent. Since these lo/goi become embedded in the orders of time and generation, the soul must recover
them in the form of symbols or tokens (sunqh/mata) drawn from the natural world and empowered by the gods.81 As these sunqh/mata are ritually
engaged, the self-alienation of the particular soul is gradually over-shadowed
by its identity with the Demiurge and the soul recovers the “totality of the
universal lo/goi” that it unknowingly projected (and lost) in its descent.
In every case, the effectiveness of the rite depends on the soul’s receptivity
to the sunqh/mata. This was not sheer passivity but a receptive capacity
(e0pithdei/othj) awakened and sustained by the soul’s awareness of its “nothingness” (ou0denei/a) when compared to the gods.82 Whether performing

was Priscian. See C. Steel, The Changing Self, trans. by E. Haasl (Brussels: Paleis der Academien,
1978) 16–20. For a recent argument against Steel’s view see Ilsetraut Hadot, “Simplicius or
Priscianus? On the Author of the Commentary on Aristotle’s De Anima (CAG XI): A Methodological Study,” trans. by Michael Chase, Mnemosyne LV (2002): 159–99.
78. [Priscian], De Anima 223,26.
79. Ibid. 241,10–11.
80. Throughout the De Mysteriis Iamblichus insists that the divine must enter the soul
“from without” (exôthen): 24,4; 30,16–19; 127,10; 167,2.
81. Sunqh/mata were embedded in the natural world and could be discovered in animals
or plants (DM 235,5–9; 136,6–10), incantations and concoctions (133,18), characters traced
on the ground (129,15–17), and in ineffable names chanted by theurgists (157,13-16). For
their origin in the context of second-century Platonism and the Chaldean Oracles, see Shaw,
Theurgy and the Soul, op. cit.,162–66.
82. DM 47,13–48,4. For a discussion of the importance of feeling one’s nothingness
(ou)denei/a), see Shaw, “After Aporia,” op. cit., 29–30. To Porphyry’s remark that divination
makes the soul passive, Iamblichus replies, “… on the contrary, it transforms us, who are subject to passivity due to our birth, into pure and unchangeable beings” (DM 42,2–5). Henry
Corbin sees the same distinction made in the visionary recitals of Muslim mystics who use the
metaphor of two kinds of “darkness” or “night” to describe the difference between the sheer
passivity of an enmattered soul and the developed receptivity of the visionary. Corbin speaks of
the “luminous Night of superconsciousness and the dark Night of unconsciousness” (The Man of
Light in Iranian Sufism [New Lebanon, NY: Omega Publications, 1994] 7).

CONTAINING ECSTASY: THE STRATEGIES OF IAMBLICHEAN THEURGY

69

animal sacrifices or the rare immaterial worship where theurgists “extend a
subtle flame of an outstretched and empty mind,” 83 all contact with the gods
was effected by means of this nothingness. If a receptacle was required to
contain the god, it was a receptacle defined by this emptiness, and its strength
was proportional to the depth of the soul’s longing for its lost divinity. In
turn, the soul’s possession was proportional to its ecstatic receptivity. By
giving up its willfulness and propensity to know and by identifying with its
poverty and emptiness, the Iamblichean soul reversed the alienating magnetism of its descent and offered the gods a receptacle (u9podokh\) vast enough
to contain them. Yet, Iamblichus reminds Porphyry, the soul’s only contribution to creating this vessel is the acute awareness of its deficiency. Explaining the role of this nothingness in theurgic prayer, Iamblichus says: “For the
awareness of our own nothingness (ou0denei/a), when we compare ourselves
to the Gods, makes us turn spontaneously to prayer, and from our supplication, in a short time we are led up to that one to whom we pray …”.84
One consequence of Iamblichus’ psychology is that there is no personal
immortality. As individuals, we must come to terms with our mortality and
recognize that self-consciousness is simply the awareness intrinsic to the soul’s
mediating function, but to recover our divinity the most we can do is to
recognize the depth of our longing for the divine and the utter hopelessness
of all plans or designs to reach it. Here the simple or the young may, indeed,
be more skilled than the intellectually brilliant who, like Iamblichus’ “Greeks,”
might find it difficult to accept the worthlessness (ou0denei/a) of their wisdom. The philosopher/theurgist of Iamblichus’ school must learn to exercise
his or her intellectual powers but, at the same time, keep them placed in a
deeper itinerary where discursive skills are used to limit the soul’s titanic
impulses 85 and to offer the gods a container. The soul meets the gods not as
an individual escaping from the cosmos but as an agent of cosmogenesis
through whom the gods express themselves in the soul’s theurgic activity,86 and
the specific faculty of the soul in which these theurgies occur is the
fantastiko/n, the soul’s power of imagination.
83. Chaldean Oracles Frag. 1, Majercik, op. cit.
84. DM 47,16–48,1.
85. Damascius discusses the titanic element in the soul in his commentary on the Phaedo.
See sections 1–9 in The Greek Commentaries on Plato’s Phaedo, ed. and trans. by L.G. Westerink,
vol. 2 (New York: 1977) 32–33. The limiting of the soul’s titanic impulses is portrayed in the
punishment inflicted on the Titans; their “shackles” (desmo/i) return the Titans (and the soul’s
titanic impulses) to the order of the gods.
86. The theurgic itinerary of Iamblichus reflects the erotic itinerary of Plato’s Symposium
where Eros, who combines poverty (peni/a) and resourcefulness (po/roj), leads souls into encounters with Beauty culminating in the soul’s participation in cosmogenesis: “The act of creation,” Diotima says, “is the one deathless and eternal element in our mortality” (206e7–8).

70

GREGORY SHAW

III. IMAGINATION AND THEURGIC EPIPHANIES
This power of imagination, which Iamblichus calls fantastiko/n or
fantasi/a, was instrumental in fixing the soul to a mortal body, through its
attraction to sensate images, and in leading the soul back to its collaboration
with the Demiurge in ecstatic visions. For Iamblichus, the fantastiko/n
has a dual function: it mirrors sensate phenomena and our concepts about
it, and it functions as a medium for the appearances (fa/smata) of the
gods. Iamblichus’ understanding of imagination (fantasi/a) is reported by
Priscian as follows:
[Imagination] rouses up images from sense perception to opinion and extends images
from Intellect down to opinion as it receives these images (fanta/smata) from
wholes.87 And imagination (fantasi/a) is uniquely characterized by this two-fold assimilation: as both producing and receiving likenesses that are appropriate, either to
intelligible powers or to materially generative powers, or to those in the middle, fitting
the outside with the inside and establishing the images that descend from the Intellect
upon the lives extending down around the body.88

As there are two kinds of ecstasy, so there are two kinds of fantasi/a, one
reflecting physical sensations, the other clothing intelligibles in visible images (fanta/smata). In the De Mysteriis, Iamblichus distinguishes the
fantasi/a of an individual soul from the fantasi/a received from the
gods. These “divine imaginations” (qei/a qantasi/ai), like god-sent dreams,
should not be confused with imaginations caused by human illness or conjecture,89 and just as the soul remains aware in the hypnagogic experience of
god-sent dreams, it also remains conscious during imaginative possessions.
Iamblichus says:
The attention and awareness of the soul follow what takes place since the divine light
does not possess them, but the imaginative faculty (fantastiko/n) is divinely inspired,
since it is awakened into modes of imagination that come from the Gods, not from
itself, and it is utterly removed from what is ordinarily human.90

Imagination is therefore the medium that effects both the soul’s attachment
to a body and its return to the gods, so theurgists had to become adept at
distinguishing merely human images from the variety of divine images.

87. From “wholes,” that is to say, from the noetic realm which is defined by undivided
unity.
88. Prisican, On Theophrastus’ On Sense Perception, trans. by Pamela Huby (Ithaca, NY:
Cornell U Press, 1997) 23,16–23 (translation modified slightly).
89. DM 160,8–12.
90. DM 133,3–8.

CONTAINING ECSTASY: THE STRATEGIES OF IAMBLICHEAN THEURGY

71

A method of discernment is clearly evident in Iamblichus’ catalogue of
divine appearances in the De Mysteriis II.3–9. To Porphyry’s question of how
theurgists distinguish among invisible entities, Iamblichus provides a diagnostic guide of appearances (fa/smata), describing in the following order:
gods, archangels, angels, daimones, heroes, souls, and archons. Employing
Aristotle’s principle that the activity (e0ne/rgeia) of an entity reveals the power
(du/namij) of its essence (ou0si/a), Iamblichus reads the fa/smata as indices
of their sources.91 He lists twenty criteria that distinguish each luminous
appearance in terms ranging from uniformity and brilliance, to beauty, magnitude, and stability: it is, in sum, a taxonomy of visionary light. For example, if the magnitude of an epiphany “covers the whole sky, the sun and the
moon, and the earth is no longer able to stand still” 92 this indicates that a
god has descended, but if the light is “more divided” and its magnitude
differs with each appearance, the entity is a daimon.93
In addition to purely descriptive criteria, Iamblichus also distinguishes
epiphanies according to their effects on the soul. To cite one example,
Iamblichus says:
At the moment of the epiphany, souls who invoke the Gods are lifted above their passions and their own habits are removed in exchange (e0chllagme/nhn)94 for a vastly
better and more perfect activity, and they participate in divine love (qei=on e0/rwta) and
experience amazing happiness.95

In contrast, when daimones appear, the soul reflects the influence of daimones
who draw invisible principles into particulars and “lead souls down into
nature.”96 Iamblichus explains:
When Daimones are seen, souls are filled with an urge toward the generated world, a
desire for nature and to fulfill the workings of fate, and they receive a power to complete these kinds of activities.97

Since contact with divinities is determined by the soul’s receptivity,
Iamblichus’ catalogue of epiphanies is as much an index of the imaginative
capacities of the soul as it is an index of divine attributes. And although
Iamblichus insists that the soul contributes nothing to ecstatic visions, it is
91. DM 70,12–13.
92. DM 75,12–15.
93. DM 76,1–3.
94. Iamblichus again uses the verb (e0c) + a0lla/sw to describe the ecstatic exchange of
human for divine.
95. DM 87,14–18.
96. DM 79,9–10. On the role of daimones in creation, see Shaw, Theurgy and the Soul 40.
97. DM 88,5–8.

72

GREGORY SHAW

clear that the theurgist’s fantastiko/n is an acutely sensitive instrument,
able to mirror 140 kinds of fa/smata corresponding to 140 receptive states.98
Yet, when Iamblichus refers to the invocations and appearances of gods we
should not understand him to mean that the theurgist commands them to
appear, for this would contradict the principle that superior orders are not
influenced by inferiors. Called or not called, the gods were never absent: the
theurgic art simply crystalized their invisible presence in a form corresponding to the receptive capacity of the soul.99
The visible appearance of the god required the cooperation of the theurgist
who clothed the epiphany in the subtle matter of imagination. As Iamblichus
puts it, the presence of the god “reveals the incorporeal as corporeal to the
eyes of the soul by means of the eyes of the body.”100 Proclus elaborates on
this point and explains the epiphanies as follows:
The Gods themselves are incorporeal but since those who see them possess bodies, the
visions which issue from the Gods to worthy recipients possess a certain quality from
the Gods who send them but also have something connatural with those who see them.
This is why the Gods are seen yet not seen at all. In fact, those who see the Gods witness
them in the luminous garments of their souls ….101 Each God is formless even if he is
seen with a form. For the form is not in him but comes from him because of the
incapacity of the viewer to see the formless without a form; rather, according to his
nature he sees by means of forms.102

The luminous garments of the soul refer to what Iamblichus calls our “vehicle of light” (au0goeide\j o0/xhma), created by the Demiurge and intimately
tied to the imagination.103 As the fantasi/a is gradually cleansed of the
alienating compulsions of sensate imagery, it becomes fit (e0pithdeio/thj)
to reflect the intelligible light of the gods, and it is in this body of light that
theurgists enter the activities of the gods.
It is important to recognize, however, that since the soul is embodied and
self-alienated its habits are determined by daimonic urges that attach the
soul’s divine lo/goi to material images, and it is this attachment that causes
the soul to suffer. The gradual cleansing of the imagination, therefore, must
address this pathology and allow souls to recover their lo/goi in the material
forms in which they are daimonically fixed. It was not possible to think one’s
98. Since Iamblichus outlines twenty criteria to distinguish seven invisible orders.
99. Henry Corbin accurately captures the divine role of the imagination among Persian
Neoplatonists. See H. Corbin, Creative Imagination in the Sufism of Ibn Arabi, trans. by Ralph
Mannheim (Princeton: Princeton U Press, 1969) 270.
100. DM 82,1–2.
101. Proclus, In Rem. Pub. II 39,5–11.
102. Ibid. II 39,28–40,4.
103. DM 132,11–13; 125,5–7; see Shaw, Theurgy and the Soul 221.

CONTAINING ECSTASY: THE STRATEGIES OF IAMBLICHEAN THEURGY

73

way out of this. It was not possible to escape the daimones or their effects,
for they manifested the divine will, the work of the Demiurge. To assume
that one could forego the material realm and go straight to the Intelligible
was a conceptual mirage that, in Iamblichus’ estimation, had lured Porphyry
and the Greeks away from a living and embodied engagement with the gods
and their daimones.
Iamblichus’ psychology of the completely descended soul provided a rationale that perfectly complemented his theurgic practice. This required that
the soul honor the divine powers that produce its material body and the
physical world. Because Porphyry believed that the essence of the human
soul is never embodied and never suffers the self-alienation described by
Iamblichus, it was not necessary to engage the gods in their material forms,
i.e., in the sunqh/mata of theurgy. If the soul is not truly embodied it does
not need to honor material daimones nor to undergo an ecstasy to recover
its divinity; it can simply “save itself,” as Porphyry put it, through contemplation. Iamblichus believed that to deny the soul’s self-alienation and embodiment, to seek transcendence without first recovering the logoi projected
into material nature, was an escapist fantasy. He tells Porphyry: “According
to the art of the priests, it is necessary to begin sacred rites from the material
Gods. For the ascent to the immaterial Gods will not otherwise take
place.”104 Souls that have not first coordinated themselves with the daimones
and gods of the material world cannot possibly contain the presence of the
intelligible gods. Without this preparation, Iamblichus says, “they will utterly fail to attain immaterial or material blessings.”105
In our fascination with the spiritual transcendence seen in the writings of
Plotinus and other Neoplatonists we have failed to appreciate the consequences of Iamblichus’ psychology. In its descent into a body, the soul is
fundamentally torn in pieces and distributed into the material world. This
psychic dismemberment requires rituals of recovery that answer to each kind
of rupture and embodied agony that the soul undergoes. Theurgic rites contain these traumas and allow the soul to gradually recover its divine body,
but the process must begin, Iamblichus insists, with the material gods who
preside over the suffering of all
… material phenomena: division, collision, impact, reaction, change, generation, and
the corruption of all material bodies … and in worship we offer what is appropriately
related to them. In the sacrifices, therefore, dead bodies and things deprived of life, the
blood of animals, the consumption of victims, their diverse changes and destruction,
and in short the breakdown of the matter offered to the Gods is fitting—not for the
Gods themselves, but for the matter over which they preside.106
104. DM 217,8–11.
105. DM 220,5.
106. DM 217,14–218,9.

74

GREGORY SHAW

And the matter over which these gods preside includes the material forms
and daimonic patterns whose shape the soul’s lo/goi have assumed. In effect, the blood and consumption of animals, the dead bodies, and the “breakdown of matter offered to the gods” all reflect the degree to which the soul
has become identified with the fate of generated lives. And as these lives are
offered back to the gods, the divine lo/goi of the soul attached to them are
recovered, allowing the soul to re-member its divine body.
Iamblichus, therefore, insists that the soul’s journey to the gods begin
with our wounds: the pathological complexes with which the soul has become identified, for skipping over these pathologies would deny to the soul
its cosmogonic role as the link between noetic and material realms. In this
context, Iamblichus’ diagnostic guide of appearances (fa/smata) may be
appreciated as much for its description of daimones as of gods, for daimones
“lead souls into nature,” and when the soul practices theurgic divination
and sacrifice it engages the daimonic powers that fix the soul to the material
world. Since the soul’s lo/goi have been projected into the material order,
the soul cannot initially receive divine light in its purity but must recover it
through the filters of material life. These receptions are distorted, Iamblichus
says, due to the imperfect capacity of secondary lives to participate in the
wholeness of primary causes. He explains:
The cause for the many differences in secondary lives is participation: the mixing of
material lives with immaterial emanations; again, what is given in one manner [from
above] is received in another manner by things below. For example, the emanation of
Kronos is stabilizing and that of Ares is kinetic, but in material lives our passive and
generatively geared receptacle receives the former as rigidity and coldness and the latter
as inflammation beyond measure…. Thus, the weakness of material and earthly places,
being unable to contain the purest life of aetherial beings, transfers its own passion to
the first causes.107

These pathological receptions of the gods are traces of the soul’s universal
lo/goi filtered through the flux of matter, the distorted reflections of an
embodied soul attempting to receive wholes using the receptive capacity of a
part. Yet, Iamblichus says, this is where we must begin: in the ecstatic encounters of imagination we learn to accept and to honor the disturbing,
dark, even terrifying daimonic images that form part of the soul’s itinerary
to recover its wholeness. If properly endured, the agonizing image reveals its
underlying principle and becomes part of the soul’s vessel to contain the
god. Addressing the importance of including all powers in theurgic worship,
Iamblichus says:
107. DM 55,3–56,1.

CONTAINING ECSTASY: THE STRATEGIES OF IAMBLICHEAN THEURGY

75

He who celebrates all these powers and offers to each gifts that are pleasing and honors
that are as similar to them as possible will always remain secure and infallible, since he
has properly completed, perfect and whole, the receptacle of the divine choir (u9podoxh\n
tou= qei/ou xorou=).108

The soul’s encounters with enmattered lo/goi was necessary, for without
them the soul would never recover the divine proportions hidden in our
corporeal pathologies. This recovery was essential to the art of theurgy, and
Iamblichus maintained that the Egyptians communicated these insights
through images. The Egyptian symbol of the lotus, Iamblichus explains,
portrays an immaterial god seated upon a circle of petals, yet below the
water its roots lie in the mud (i0lu\j) which represents corporeal life and is
also the foundation (puqme/n) of the plant.109 So it is with the soul. To recover its divinity the soul must first recognize and honor its corporeality, the
mud of human experience, before it can become the receptacle of the god.
In the theurgic itinerary it is not possible to skip over the darkness of embodiment. Our reception of the god depends upon it.
IV. DREAMWORK AS THEURGY?
I have examined two central elements of Iamblichus’ Neoplatonism to
clarify the role of ecstasy in theurgy: (1) the soul’s embodiment, which requires its pathologies to be honored as ways (however distorted) through
which the soul may recover its participation in the gods; and (2) the role of
imagination: since the soul’s return to the gods is effected through ecstatic
encounters in the imagination, Iamblichus makes a critical distinction between merely human fantasi/a and the fantasi/a inspired by the gods. I
find it significant that both elements also play a central role among contemporary archetypal psychologists, and in conclusion I will briefly examine the
development of these themes and evaluate the depth of their similarity to
Iamblichean theurgy.
To begin, Iamblichus’ distinction between human and divine imagination is remarkably similar to the distinction made by archetypal psychologists between the imagination and the imaginal. Iamblichus’ intention was
to distinguish the images projected by the human soul from the divinely
empowered fa/smata that descend from the gods; to confuse human with
divine images would divert the soul from the deep eros that unites it with
divine activity. The distinction made by archetypal psychologists is framed
differently but answers to the same concern.
Drawing largely from Carl Jung’s experiments in “active imagination,”
James Hillman and other archetypal psychologists distinguish the fantasies
108. DM 229,2–7.
109. DM 250,17–251,5.

76

GREGORY SHAW

of the ego from the autonomous imagery arising from the unconscious which
they call “imaginal.” Based on his encounters with autonomous images, Jung
described the technique of engaging these images “active imagination” to
distinguish it from passive day-dreaming and to emphasize the autonomy
and reality of the imagined figures. As Jung put it:
Active imagination, as the term denotes, means that the images have a life of their own
and that the symbolic events develop according to their own logic—that is, of course, if
your conscious reason does not interfere.110

Hillman claims Jung as archetypal psychology’s “first immediate father,”111
yet the importance of “imaginal” as a critical term does not derive from Jung
but from Henry Corbin whom Hillman claims as the “second immediate
father” of his tradition.112 A friend and contemporary of Jung, Corbin’s publications elucidate the visionary practices of Muslim mystics such as
Suhrawardi and Ibn Arabi who were deeply influenced by theurgical
Platonists,113 and it is from Henry Corbin that archetypal psychologists derive the terms “imaginal” and “mundus imaginalis.”
To explain the ecstasies of his Muslim visionaries, Corbin introduced the
term “imaginal” to avoid confusing their visions with mere imaginative projections of the psyche and to assert the reality of a visionary world that is
neither material nor intelligible but in-between, a “place” where the invisible
is made visible in the form of empowered angelic images. Addressing the
problem of terminology, Corbin says:
Our language of today, even philosophical, is so unfit to describe this world of the
Imagination as a perfectly real world that a satisfactory term is lacking here. We must
avoid all confusion with simple “fantasy”; “imaginable” too particularly indicates possibility. We need some such adjective as imaginal to qualify everything related to this
intermediate universe (dimensions, figures, landscapes, and so on). Then we would
have Imaginalia (as original, not as mere “effigies” of sensory things), just as we have
110. C.G. Jung, The Symbolic Life 171; cited by Dan Merkur, Gnosis: An Esoteric Tradition
of Mystical Visions and Unions (Albany: State U of New York, 1993) 43. Compare Jung’s warning for the conscious reason not to interfere with Iamblichus’ remark that the soul must not
take the initiative in divination (DM 115,3–15).
111. James Hillman, Archetypal Psychology (Dallas: Spring Publications, 1983) 3.
112. Ibid. 3.
113. Suhrawardî’s philosophy of illumination (ishraq) was influenced by the Theology of
Aristotle (actually sections of Plotinus) and the Liber de Causis (sections from Proclus’ Elements
of Theology), and his spiritual discipline, while expressed in mythic imagery different from
Iamblichean theurgy, requires the same discipline of discursive thinking combined with the
purification of the soul. Suhrawardi’s theology of light might profitably be compared to
Iamblichus’ taxonomy of divine fa/smata in DM II. For the influence of Neoplatonism on
these Muslim mystics see Seyyed Hossein Nasr, Three Muslim Sages (Delmar, NY: Caravan
Books, 1964) and Henry Corbin, Creative Imagination in the Sufism of Ibn Arabi, op. cit.

CONTAINING ECSTASY: THE STRATEGIES OF IAMBLICHEAN THEURGY

77

Divinalia. And imaginal is no more to be confused with imaginary than original with
originary.114

For Corbin’s Muslim visionaries and for Iamblichean theurgists the imaginal world is firmly rooted in the Intelligible, and the soul’s encounter
with divine images effects a possession in which the soul enters the paradoxes of the One as it simultaneously reveals and veils itself in the imaginal
realm. The influence of the ecstatic practices of Iamblichean theurgy is clearly
evident in the visionaries studied by Corbin.115 As in Iamblichean theurgy,
the soul rises to meet its divinity in ecstatic visions that begin in the sensible
world. As Corbin put it, describing Persian Avicennism: “… each sensible
thing or species is the ‘theurgy’ of its Angel … the sensible species does not
divert from the Angel but leads to the ‘place’ of the encounter, on condition
that the souls seeks the encounter.”116 This place in which sensible objects are
transformed into theurgic symbols is the mundus imaginalis, where the soul’s
desire to return to the divine is united with the theurgies that emanate from
the One. In Iamblichean terms this unification allows the soul to enter the
creative activity of the Demiurge. Corbin’s visionaries describe this unification in terms of meeting one’s angel, an event in which the soul experiences
its ascent to the angel as the angel’s descent to the soul. Echoing, in soteriological
terms, the paradoxes of Iamblichus’s psychology, Corbin writes: “This Angel
is itself the ekstasis, the ‘displacement’ or departure from ourselves that is a
‘change of state’ from our [habitual] state.”117 This “philosopher’s Angel,”
says Corbin, sees us through our own ecstatically displaced eyes, a seeing in
114. Henry Corbin, Spiritual Body and Celestial Earth, trans. by Nancy Pearson (Princeton:
Princeton U Press, 1977) 294.
115. There is a fascinating story to be told of the hermetic, gnostic, and neoplatonic influences on Muslim mystics through the school of Harran in northern Syria. For a description of
this hermetic tradition as passed into Sufi brotherhoods see Peter Kingsley, Ancient Philosophy
Mystery, and Magic: Empedocles and the Pythagorean Tradition (Oxford: Oxford U Press, 1995)
esp. chapter 24: “From Empedocles to the Sufis: ‘The Pythagorean Leaven’” 371–91; see also
John Walbridge, The Leaven of the Ancients: Suhrawardi and the Heritage of the Greeks (Albany:
SUNY Press, 2000).
116. Henry Corbin, Avicenna and the Visionary Recital (Dallas: Spring Publications, 1980)
115–16. The practice of uniting with one’s angel in Avicennan doctrine requires the same
restriction on our will and discursive thinking seen in Iamblichean theurgy. Corbin writes: “ the
human intellect does not abstract Forms; it can only prepare itself, make itself fit, by perception
of the sensible, for the Angel to illuminate the intelligible Form upon it.… No sooner is the
Angel’s intervention replaced by abstraction by the intellect than direct, immediate contact
with the ‘celestial’ world of the Angel is broken off ” (Ibid. 105).
117. Henry Corbin, Swedenborg and Esoteric Islam, trans. by Leonard Fox (West Chester,
PA: Swedenborg Foundation, 1995) 32. Of this encounter Corbin says: “The reciprocity that
flowers in the mystery of this divine depth cannot be expressed save by a symbol.” (Corbin,
Avicenna and the Visionary Recital [Dallas: Spring Publications, 1980] 203.)

78

GREGORY SHAW

which the ineffability of the One and the “one in the soul” are transformed
into an erotic bi-unity, a reciprocating desire and angelic encounter.118 These
Sufi visionaries developed Iamblichean principles in distinct ways reflecting
their specific cultural contexts, yet the necessity of the soul’s ecstasy from its
habitual state remains constant, as does the paradox found at the heart of the
soul and in the One itself.
The Corbin scholar, Christian Jambet, insists that the place of these
theurgic encounters, the mundus imaginalis, cannot be uprooted from its
neoplatonic context without making it into a projection of the psyche and
reducing the imaginal into mere imagination. This, Jambet maintains, is
what Jungians have done by stripping the imaginal of its cosmogonic function of clothing intelligibles in sensible forms. Jambet argues that because
Jungians lack a foundation in the metaphysics of the Muslim Neoplatonists,
they have profoundly misunderstood Corbin and have misused his terms.
He quotes Corbin’s warning that “if anyone uses the term [imaginal] to refer
to anything other than the mundus imaginalis and the Imaginal Forms …
there is great danger that the term will be debased and lose its meaning.”119
“This is why,” Jambet continues, “every Jungian reading [of Corbin’s mundus
imaginalis] misses the point.”120
I believe that Jambet’s critique is valid: despite Hillman’s profound admiration for Corbin himself and Corbin’s support for Hillman’s work,121 archetypal psychologists remain largely ignorant of the subtleties of neoplatonic
metaphysics and have removed the imaginal from its traditional context:
“the apophatic theology of Neoplatonism.”122 Following Jambet’s critique,
they run the risk not only of confusing the imaginal with the imaginary but
of inflating personal imagination with the archetypal power and authority
of the imaginal realm, an error that Paracelsus characterized as “the cornerstone of the insane.”123
118. Christian Jambet, La logique des orientaux: Henry Corbin et la science des formes (Paris:
Editions du Seuil, 1983) 140–41; cf. Henry Corbin, Creative Imagination in the Sufism of Ibn
Arabi, trans. by Ralph Mannheim (Princeton: Princeton U Press, 1969) 333, fn. 432.
119. Jambet, op. cit., 44.
120. Ibid. 41. Jambet maintains (43) that the Jungian archetypal realm should not be confused with the Imaginal. In metaphysical terms, he explains that the Imaginal is not derived
from a therapy of the soul (as it was for Jung): for Muslim visionaries the soul is the alter-ego of
the World Soul which is the manifestation of the Imaginal, therefore, the Imaginal is not a
product of the soul but the soul is the product of the Imaginal.
121. For Hillman’s admiration of Corbin see Hillman, The Thought of the Heart (Dallas:
Spring Publications, 1984) 1–2; for Corbin’s approbation of Hillman see David Miller, The
New Polytheism; preface by Henry Corbin (Dallas: Spring Publications, 1981) 4.
122. Jambet, op. cit., 41.
123. For Paracelsus’ quotation see Henry Corbin, Swedenborg and Esoteric Islam 17.

CONTAINING ECSTASY: THE STRATEGIES OF IAMBLICHEAN THEURGY

79

What archetypal psychologists share with Iamblichus and Muslim visionaries is a belief in the autonomy of images, yet as Jambet rightly insists, these
images remain subjective fantasies if they lack the noetic orientation that is
the magnetic pole of traditional theurgy.124 Despite Jambet’s valid critique
and despite Hillman’s misreading of theurgy as manipulative magic,125 I believe that his instincts in developing archetypal psychology may be in more
profound accord with the principles of Iamblichean theurgy and Corbin’s
visionaries than Jambet (or Hillman) realize. I will argue that when Hillman’s
theories are seen against the background of Iamblichean theurgy and are
complemented by practice, exemplified in the dreamwork of Robert Bosnak
(a former student of Hillman), the imaginal realities of Henry Corbin are
both engaged and contained in rites that resemble the ecstatic theurgies of
Iamblichus.
In his ground-breaking work, Re-Visioning Psychology,126 Hillman introduces the concept of the “heroic ego” to describe the kind of psychology
against which he stands. The heroic orientation, as described by Hillman, is
an egocentricism afraid of losing control in the deeper waters of the psyche,
and this orientation, he argues, has become pervasive in our culture, even
among his Jungian contemporaries. In this orientation, all mythic journeys
and moments of transcendence are translated by our habitual heroic stance
into credentials of transformation or, in Jungian terms, tokens of our
“individuation.” Encounters that for Jung had been genuinely transformative
were—in Hillman’s estimation—being abstracted from a context of psychic
depth and appropriated as fantasies of the ego’s empowerment.
Jung had written that because our culture no longer has religious rituals
to contain the powers of the unconscious they are involuntarily encountered
in our illnesses: “The gods,” he said, “have become our diseases.”127 For
Hillman, therefore, it is not through heroic spirituality but through our
pathologies that we are led back to an encounter with the gods. He writes:
… it is mainly through the wound in human life that the Gods enter (rather than
pronouncedly sacred or mystical events), because pathology is the most palpable manner of bearing witness to the power beyond ego control and the insufficiency of the ego
perspective.128
124. Charles Boer, without criticizing Hillman’s archetypal psychology, maintains that the
central problem in many appropriations of Corbin’s work is that imagination is severed from
intellect (the neoplatonic nous) and so creates fantastic, but absurd phenomena, i.e., imaginative but not imaginal. See “Confessions of an Altar Boy,” The Salt Journal 2.5 (July/August
2000): 25–30.
125. James Hillman, Healing Fiction (Dallas: Spring Publications, 1994) 79. Hillman follows Augustine’s and E.R. Dodds’ mistaken characterization of theurgy as manipulative magic.
126. James Hillman, Re-Visioning Psychology (New York: Harper & Row, 1975).
127. Cited by Hillman in Archetypal Psychology 37.
128. Ibid. 39.

80

GREGORY SHAW

Hillman rejects the “grand shamanic journey” and prefers the soul to be
broken down, afflicted, and depressed: “the pathological image held solemnly is what moves the soul.”129 Hillman is so acutely on guard against
heroic inflation that he views all forms of transformation with suspicion: “I
prefer to speak of transformation only when I can point at its actually happening.”130 For those possessed with a heroic stance, Hillman suggests, transcendence is merely the spiritualized wrapping of self-deception:
There may well be more psychopathology actually going on while transcending than
while being immersed in pathologizing. For any attempt at self-realization without full
recognition of the psychopathology that resides, as Hegel said, inherently in the soul is
itself pathological, an exercise in self-deception.131

This self-deception to which Hillman alerts us is the very much like the
self-deception and hubris that Iamblichus perceived in “the Greeks.” Indeed, I believe that Hillman’s critique of the heroic ego is functionally equivalent to Iamblichus’ critique of the undescended soul, but Hillman offers no
explicit practice such as theurgy that would address our incapacity to receive
the gods. He acknowledges the inadequacy of discursive thinking for this
and recognizes the dangers of releasing the unconscious. He says:
To let the depths rise without our systems of protection is what psychiatry calls psychosis: the images and voices and energies invading the emptied cities of reason which have
been depersonified and demythologized and so have no containers to receive the divine
influxes.132

Archetypal psychologists point to dreams as containers for these influxes,
but Hillman is careful to distance himself from those who would translate
dream images into theoretical models or reduce their meaning to objective
(Freud) or subjective (Jung) causes. In The Dream and the Underworld,
Hillman argues against all forms of theoretical reduction and says that we
must follow the dream image down into the world of shadows, leaving our
daytime thinking behind. He declares:
… we must sever the link with the dayworld, foregoing all ideas that originate there—
translation, reclamation, compensation. We must go over the bridge and let it fall behind us, and if it will not fall, then let it burn.133

129. Hillman, Re-Visioning Psychology op. cit., 93.
130. Hillman, “Further Notes on Image,” Spring (1978): 175.
131. Hillman, Re-Visioning Pyschology op. cit., 70.
132. Ibid. 224.
133. Hillman, The Dream and the Underworld (New York: Harper & Row, 1979) 13.

CONTAINING ECSTASY: THE STRATEGIES OF IAMBLICHEAN THEURGY

81

Robert Bosnak, a Dutch psychologist now living in the United States,
has followed this exhortation and developed a practice of working with dream
images that bears a remarkable resemblance to the techniques of Iamblichean
theurgy. Within the tradition of archetypal psychology, Bosnak’s dreamwork
ensures that Hillman’s theoretical insights are deepened into imaginal experiences that resemble those described by Iamblichus. Bosnak’s Tracks in the
Wilderness of Dreaming and his earlier work, A Little Course on Dreams, are
not recognized in most scholarship on dreams.134 His texts have few footnotes, no indices, and he does not try to validate his claims against recognized positions in the academic study of sleep and dreams. His books simply
report what he has experienced in dreamwork and how he has learned to
work both with imaginal entities and with our resistances to these presences.
If we were to place Bosnak in the world of late antiquity, he would resemble
the magician more than the abstract philosopher, for he is immersed in a
practical knowledge of the spirit world, and it is no more possible to understand Bosnak’s dreamwork without practice than it is to understand
Iamblichus’ theurgy. In what follows, I will briefly outline several resemblances between the two practices.
Bosnak’s dreamwork may be described as a collective form of Jungian
active imagination. In Bosnak’s method, it is assumed that a group of participants can intensify and contain images that might otherwise overwhelm
an individual and, more importantly, without the help of these participants
it is unlikely that dreamers could overcome their unconscious resistances to
the dream. The dream images often appear in forms drawn from the dreamer’s day life, but these images are assumed to hold imaginal depth, and their
appearances, while having very real associations to natural life, are not
literalized. As Iamblichus and Proclus said, formless and incorporeal beings
are seen in corporeal forms in accord with our own nature.135 The otherness of
the imaginal world must first appear to us wearing a familiar face, and in the
careful reception of these images the unfamiliar presence is gradually intensified and contained. To the degree that the group is able to enter the atmosphere and activity of these images, they become saturated with their ambiance and begin to sense what the images want, to feel their voice and to
follow their will. The group enters into a trance-like state defined by the
parameters of the dream; they experience a kind of voluntary ekstasis and
become possessed by the images, yet at the same time they remain tethered to
ordinary reality, aware that they are sitting in a dimly lit office doing
“dreamwork.” This dual orientation is not unlike the condition described by
134. Robert Bosnak, Tracks in the Wilderness of Dreaming (New York: Delacorte Press, 1996);
A Little Course in Dreams (Boston: Shambhala Publications, 1983; 1998).
135. Iamblichus, DM 82,1–2; Proclus, In Rem Pub. II 39,28–40,4.

82

GREGORY SHAW

Iamblichus when the fantasi/a is possessed by the gods but discursive
awareness remains attentive. Iamblichus explains this duality in theurgy as
follows:
All of theurgy has a dual character. One is that it is a rite conducted by men which
preserves our natural order in the universe; the other is that it is empowered by divine
symbols (sunqh/mata), is raised up through them to be joined on high with the Gods,
and is led harmoniously round to their order. This latter aspect can rightly be called
taking the shape of the Gods.136

Lest “taking the shape of the Gods” sounds too elevating and heroic, it is
important to remember that the shapes the gods most often present reflect
the pathologies of the soul in the material order: the corruptions, ruptures,
collisions, and decay of generated life. It is one thing to write about this
process, quite another to experience it, to feel involuntary spasms and contractions, breathless constriction, quivering, and the panic of losing one’s
habitual awareness.137 Dreamwork, like Iamblichean theurgy, begins with
the material realm and the pathological habits in which souls have become
coagulated and fixed. To contain the pressure of these encounters requires
great precision and care on the part of the participants. They must lead the
dreamer slowly into the atmosphere of the image at a pace determined both
by the image and by the dreamer’s resistance to the image. Bosnak provides
an example.
He refers to the dream of a middle-aged man to show that associations
from the dayworld can be used to serve the nightworld. At the same time, he
demonstrates how a pathological image, properly contained, allows the
dreamer to reach the “god” who resides in the image. The dream: A middleaged man dreams that he is sitting by a refrigerator. He feels lonely and
rejected. His wife has left. The refrigerator is empty.138 Through re-entering
the dream and making a slow descent into this cold and lonely place, the
dreamer is led into the icy atmosphere of the refrigerator. He remembers, by
association, the coldness of his mother, the fears of being alone as a child and
now again as an adult. Rather than draw the dream images out of the dark to
focus on personal problems, Bosnak uses the emotions released by the associations to strengthen the vessel of the work and move into a deeper identification with the dream image, importing the emotions of daily life to serve
the soul’s dreaming rather than exporting imagery out of the dream to serve
the dreamer’s “self development.” Bosnak describes this deepening:
136. DM 184,1–8.
137. The author has had the opportunity to work with Robert Bosnak in this practice since
1988.
138. Bosnak, Tracks 41.

CONTAINING ECSTASY: THE STRATEGIES OF IAMBLICHEAN THEURGY

83

As we make this importing move, the feelings in the dream are magnified: he suddenly
feels himself in a deep freeze. A spontaneous transit has taken place to the interior, frigid
core of the freezer. The deep freeze pervades his entire body. He begins to feel a drugged
glow of well-being.… He has been moved to the core of cold. The feeling of isolation
has been essentialized into a concentrated emotional substance through distillation.… The
dreamer knows the essence of coldness (my emphasis).139

By penetrating to the essence of coldness, the dreamer begins to feel his
loneliness turn into “an ability to be alone,” clinging less to the warmth of
his wife, and in turn, the dream wife feels less constricted by the husband.
The man’s dread of loneliness and coldness which had poisoned him has
been intensified in the pressure-cooking of dreamwork into its own antidote, a process Bosnak compares to homeopathic distillation where the
pharmakon as poison is transformed into medicine: the dreadful coldness of
the refrigerator becomes, in its essence, a cure, allowing the dreamer to contain the “concentrated emotional substance” of cold.140 In theurgic terms,
the dreamer, plagued by daimones of loneliness, isolation and cold,
reconfigurates his awareness into a receptacle of the god of these congealing
and isolating powers. By properly receiving the god, the dreamer is cured of
its ill effects: loneliness, frigidity, and rejection.
This god, Iamblichus would tell us, is Kronos, whose ancient power “stabilizes” the soul, but when improperly received he is experienced as “rigidity
and coldness.”141 Ficino, similarly speaks of the power of Saturn (Kronos) to
effect a frozen experience like death.142 The arts of theurgy and dreamwork
both allow the soul to receive the god, to contain the “concentrated emotional substance” through a ritual in which the god reveals himself as “Refrigerator”: the su/nqhma of Kronos in his crystalizing power.
Clearly, there can be no map or guide book for these excursions into
imaginal reality. Abstract schemes, for example, that would equate refrigerators with Kronos cannot help the dreamworker. The next refrigerator, after
all, might be full of cool, moist fruit, thus creating an atmosphere entirely
foreign to Kronos the Deep Freezer. Similarly, the dreamworker cannot know
how she will enter the dream, but must learn how to trust her not-knowing
and be willing to follow the dreaming of imaginal beings, guided often only
by the affects aroused by her resistance to those beings. Bosnak admits to
experiencing “a not-knowing so profound that it makes me shiver. I passionately don’t know,” he says.143 Yet, like the theurgists who share in this not139. Ibid. 53–54.
140. Ibid. 54.
141. DM 55,4–11.
142. Thomas Moore, The Planets Within: The Astrological Psychology of Marsilio Ficino (Great
Barrington, MA: Lindisfarne Press, 1990) 170.
143. Bosnak, Tracks 11.

84

GREGORY SHAW

knowing, he enters the activity and atmosphere of dream images and learns
how to swim in their currents. After a number of such excursions, the
dreamworker begins to recognize changes in the texture and density of atmospheres in the imaginal realm, but this can only be learned in increments
of experience, not by theoretical study. Similarly, Iamblichus says that knowledge of the gods in theurgy can only be learned by experience. He says:
“Only theurgists know these things in a precise way since they have experienced these activities. Only they are able to know what is the perfection of
the sacred operation.”144
In Bosnak’s dreamwork the role of participants in helping to intensify
and contain the images is crucial. Before the middle-aged man was able to
enter the deep freeze, the participants in his dream had probably already
entered the frozen atmosphere and had begun to feel its affects in their bodies, noting, through its location and intensity, resistances to the image but
not-knowing if this was their own resistance, that of the dreamer, or both.
This symbiotic capacity allows the dreamworker to use physical affects as
guides to gently ask the dreamer how his body or parts of his body feel, using
whatever sensate image the dreamworker feels most likely to intensify the
affect in the dreamer’s body and deepen his experience of the image.145 By
allowing themselves to carry the affect of the refrigerator, the dreamworkers
help the dreamer do something he could not consciously will to do—experience an identification with the freezer.146 For someone who is terrified of
“coldness,” this transit would be impossible without the support of other
containers sharing the load, so to speak, so that he could experience the
distillation of his fear and dread into the essence of coldness.147
Those who equate Neoplatonism with the spiritual imagery found in
Plotinus and later absorbed into forms of Christian piety, might find the
comparison between theurgy and dreamwork inappropriate. Indeed, identifying with refrigerators may seem to have very little to do with neoplatonic
theurgy, but such a judgment merely reflects our own literalness regarding
the gods of Platonism. Despite the abundance of theophanies reported in
the literature, the Neoplatonists knew that no one has ever seen the gods; if
they are seen, even in visions or dreams, they are clothed in the imagination
of the dreamer. Our cultural expressions, understanding, and terminology
pertaining to the gods certainly have changed, but ecstatic encounters and
possessions are present in both theurgy and contemporary dreamwork. What
Iamblichus objected to was not the differences in cultural expressions of
contacting the divine but the hubris of believing that our ability to concep144. DM 229,17–230,2.
145. Bosnak, Tracks 21–26.
146. Ibid. 31.
147. Ibid. 59.

CONTAINING ECSTASY: THE STRATEGIES OF IAMBLICHEAN THEURGY

85

tualize spiritual realities was equivalent to experiencing them. The same hubris exists among academics today who presume to have no need of practicing
material theurgies in order to make judgments about the most elevated forms
of immaterial theurgy or Plotinian contemplation.148 But unless we learn to
endure the disorienting ecstasies from our habitual identity and to recognize
the presence of a different center (or centers) of awareness, we simply lack
the capacity (e0pithdeio/thj) to understand the Neoplatonism of either
Iamblichus or Plotinus. The ecstasies of theurgic visions may have occurred
in a profoundly different culture than Bosnak’s dreamwork, but the loss of
our habitual orientation is required for both, and in both practices this ekstasis
must be contained in order to be effective.
In conclusion, I will compare the following elements of dreamwork with
the techniques of theurgy described in the De Mysteriis.
1. Just as theurgy was not an attempt to manipulate the gods, so dreamwork
is not so much our work on dreams as it is a discipline that allows dreams to
work on us.
2. In each session of dreamwork, the group enters a trance-like state defined by the contours of the dream. Although the participants become “possessed” by the images, they remain tethered to their awareness that they are
doing dreamwork.149
3. Like the hypnagogic state in which theurgists received god-sent dreams
and divine images in the fantasi/a, dreamwork requires an awareness that
hovers between waking and sleeping.150
4. The descent into dream reality provokes intense emotional reactions
that would push us “outside” the dream unless a vessel is carefully built by
the group within the texture of the dream images. Like the theurgic u9podoxh\,
the strength of this vessel is determined by the capacity of the dreamer and
of the group to contain the intensity of emotions released.151
5. In dreamwork the gods appear in a variety of forms, veiling and revealing themselves through images of friends, relatives or inanimate objects.152
Like theurgic sunqh/mata, these images allow us to contact the depths hidden in the soul.
6. Perhaps the most important and most difficult principle of dreamwork
is that dreamworkers do not know what the dream means nor what they will
do with the dream until they are in it. As Iamblichus said of theurgy: “we
148. Plotinus’ contemplative exercises or “thought experiments” were close to Iamblichean
theurgy in both theory and practice. See G. Shaw, “Eros and Arithmos: Pythagorean Theurgy
in Iamblichus and Plotinus,” Ancient Philosophy 19 (1999): 121–43.
149. Bosnak, Tracks 34–35.
150. Ibid. 35.
151. Ibid. 149.
152. Hillman, The Dream and the Underworld op. cit., 62.

86

GREGORY SHAW

don’t perform these acts intellectually, for then their energy would be intellectual and depend on us.…”153 In the same way, dreamwork is led by the
images and the subtle atmospheres in which they are received.
7. Dreamwork is a discipline of the imagination and a way of consciously
re-entering a world where images “do not depend on us” but act on us,
affecting our mood and activity. The capacity to contain the pressures released in dreamwork is a function of the strength and elasticity of our body
of imagination, what Iamblichus called the “luminous vehicle” (au0goeide\j
o0/xhma).
8. Just as theurgy required a preliminary worship of material gods who
preside over the suffering of generated lives, so dreamwork involves an encounter with these pathologies and understands that each agony, each poison of the soul, is also a medicine, a god waiting to be properly received and
contained in the work on dreams.154
The crucial question is whether the ecstasies that draw participants outside their habitual awareness in dreamwork are similar to the ecstasies discussed by Iamblichus and, if so, whether they are—in Iamblichus’ terms—
divine or delusional. Do these ecstasies form part of an itinerary to recover
our noetic identity, as exemplified by Corbin’s visionaries, or are they exercises in self-deception, filling the soul with “foolishness and delusion,” or
worse. Although Bosnak and Hillman lack a metaphysics to respond to such
questions, I believe that their emphasis on containing divine influxes is of
central importance.155 An ecstasy contained by the imaginative receptacle of
the soul was the precondition for theurgists to recover their noetic identity.
Yet this recovery must begin with the material gods who reveal themselves in
the traumas and pathologies of embodied life. In Iamblichus’ era these
pathologies were contained primarily through blood sacrifices and visionary
encounters with daimones. Today, the same pathologies are revealed in our
dreams and, as Jung noted, our illnesses, and may be encountered in active
imagination. Hillman learned from Plotinus and Ficino the importance of
having containers for these encounters, yet Hillman—wary of metaphysical
systems156—left his sources largely unexplored and thus misunderstood.
153. DM 97,2–9. Cf. Bosnak’s remarks about “not-knowing” in the work with dreams,
Tracks op. cit., 11.
154. See Bosnak’s discussion, “The Imagination as Healing Poison,” in A Little Course in
Dreams op. cit., 113–18.
155. Ibid. 113–18; Hillman, Re-Visioning Psychology op. cit., 224.
156. Recently, Hillman has recognized the need to develop a metaphysics and admits that
he shunned metaphysics as a ploy of the heroic ego. He discusses the importance of Corbin as
a metaphysician and begins imagining a “psychological cosmology” following Bachelard’s commentaries on Plato’s Timaeus. See Hillman, “Back to Beyond: On Cosmology,” Archetypal Process: Self and Divine in Whitehead, Jung and Hillman, ed. by David Ray Griffen (Evanston, IL:

CONTAINING ECSTASY: THE STRATEGIES OF IAMBLICHEAN THEURGY

87

Bosnak’s work with dreams now makes it clear that if the dreamwork of
archetypal psychologists aims to be imaginal and not merely imaginative, if
archetypal psychologists desire to practice more than the subjective and personal fantasizing condemned by Jambet, they must return to the roots of
their imaginal practice. These roots, I suggest, lead directly back from Corbin
and the Renaissance Neoplatonists to the ecstatic practices of Iamblichus.

Northwestern U Press, 1989) 213–15. See also Hillman, “Cosmology for Soul: From Universe
to Cosmos,” Sphinx 2 (1989): 17–33. Bosnak also credits Corbin as an important influence on
his work (Tracks 48–49).

