Gregory Shaw

19

19

Archetypal Psychology, Dreamwork,
and Neoplatonism

I. Introduction
Not easy this – and so esoteric, occult.
James Hillman

A

ccording to James Hillman, archetypal psychology is rooted in the
Neoplatonic tradition of Plotinus, Porphyry, Iamblichus and Proclus.1
C.G.Jung, whom Hillman credits with being the “irst immediate fa­
ther” of archetypal psychology,2 was inluenced by the Neoplatonists
both directly and indirectly, while Henry Corbin, the “second immediate father”
was even more directly inluenced by Neoplatonists as evidenced by his work
on Suhrawardi, Avicenna, and Ibn Arabi who carried the voice and vision of
earlier Platonists, including their emphasis on the reality of the imaginal world
so central to archetypal psychology.3 If Jung’s psychology can be read as a kind
of Christian (monotheistic) Neoplatonism, the Neoplatonism of archetypal psy­
chology understands itself to be more polytheistic, relecting more directly the
thinking of Plotinus and other non-Christian Neoplatonists.
Since archetypal psychology sees itself as rooted in, or at least inspired by Ne­
oplatonism, a closer examination of the currents of thought among the Neoplaton­
ists should shed light on certain characteristics of archetypal psychology. Specii­
cally, I will argue that the theurgical Neoplatonism of Iamblichus (c. 245–c.325)
shares many theoretical assumptions developed by Hillman and that the theurgical
rites advocated by Iamblichus bear remarkable similarities to the “dreamwork” of
Robert Bosnak, a Dutch psychologist and student of Hillman, who developed a
ritual practice of encountering imaginal entities. Yet before fruitful comparisons
can be made between Iamblichean Neoplatonism and its contemporary expres­
sions, a signiicant misunderstanding by Hillman must be addressed.
1

2
3

James Hillman, “Plotino, Ficino and Vico as Precursors of Archetypal Psychology,” in
Loose Ends (Dallas: Spring Publications, 1975), 148–49; 162, fn. #6. Cf. Hillman, Archetypal Psychology (Dallas: Spring Publications, 1983), 2–5.
Archetypal Psychology, 3.
Ibid., 4–5.

328

GreGory SHAw

In “The Pandaemonium of Images: C. G. Jung’s Contribution to Know Thy­
self,”4 Hillman distinguishes Jung’s practice of active imagination from the en­
counters with divine images seen in Neoplatonic theurgy. As a term, “theurgy”
was coined by 3rd century Platonists to describe divine activity as distinct from
human activity; theurgy was ritual action that allowed human beings to enter the
activity (ergon) of a god (theos), hence the term theourgia, divine action.5 Distin­
guishing theurgy from active imagination, Hillman writes:
Active imagination is not a psychological activity in the transpersonal sense
of theurgy (ritual magic), the attempt to work with images by and for the human will … Active imagination as theurgic divination would work on the Gods
rather than recognize their workings in us (my emphases).6

Hillman here repeats the Christian polemic against Platonic theurgy irst articu­
lated by Augustine and continued by classical scholars who misconstrued the­
urgy as manipulative magic, as a form of sorcery (goeteia). Yet anyone who reads
Iamblichus’s explanation of theurgy in On the Mysteries will recognize that it
aims at precisely the opposite of what Hillman says.7 The goal of theurgy was
not to “work on the Gods” but to conform human action to divine action, and
Iamblichus ridicules as absurd the notion that human beings could work on the
gods in any way.8 In Hillman’s defense, he was not a historian of philosophy and
his understanding of theurgy was inluenced largely by E.R. Dodds, probably
the greatest classical scholar of the 20th century and gifted with rare psychologi­
cal insight. But Dodds was simply incorrect in his characterization of theurgy
as superstitious magic,9 and this has now been recognized by most scholars of
Neoplatonism, particularly by those who have studied Iamblichus.10 Hillman’s
Hillman, Healing Fiction (Dallas: Spring Publications, Inc., 1994); irst published as “The
Pandaemonium of Images: C.G.Jung’s Contribution to Know Thyself,” New Lugano Review, III, 3/4 (1977).
5 For the history of this term in later Platonism, see Hans Lewy, Chaldean Oracles and Theurgy, ed. by M. Tardieu (Paris: Etudes Augustiniennes, 1978), 461–66.
6 Hillman, Healing Fiction (Dallas: Spring Publications, Inc., 1994), 79.
7 emma C. Clark, John M. Dillon, and Jackson P. Hershbell, Iamblichus, On the Mysteries,
translated with introduction and notes (Atlanta: Society of Biblical Literature, 2003). All my
translations of On the Mysteries are based on this translation; in several instances I have
changed their translation slightly. Passages from On the Mysteries (De Mysteriis = DM) will
be followed with the Parthey pagination they provide.
8 DM 146.5–147.1.
9 E.R.Dodds, “Theurgy and its Relation to Neoplatonism,” Journal of Roman Studies 37 (1941);
cf. The Greeks and the Irrational (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1973), 288.
10 Jean Trouillard, “La theurgie,” L’Un et l’âme selon Proclos (Paris: Les Belles Lettres, 1972),
171–89; Andrew Smith, Porphyry’s Place in the Neoplatonic Tradition (The Hague, 1974),
81–99; Garth Fowden, The Egyptian Hermes: A historical approach to the late pagan mind
(London: Cambridge University Press, 1986), 131–41; Gregory Shaw, “Rituals of Uniica­
tion in the Neoplatonism of Iamblichus,” Traditio 41 (1985), 1–28; Polymmnia Athanassia­
di, “Dreams, Theurgy and Freelance Divination: The Testimony of Iamblichus,” Journal of
4

ARCHETyPAL PSyCHoLoGy, DREAMwoRK, AND NEoPLAToNISM

329

understanding of active imagination may still need to be distinguished from Iam­
blichean theurgy but for different reasons, and, I will argue, in most respects their
approaches to images bear remarkable similarities, especially in the context of
dreamwork.
By misunderstanding theurgy, I believe that Hillman overlooked a deep and
central current in Neoplatonism, one that he found necessary to reinvent by de­
veloping aspects of Plotinus’s thought in the style of the Renaissance Neoplaton­
ist, Marsilio Ficino, not realizing, however, that Ficino’s richly embodied Neo­
platonism exempliies Iamblichus’s theurgical principles.11 To understand the
different schools of Neoplatonism and their relevance for archetypal psychology
we need to step back, briely, to consider the important issues for the Neoplaton­
ists of the 3rd and 4th centuries.
In the late 3rd century a pointed debate took place among Platonists and Py­
thagoreans over the soul’s place in the cosmos. Some claimed the essence of the
human soul was so high and pure that it remained undisturbed and unchanged de­
spite its appearance in a body. These Platonists believed they possessed a divine
and higher eye that remained untouched by the material world and from which
they could rationally evaluate the traditional rituals of the Mediterranean world
that exhibited an unenlightened groping for the gods. The Syrian Platonist Iam­
blichus was profoundly opposed to this elevated view of the soul and he blamed
these “Greeks” (his fellow Platonists) for promoting an excessive intellectualism
that was ruining the religion and piety of his day. In On the Mysteries he writes:
At the present time I think the reason everything has fallen into a state of decay –
both in our words and prayers – is because they are continually being changed by
the endless innovations and lawlessness of the Greeks. For the Greeks by nature
are followers of the latest trends; they are eager to be carried off in any direction
and possess no stability. Whatever wisdom they receive from other traditions
they do not preserve; even this they immediately reject and change everything
through their unstable habit of seeking the latest terms (DM 259.4–10).

Although Plato himself had censured the Greeks with nearly identical charg­
es, this condemnation by Iamblichus – one of the most respected Platonist and
Pythagoreans of his time – may seem harsh, even if he was writing under the
pseudonym of Abamon, an Egyptian priest.12 By contrast, consider Iamblichus’s
Roman Studies, 83 (1993), 115–30; and G. Shaw, Theurgy and the Soul: the Neoplatonism of Iamblichus (University Park, PA: Penn State Press, 1995).
11 See Hillman’s discussion of Plotinus’ reception by those who have emphasized the “Chris­
tianity-conforming aspects of his work.” Hillman, in contrast, emphasizes those aspects of
Plotinus focused on the “embodied” psyche, precisely those elements of Plotinus’ philoso­
phy developed by Iamblichus; J. Hillman, “Plotino, Ficino, and Vico,” in Loose Ends: Primary Papers in Archetypal Psychology (Dallas: Spring Publications 1975; 1991), 150–154.
12 Plato’s critique of the “Greeks” immaturity is spoken by an Egyptian sage to the wise So­

330

GreGory SHAw

high regard for the “Egyptians,” one of the sacred barbarian races with whom he
compares the Greeks:
… since the Egyptians were irst to be allotted participation in the Gods, the
Gods are pleased when invoked according to the custom of the Egyptians (DM
258.3–6) … The barbarians, since they are ixed in their manners, irmly con­
tinue to employ the same words. Thus, they are beloved by the Gods and offer
invocations pleasing to them. To no man is it permitted to change these prayers
in any way (DM 259.14–19).

Ah, but those Greeks, so enamored of their intellectual brilliance, were willing
to change even sacred liturgical words and phrases because they understood their
conceptual meanings and were therefore able to replace old words with new and
better ones. In the case of barbarian prayers, these same Greeks translated the
archaic terms into their own more sophisticated jargon. The Greeks condemned
by Iamblichus were the philosophic trendsetters of his time, those who disdained
traditional cults – Greek or barbarian – as somehow unworthy of their intellectual
status, and this hubris was no more evident than in Iamblichus’s own Platonic
tradition as he received it from Porphyry, the student of Neoplatonism’s founder,
Plotinus.
The Greeks that Iamblichus criticizes so harshly through “Abamon” were
his own Platonic predecessors, and in both On the Mysteries and his philosophic
commentaries Iamblichus criticized the kind of Platonism promoted in Porphy­
ry’s transmission of Plotinus’s teachings. Speciically, Iamblichus disagreed with
Plotinus’s views concerning the soul and the material cosmos, and he lamented
their practical consequences. Although Plotinus had condemned the Gnostics for
denying the divinity of the cosmos,13 his own descriptions of the soul betray a
Gnostic inluence, even to the point of using Gnostic terminology to describe the
soul’s relation to the body.14 In an attempt to convey the depth of his contempla­
tive experiences, Plotinus told his students that he never really entered a body,
that the embodiment of the soul was only an appearance for its “head” remains
in heaven, never descending into the lesh.15 What his students saw before them
was not the real Plotinus but his “inferior companion,” the mere simulacrum or
statue of the true man.16

13
14
15
16

lon: “for you Greeks have in your souls no old opinion stemming from ancient oral tradition”
(Timaeus 22B–23B).
Ennead II.9; see A.H. Armstrong, Plotinus Enneads I–VI. Translation and commentary
(Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1966–1988).
Ennead I.1.12.25–29 for the soul’s descent; Enn. II.9.10.25–27 for Plotinus’s description of
the fall of the Gnostic Sophia.
Enn. IV.3.12.1–5.
Enn. I.2.6.28.

ARCHETyPAL PSyCHoLoGy, DREAMwoRK, AND NEoPLAToNISM

331

Porphyry had the privilege of attending Plotinus’s seminars where he and
other students were entranced by the beauty of their master’s voice and his vivid
images of an unfallen soul. Porphyry, however, translated the visionary poetry
of Plotinus’s experience into prose, into what became known as the doctrine of
the undescended soul. The consequence of making a teaching out of Plotinus’s
evocative images was signiicant. For if the soul never truly enters the material
cosmos, there is no need to honor its generative powers, and to the degree that
the soul worships the gods of the cosmos, it remains alienated from its true stat­
ure above the cosmos. According to Porphyry, the undescended soul is identical
to the divine Nous,17 a view consistent with Plotinus’s remark when asked by a
disciple to join him in worshiping the gods: “It is more itting for them to come
to me than for me to come to them.”18
Such a doctrine and attitude were entirely new and unorthodox for Platon­
ists.19 Traditional Platonic paideia had encouraged the soul to become divine by
assimilating itself to the gods of the visible cosmos,20 but there was no need for
this if the soul was only under the illusion of embodiment. If matter, as Plotinus
said, was “evil in itself,”21 then the soul should escape from it: one’s body and
even the activities that unite us to the gods of the material world would prevent
the soul from recovering its divine status. In Porphyry’s On the Abstinence of
Animal Food, for example, he condemned animal sacriice and claimed – to the
delight of Christians – that the fumes of burning lesh did not contact real gods
but fed blood­thirsty and malevolent daimons!22 He encouraged the soul to fore­
go all such rites in order to make its escape from the cosmos, “never again to ind
itself held and polluted by the contagion of the world.”23
All of this anti­cosmicism was unacceptable to Iamblichus, and the doctrine
of the undescended soul was at the heart of his objection to Plotinian Platonism:
it made the soul too high, the world too low, and left nearly all human beings cut
off from the gods. In a pointed critique of Porphyry’s view of sacriice and the
soul Iamblichus gloomily says:
This doctrine spells the ruin of all holy ritual and theurgic communion between
Gods and men since it places the presence of superior beings outside this earth.
17 Porphyry, Porphyrye: De L’Abstinence Vol. I.29.4, tr. and introduction by Jean Bouffartigue
and Michel Patillon (Paris: Les Belles Lettres, 1977).
18 Porphyry, The Life of Plotinus 10; see Armstrong, op.cit.
19 Plotinus himself says his notion of the undescended soul goes against the received opin­
ion of his tradition; Enn. IV.8.8.1–2.
20 Plato, Timaeus 90; a position also endorsed by Plotinus, Enn. II.9.18.31–35.
21 Plotinus, Enn. I.8.3.38–40.
22 Porphyry, Porphyrye: De L’Abstinence II.42.1.
23 Porphyry, De regress animae 40, 15–16, in J. Bidez, Vie de Porphyre (Hildesheim: Georg
olms, 1964).

332

GreGory SHAw

For it amounts to saying that the divine is at a distance from the earth and can­
not mingle with men and that this lower region is a desert, without Gods (DM
28.6–11).

In contrast to the Platonism of Porphyry and Plotinus, Iamblichus employed Py­
thagorean principles to argue for the divinity of the material world and for the
necessity of the soul to descend into a body and a mortal life. Following the
Timaeus, Iamblichus deined the soul as a mediating activity bridging the oppo­
sites of sameness/difference, indivisible/divisible, rest/motion, and rhythmically
weaving the cosmos into existence.24 Mediating opposites was the soul’s only
way to enter the hidden activity of the One which, according to Iamblichus, was
an entirely ineffable principle “known” only through the mixing of its equally
unknowable derivatives: the Limit and the Unlimited, from which all number and
existence derive. Yet for the soul, its participation in the One causes it to experi­
ence an ontological rupture unique among divine beings, for in order to mediate
between the immortality of the gods and the mortality of generated beings, the
immortal soul had to become mortal. As Iamblichus puts it:
… the soul is a mean, not only between the divided and the undivided, the
remaining and the proceeding, but also between the ungenerated and the gener­
ated … Wherefore, that which is immortal in the soul is illed completely with
mortality and no longer remains only immortal.25

Iamblichus’s understanding of the soul stands in sharp contrast to that of Ploti­
nus. Plotinus and Porphyry maintained that the essence (ousia) of the soul never
descends but remains unchanged when the soul animates a body. The soul itself
does not descend but merely illuminates its body;26 mortal activities, therefore,
cannot affect the soul’s ousia. For Iamblichus, however, not only does the soul’s
ousia undergo change in embodiment, the multiplicity of its activities suggests
to him that the soul’s essence becomes fragmented into “essences (ousiai) of the
soul.” He says: “Our soul remains one yet is multiplied at the same time in its
inclination to the body.” For Iamblichus, the soul’s ousia is “one and many.”27
Mortal and immortal, one and many, uniied and divided … obviously, such para­
doxes do not allow for discursive clarity or closure. The psychology of Porphyry
24 Iamblichus, De Anima 30, 19–23, text and translation by John Finamore and John Dillon
(Leiden: Brill, 2002).
25 Simplicius, De Anima [DA] 89, 33–37; 90, 21–23, ed. M. Hayduck (Berlin: B. Reimeri, 1882).
26 See Enn. I.1.12.25–29.
27 For citations in Iamblichus see Carlos Steel, The Changing Self: A Study on the Soul in
Later Neoplatonism: Iamblichus, Damascius and Priscianus, tr. by E. Haasl (Brussels: Pa­
leis der Academien, 1978), 61–63.

ARCHETyPAL PSyCHoLoGy, DREAMwoRK, AND NEoPLAToNISM

333

and Plotinus allowed for a soteriology much easier to imagine: the soul escapes
from the material world and ascends “alone to the Alone.”28 For Iamblichus, how­
ever, the soul’s salvation depends not only on its unity and immortality but on its
dividedness and mortality as well, for only by mediating the opposites could the
soul truly function as soul. By ritually engaging the powers of the material world,
the Iamblichean soul transformed the suffering and chaos of its embodiment into
a cosmos. The soul became divine not by escaping from the world but by sharing
in its creation through the performance of cosmogonic rituals: theurgies (theia
erga = divine acts), which were the necessary complement to Iamblichus’s less
exalted psychology and less dualistic cosmology.
Theurgy was necessary, Iamblichus believed, because of the limitations
caused by embodiment, the most signiicant being the self-alienation (allotriō­
then) that deined the soul’s essence as human.29 Although immortal, the soul be­
comes mortal and is estranged not only from the gods but from its own divinity.
It becomes constitutionally unable to return to the divine because its essence has
become mortal; an “I” deined by its particular mortal life. To return to the gods
Iamblichus says the soul irst must recognize the “nothingness” (oudeneia)30 of
its identity and then ritually conform itself to the signatures of the gods present
in the visible world. Like the god Dionysus dismembered by the Titans, the
embodied soul gradually recollects its immortal identity by discovering its frag­
ments in nature.31 These acts of recollection, or theurgies, allow the presence of
the gods in the world to awaken their corresponding presences in the soul, and
through a life-long process of engaging these divinities the soul reconigures its
subtle body (ochēma). Theurgy, in effect, was a form of demiurgy, and the soul’s
deiication was realized when the world and the soul became transparent to the
gods within them.
Iamblichus has been viliied by Christians and ridiculed by classicists for
his willingness to use stones, plants, and animals in theurgic rituals, but if the
world is a visible divinity as Iamblichus believed, then each of its elements has
the power to lead the soul back to its source. As Henry Corbin put it: “… each
28 Enn. VI.9.11.51: phugē monou pros monon.
29 Simplicius, DA 223.26; Iamblichus also says that the embodied soul is also “made other to
itself” (heteroiousthai pros heautēn 223.31.
30 DM 47.13–48.4.
31 For the later Platonists Dionysus represents collectively all souls who descend into the
sublunary world. Damascius explains how the soul’s descent into a body is effected by the
mirror of Dionysus and how souls (= Dionysus) recover their divinity: “The myth describes
the same events as taking place in the prototype of the soul. when Dionysus projected his
relection into the mirror, he followed it and was thus scattered over the universe. Apollo
gathers him and brings him back to heaven, for he is the purifying God and savior of Dio­
nysus” Damascius Commentary on Plato’s Phaedo 129.1–4, tr. by L.G. westerink (Dilton
Marsh: The Prometheus Trust, 2009; 1977). The gathering of the god by Apollo is effected
by theurgic rites.

334

GreGory SHAw

sensible thing or species is the ‘theurgy’ of its Angel … the sensible species does
not divert from the Angel but leads to the ‘place’ of the encounter, on condition
that the soul seeks the encounter.”32 In this sense, theurgy is a ritualization of
Platonic recollection, employing the traces of divinity in the world to awaken the
soul to its divine inheritance. What allows the sensible thing to be experienced
as theurgy is the inner disposition of the soul that feels called by the god through
the sensible image: the soul’s eros awakened by the beauty of the god calling to
the soul. Yet this theurgic union with the god does not sever the soul’s connection
with the material world – it conirms it, and it is this emphasis on the soul return­
ing to the gods by going outside itself and into the world that most distinguishes
the Neoplatonism of Iamblichus from that of Plotinus. It is this world-afirming –
and theurgical – Neoplatonism of Iamblichus that informed the Florentine school
of Ficino and is relected in archetypal psychology’s effort to return the soul to
the world.33
Before shifting our focus to consider archetypal psychology and dreamwork
against the background of Iamblichean theurgy, it may be helpful to summarize
theurgy’s guiding principles, some of which have not yet been discussed but will
be referred to later in the paper.
1. Theurgy was not (pace St. Augustine, E.R. Dodds, Hillman et. al.) an at­
tempt to manipulate the gods. It is the work of the gods on us and through us, not
vice versa. Iamblichus is unambiguous about this point in On the Mysteries and
saves his harshest criticism for sorcerers (goētes) who use their knowledge of the
gods for personal ends.34 The purpose of every theurgy, Iamblichus says, is the
puriication, liberation, and salvation of the soul.35
2. Theurgy allows the soul to share in the cosmogonic activity of the gods,
seen in the power of nature to reveal the invisible powers of the gods through vis­
ible shapes and images.36 In terms of experience, all theurgy is dual in the sense
that although those who perform the rite remain human beings, yet in theurgic
ritual they take on the shape of the gods.37
3. Souls perform different kinds of theurgy according to their needs and
capacities. Without a proper “receptacle” (hupodochē) the soul would lack the
32 Henry Corbin, Avicenna and the Visionary Recital, tr. by willard Trask (Dallas: Spring Pub­
lications, 1980), 115–116.
33 The Iamblichean inluence is seen particularly in Ficino‘s On Making Your Life Agree with
the Heavens where Iamblichus is often cited as an authority; see Marsilio Ficino: The Book
of Life, tr. by Charles Boer (Dallas: Spring Publications, Inc. 1980). on Hillman’s dependence on Ficino’s world-afirming Neoplatonism, see James Hillman, “Anima Mundi: The
return of the Soul to the world,” Spring (1982), 71–93.
34 DM 193.15–194.7; 182.13–16.
35 DM 293.5–8.
36 DM 249.14–250.7.
37 DM 184.1–8.

ARCHETyPAL PSyCHoLoGy, DREAMwoRK, AND NEoPLAToNISM

335

capacity to receive the god.38 Therefore, a careful diagnosis of the soul and its
capacity should precede the ritual act.
4. The gods appear to the soul as symbols and sunthēmata (“tokens”) in vari­
ous forms and through various media: animals, plants, stones, images, letters,
sounds, music, names, and geometric shapes. Each of these symbols is the god in
an activity (theurgy), veiling and revealing its divinity.
5. Although the soul must prepare itself, the theurgic symbol works on us
without our interpretation or understanding. In an often quoted passage Iambli­
chus says, “we don’t perform these acts intellectually, for then their energy would
be intellectual and depend on us, which is not at all true. In fact, these symbols,
by themselves, perform their own work, and the ineffable power of the Gods with
which these symbols are charged, itself, recognizes, by itself, its own images. It
is not awakened to this by our thinking.”39
6. Through the performance of theurgic rites, the soul restores and strength­
ens its subtle body (ochēma) – disoriented by embodiment – through which it
is reunited with the gods. This subtle or imaginal body is the place of the soul’s
transformation.
7. All theurgy must begin with the material gods in order to establish a foun­
dation for encounters with the gods who rule over immaterial reality. The material
gods have jurisdiction over all experiences of growth and decay and the agonies
of material life. The attempt to worship immaterial gods without irst establishing
a foundation with the material gods cuts the soul off from all gods for it would
have no way to contain them.40 To think otherwise is hubris and self-deception.

II. Archetypal Psychology: Recovering the Gods
He who has not distributed to all these Powers what is itting
and in accord with the appropriate honor that each is worthy to receive
will depart imperfect and deprived of participation in the Gods.
Iamblichus

Once we know at whose altar the question belongs,
then we know better the manner of proceeding.
James Hillman

Iamblichus’s dark prophecy that Porphyry’s theology would remove the divine
from the earth and “leave this lower region a desert, without gods,” was eventu­
38 DM 233.7–16.
39 DM 97.2–9.
40 DM 228.19–229.7; 227.6–13.

336

GreGory SHAw

ally fulilled. After the gods and the undescended soul were exiled into heaven,
this lower world lost its connection with divine powers and with them its living
spirit. Later, the ineffable divinity of the Neoplatonists – revealed only in the
multiplicity of gods – was confused by Christians with their One Triumphant
God, a mistake that Corbin describes as a “metaphysical catastrophe.”41 It was
inevitable, Corbin argues, that this God of monotheism would eventually be
exposed as an idol created by human insecurities: the God elevated above the
world and cast in the image of our Uniied and Transcendental Self. Iamblichus
had warned Porphyry that his inlated notion of the soul would lead to this:
For being unable to lay hold of the knowledge of the Gods through reasoning,
but believing they are able to do so, men are entirely carried away by their hu­
man passions and make assertions about divine things drawn from personal
feelings (DM 65.16 – 66.2).

As a Neoplatonist and Pythagorean, Iamblichus was well trained in the dialec­
tics of the One. Like other Neoplatonists who had relected on the function of
Socratic unknowing (aporia), he knew that the One was ineffable and that Plato
had already demonstrated in the Parmenides that the One itself never is, that the
One does not exist.42 For the Neoplatonists, however, this realization marked the
beginning of genuine theological relection, the subtlety of which is captured by
the Proclus scholar Jean Trouillard:
If one tries to afirm pure unity this very afirmation, in effect, destroys it be­
cause one may only posit and think in relations, in dualities. Pure simplicity [the
Limit] blinds us as does pure diversity [the Unlimited]. If we try to realize the
absolute we abolish it as absolute, for meaning occurs only in a context of rela­
tions to which the absolute presents itself as the negation. But this impossibility
of afirming is not an ordinary negation, since the One that we posit as relative
to the Many itself implies another unity which sustains them both, but which we
may not describe. It is necessary, then, after avoiding the afirmation, to deny
the negation itself and enter into the ineffable.43

Damascius, the 6th century master of apophatic discourse, said that the One is
simply a symbol for the ineffable,44 what Egyptians call “unknowable darkness”
41 See Henry Corbin‘s discussion in his Prefatory Letter to David Miller, The New Polytheism:
Rebirth of the Gods and Goddesses (Dallas: Spring Publications Inc., 1981), 2–3.
42 Parmenides, 141d–142.
43 Jean Trouillard, “Néo-platonisme,” Encyclopedia Universalis 11 (Paris, 1968), 682 (my trans­
lation).
44 Damascius, Traité des Premiers Principes, Vol. 2: “De la triade et de l’uniié,” westerink
and Combes (Paris: Les Belles Lettres, 1989), 30.3–8.

ARCHETyPAL PSyCHoLoGy, DREAMwoRK, AND NEoPLAToNISM

337

(skotos agnōston).45 It made no sense, then, to speak of the One God as if it ex­
isted or were capable of being known, for it was neither. Yet, despite (and perhaps
because of) their aporia in the face of ineffability, the Neoplatonists experienced
the ineffable One revealing itself as unifying activities: the activities of the Gods
in their daimonic expression of creating the world. The goal of the later Neopla­
tonists, therefore, was not to reach the One, since it doesn’t exist, but to enter its
ineffable and unifying activities, the theurgies of the One, in whatever context
the soul inds itself.
The tendency to transform apophatic discourse or any transformative dis­
course into an orthodoxy of memorized rules or concepts seems to be inherent
in our need for security. Even a discourse designed to subvert this habit of selfdeception can become the most subtle and eficient way to indulge it. This is why
even in apophatic Neoplatonism there is a need for rigorous self­criticism which
attempts to rediscover those moments of genuine transformation revealed by a
seminal thinker, whether it is a Plato, a Plotinus, or, more recently, the Swiss
psychologist Carl Jung.
As the Neoplatonists interpreted Plato according to their apophatic princi­
ples, seeing the One and the Forms not as ideal entities or objects but as patterns
of activity and manifestation, so James Hillman, in a effort to circumvent a ven­
eration (and reiication) of Jungian archetypes (akin to the Platonic Forms of the
psyche), speaks not of archetypes, but of archetypal images, changing the “what”
of an archetype into a “how,” into an activity experienced by the soul.46 Hillman’s
desubstantiating and deliteralizing move, like the apophatic move of the Neopla­
tonists, means that the archetypes are not conined to a metaphysical space or an
abstract empyrean outside this earth. Archetypal images, like the gods of Iambli­
chus, must be found in this lower region. “All images,” Hillman says, “can gain
this archetypal sense,”47 and in the same way that theurgic symbols penetrate the
soul and work on us independently of our thinking, so archetypal images work
on us without our interpretation. Hillman writes:
We learn from the alchemical psychologists to let the images work upon the
experimenter; we learn to become the object of the work – even an object, or
objectiied image, of the imagination.48

I believe that the Neoplatonism to which archetypal psychology is most akin
is not, as Hillman thinks, the high-souled Neoplatonism of Plotinus but that of
the Syrian theurgist Iamblichus. Hillman looks to Plotinus to ind parallels with
45 Ibid., 30.8–9.
46 James Hillman, “An Enquiry into Image,“ Spring (1977), 82–83; Hillman, Archetypal Psychology (Dallas, Spring Publications, Inc., 1983), 12–14.
47 Hillman, “An Enquiry.” Spring, 83.
48 Hillman, Re-Visioning Psychology (San Francisco: Harper & Row, 1975), 40.

338

GreGory SHAw

archetypal psychology, not, he says, the Plotinus that has been appropriated by
Christian philosophers and theologians with their “inherent tendency to bring
out, or read in, the inspiring and inlating and Christianity-conforming aspects
of his work …,”49 but with the Plotinus who describes the soul struggling with
pleasures, fears and other emotions of embodied existence. Granted that Plotinus
was a masterful thinker with acute insight into the soul, there is nevertheless, a
reason that Christian theologians have been attracted to Plotinus’s Neoplatonism
and, largely, have been repelled by Iamblichus and theurgy. The theory of the
undescended soul and the evilness of the material world can be found in Ploti­
nus, not in Iamblichus. And in Plotinus’s personal rejection of traditional pagan
worship and Porphyry’s condemnation of blood sacriice Christians found pow­
erful allies in their battle against the worship of the pagan gods. Iamblichus, on
the other hand, by providing a philosophic rationale for traditional pagan cults,
became a demonic igure for Christians and later, a target of ridicule for scholars
who feel greater afinity for the “rational” Neoplatonism of Plotinus.50
A. H. Armstrong noted, however, that “it is possible to develop a theory of
theurgy from one side of the thought of Plotinus,”51 and that is precisely what
Iamblichus did. It happens that the side to which Armstrong refers is also the side
attractive to Hillman. For Hillman is interested in Plotinus’s grasp of the soul’s
paradoxes, its multiplicities, imagination, and complexities, not in his exhorta­
tions to escape from the world. With archetypal psychology Hillman follows a
trajectory of Plotinus’s thought that was developed by Iamblichus into theurgy:
the recognition that the soul in the body is fragmented and needs to recover itself
not by withdrawal, introspection, and escape but by creating proper receptacles
to contain the gods, to give these deepest impulses of the soul a divine shape. In
Re­Visioning Psychology, Hillman cites a passage from this theurgical side of
Plotinus describing a technique for ritually containing the gods. Plotinus says:
I think, therefore, that the ancient sages, who sought to secure the presence of
divine beings by the erection of shrines and statues, showed insight into the na­
ture of the All; they perceived that though this soul is everywhere tractable, its
presence will be secured all the more readily when an appropriate receptacle is
elaborated, a place especially capable of receiving some portion or phase of it,
something reproducing it, or representing it and serving like a mirror to catch
an image of it.52
49 Hillman, Loose Ends, op. cit., 150.
50 See Shaw, Theurgy and the Soul: The Neoplatonism of Iamblichus (Kettering, oH: An­
gelico Press, 2014; 1995), 1–18.
51 A.H. Armstrong, “Tradition, Reason, and Experience in the Thought of Plotinus,“ Plotinian
and Christian Studies 17 (London: Variorum reprints, 1979), 187.
52 Hillman, Re-Visioning, 14.

ARCHETyPAL PSyCHoLoGy, DREAMwoRK, AND NEoPLAToNISM

339

These recommendations form an integral part of the theurgical art as described
by Iamblichus, speciically, providing a receptacle (hupodochē) in which divine
activity may be fruitfully contained and engaged.53 Later, Hillman returns to the
theme of receptacles and the dangers of facing the depths of the soul without
them. He writes:
To let the depths rise without our systems of protection is what psychiatry calls
psychosis: the images and voices and energies invading the emptied cities of
reason which have been depersoniied and demythologized and so have no containers to receive the divine inluxes.54

Hillman recognizes the truth of Iamblichus’s prophecy: this “lower world” has
become a demythologized desert, without gods, and its corollary for the human
soul is that without “containers” to properly receive the gods outside us – in
shrines, rituals, statues or prayers – they appear as psychic imbalances. As Jung
put it, “the gods have become diseases; Zeus no longer rules Olympus but rath­
er the solar plexus, and produces curious specimens for the doctor’s consulting
room.”55
Here, it seems, is where archetypal psychology differs most markedly from
Iamblichean theurgy. For Iamblichus, the gods could still be met, contained, and
acted with through various forms of worship and divination. Theurgists like Iam­
blichus and Ficino could diagnose psychic imbalances and prescribe rituals to
align the soul with its god, for they still had gods, rituals, and shrines to which
they could refer. In our terms, they had a way to contain the pathologies of the
soul. We do not. Yet, Hillman argues, our lack of containers and the debilitating
experience of having gods as diseases may have a useful function, for it strips the
ego of its illusion of power and control. He claims
… that it is mainly through the wound in human life that the Gods enter (rather
than pronouncedly sacred or mystical events), because pathology is the most
palpable manner of bearing witness to the powers beyond ego control and the
insuficiency of the ego perspective.56

Despite the cultural differences between archetypal psychology and the theurgy
of the Platonists, Hillman’s emphasis on working with pathological images is
consistent with the principles of Iamblichean theurgy especially as they relate
to the soul’s embodied experience. For when the soul enters a body, its essence
(ousia) is broken apart; it becomes intertwined with mortal lives (the material

53
54
55
56

Shaw, Theurgy and the Soul, 53–54.
Hillman, Re-Visioning, 224.
Cited by Hillman in Archetypal Psychology op. cit., 37.
Hillman, Archetypal Psychology, 39.

340

GreGory SHAw

daimons) and is made subject to fate and suffering.57 The soul is identiied by the
Neoplatonists with the dismembered Dionysus, and in exact proportion to its di­
videdness and identiication with mortal lives, it requires rituals speciic to each
kind of rupture and embodied agony that it experiences. These rituals, provided
they are appropriate to its needs, contain the agonies of the soul and allow it to re­
cover its divine body. Iamblichus insists, however, that the soul begin its theurgy
with the material gods who, he says, preside over the suffering of all
… material phenomena: division, collision, impact, reaction, change, genera­
tion, and the corruption of all material bodies … and in worship we offer what is
appropriately related to them. In the sacriices, therefore, dead bodies and things
deprived of life, the blood of animals, the consumption of victims, their diverse
changes and destruction, and in short, the breakdown of the matter offered to
the Gods is itting – not for the Gods themselves – but for the matter over which
they preside.58

Iamblichus explains that the power of ire to consume and assimilate matter to
itself initiates the assimilation of the soul to the divine ire.59 Like the mortiica­
tions of alchemical materia or the tortured images in the art of memory which,
Hillman says, free the soul of its “literal perspective,” stuck in the coagulations of
matter,60 so the material rites of theurgy release the soul from its embodied ixa­
tions through giving ritual expression to the material daimons. Iamblichus insists
that it is necessary to begin theurgy with the material gods in order to build a
foundation for the soul’s subsequent contacts with divine powers, and he specii­
cally criticizes Porphyry for trying to return to the immaterial gods without irst
honoring their material counterparts. Yet Porphyry, believing that his soul was
undescended, perhaps did not feel the need to ritually honor material gods and
daimons that he had never really encountered. This hubris, according to Iambli­
chus, makes the soul blindly subservient to the material gods and daimons that it
ignores and prevents any possibility of uniting with the immaterial gods.
The divinities which the soul recollects in theurgy by engaging their traces
in nature seem to grow uglier through our neglect: the gods truly have become
diseases. But despite their grotesque and repulsive appearance, these pathologi­
cal symptoms have become our only means to return to the cosmos of the Neo­
platonists. Iamblichus would tell us that our illnesses are not themselves the gods
but indicate our failure to receive and contain the gods properly,61 and Hillman
57 Iamblichus explains that daimons oversee nature and bind souls to their mortal bodies: DM
67.1–68.2.
58 DM 217.10–218.8.
59 DM 214.14–215.5.
60 Hillman, Re-Visioning, 90f.
61 Shaw, Theurgy and the Soul, op. cit., 60–61.

ARCHETyPAL PSyCHoLoGy, DREAMwoRK, AND NEoPLAToNISM

341

seems to agree, for he encourages us to elaborate – like theurgists – “appropriate
receptacles” in order to better contain our divine inluxes.62
Iamblichus and Hillman both emphasize the importance of our not knowing
and not controlling the gods when they appear and for the same reason. When
challenged by Porphyry to explain why theurgists chant “meaningless” god
names, Iamblichus tells him “to remove all conceptions and logical deductions
from divine names”63 and concludes by asserting that “even if it is unknowable
to us, this very thing is its most venerable aspect.”64 The embodied soul, identi­
ied with a particular “self” is not capable of intellectually grasping the audible
bodies of the gods, and to think it could, Iamblichus argues, keeps us from being
able to receive them. It is through recognition of our “nothingness” that we are
drawn to receive the gods.65 Once freed of our pretensions to know, the soul can
be moved in theurgy “to another order, having entirely abandoned its former
existence.”66 For Iamblichus, the doctrine of the undescended soul, untouched
and unperturbed by the lower powers of the cosmos, is the functional equivalent
of archetypal psychology’s “heroic ego” which similarly prevents us from en­
tering the darkness and meeting the gods. Like Iamblichus, Hillman values the
pathological symptom because it is unknowable: “that thing so foreign to the
ego, that thing which ends the rule of the hero … [and] moves the myth of the
individual onward by moving him irst of all out of the heroic ego …”67 and into
death, which is the theme developed by Hillman in the Dream and the Underworld. Both Hillman and Iamblichus also insist that we must begin with patho­
logical images: the “breakdown of matter offered to the Gods,” and I believe that
both share a similar motivation.
Behind the psychologies of Iamblichus and Hillman is a protest, a reaction
against the titanic self-deception that invites us to see ourselves as self-sufi­
cient and god-like: a disease speciically of our discursive power that has not
yet learned – in Neoplatonic terms – to limit its propensity to the Unlimited.
Iamblichus attacked the doctrine of the undescended soul because it invited the
kind of hubris and self-deception he perceived in Porphyry’s questions and in
Plotinus’s psychology. Hillman, for his part, seeks to undermine what he calls
the heroic ego, our “heroic attitude toward all events, an attitude now so habitual
that we have come to call it the ‘ego.’”68 Since this heroic mode dominates our
consciousness today far more than the doctrine of the undescended soul did in
62
63
64
65
66
67
68

Hillman, Re-Visioning, 225.
DM 255.5–6.
DM 255.9–10.
DM 47.13–48.3.
DM 270.10–14.
Hillman, Re-Visioning, op.cit., 89.
Ibid., xiv.

342

GreGory SHAw

Iamblichus’s time, Hillman is proportionately more passionate and careful to dis­
cern the subtle forms of self­deception that the “hero” invites. While Iamblichus
could speak of “taking on the shape of the Gods” in theurgic ritual,69 Hillman
would likely suspect it to be “but another heroic voyage of the ego now translated
into interior space.”70 So long as the hero lives, has not been initiated into death,
into the realm of Hades, then all transformations of the soul are nothing more
than heroic self-deceptions. The task, then, is to enter the darkness, to experience
our soul as “illed completely with mortality,”71 to recognize, as Iamblichus puts
it, our nothingness. Hillman rejects the “grand shamanic journey”72 and prefers
the soul to be broken down, aflicted, and depressed: “the pathological image
held solemnly is what moves the soul.”73 He is so acutely on guard against heroic
inlation that even such a standard notion as self-transformation is viewed with
suspicion: “I prefer to speak of transformation,” Hillman says, “only when I can
point at its actually happening,”74 and the experience of transcendence, which
was important to all Neoplatonists, is even more suspect for Hillman, who writes:
There may well be more psychopathology actually going on while transcending
than while being immersed in pathologizing. For any attempt at self-realization
without full recognition of the psychopathology that resides, as Hegel said, inherently in the soul is itself pathological, an exercise in self­deception.75

Hillman’s vigilance against self­deception might lead one to suspect that he dis­
counts the validity of any form of transcendence, but his insistence on recogniz­
ing our pathologies before transcending is similar to Iamblichus’s insistence that
we honor the material gods before proceeding to the immaterial gods. Hillman
does acknowledge the validity of transcendence as described by Henry Corbin,
who spoke of the soul’s ascent to the divine, called epistrophē (return) by the
Neoplatonists and ta’wil by Shi’ite Muslims. Quoting Corbin, Hillman says that
“one must carry sensible forms back to imaginative forms and then rise to still
higher meanings …”76 For the Persian Neoplatonists of Corbin the theurgic mo­
ment that transforms the sensible into symbols occurs in the mundus imaginalis,
a realm of images where the soul’s desire for epistrophē enters into theurgies
emanating from the One, a meeting, Corbin says, that effects an ecstatic encoun­
ter with one’s Angel, an event in which the soul experiences its ascent to the
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76

DM 184.1–8.
Re-Visioning, 93.
The Iamblichean vision of the embodied soul: Shaw, Theurgy and the Soul, 110–120.
Re-Visioning, 93.
Re-Visioning, 93.
Hillman, “Further Notes on Image,“ op. cit., 175.
Re-Visioning, 70.
Hillman, Loose Ends, op. cit., 50.

ARCHETyPAL PSyCHoLoGy, DREAMwoRK, AND NEoPLAToNISM

343

Angel as the Angel’s descent to the soul. This Angel, Corbin writes, is “itself the
ekstasis, the ‘displacement’ or departure from ourselves that is a ‘change of state’
from our [habitual] state.”77 For such a mysterious encounter to be received prop­
erly we need containers, the sunthēmata of theurgy: shrines, myths, images, and
perhaps even stones that can hold more of the ineffable than our thinking. And
for each soul the intensity of its encounter is measured by its capacity to receive
the divinity through the theurgic symbol.
The Corbin scholar Christian Jambet insists that the mundus imaginalis must
be rooted in the apophatic Neoplatonism in which it developed for the imaginal
world to link the sensible realm to the paradoxes of the ineffable One. He warns
that if we abstract the imaginal world from this function and place it in a merely
psychological context, we risk losing its signiicance and power.78 The imaginal
then would be reduced to personal imagination and become subordinate to sen­
sate experience; as such it could no longer function as the place where the inef­
fability of the One and the “one in the soul” are metamorphosed into an erotic
bi­unity, a reciprocating desire and angelic encounter.79
Following Corbin, Hillman explains that the imaginal world is deined nei­
ther by our subjectivity nor by what is sensibly external; it is, rather, a third place
made up of images external to us yet intimately related to our heart’s most ardent
desire.80 Despite Jambet’s concerns, Hillman seems to have lifted the imaginal
out of its context in the apophatic metaphysics of the Neoplatonists. His touch­
stone for the imaginal world was Corbin himself, who seems to have functioned
for Hillman as a theurgic sunthēma, opening him to the mysteries of the mundus
imaginalis. Shortly after Corbin’s death Hillman writes:
In him imagination was utterly presence. One was in the presence of imagination itself, that imagination in which and by which the spirit moves from the
heart towards all origination … the invisible Henry Corbin is among us.81

For his part, Corbin said that it was precisely in his effort to restore the mundus
imaginalis that his work coincided with that of Hillman whom he praises for his
courage and originality.82 The gods that Hillman discerns in our diseases and in­
77 Corbin, Swedenborg and Esoteric Islam, tr. Leonard Fox (west Chester, PA: Swedenborg
Foundation, 1995), 32. of this encounter Corbin says: “The reciprocity that lowers in the
mystery of this divine depth cannot be expressed save by a symbol.” (Corbin, Avicenna
and the Visionary Recital, op.cit., 203). Each of these symbols, like theurgic receptacles,
would relect the capacity of each soul to contain the divine inlux.
78 Christian Jambet, La logique des Orientaux: Henry Corbin et la science des formes (Paris:
editions due Seuil, 1983), 41.
79 Ibid. 40–41; cf. Corbin, Creative Imagination in the Suism of Ibn Arabi, fn. 32, 333.
80 Hillman, The Thought of the Heart (Dallas: Spring Publications, Inc., 1981), 2–3.
81 Ibid. 1–2.
82 David Miller, The New Polytheism, op. cit., 4.

344

GreGory SHAw

luxes can again be reborn “as gods” Corbin said, in the imaginal world, that is,
in the epistrophē of the soul toward its origins. The context, then, of Hillman’s
archetypal psychology is the apophatic Neoplatonism of Plotinus, Iamblichus and
Damascius – not as a metaphysical system – but as an imaginal experience embodied and communicated through the living presence and voice of Henry Corbin.83
Like the theurgists of Iamblichus’s era, Corbin’s Persian Neoplatonists had
receptacles and the imaginal capacity to contain invisible powers. The arts of
theurgic divination were still alive in the medieval world, but today our “world”
has largely been drained of its imaginal richness, its soul, so the only imaginal
experience that remains to us is the dream. Dreams, therefore, have become the
containers for the “gods” of archetypal psychology through which the soul can
still be initiated to see through its self-alienation and make its epistrophē to the
gods. The importance of dreams as a place to meet the gods was also recognized
by the Neoplatonists. Iamblichus spoke of dreams as the most effective way to
contact the divine for, he says: “in sleep we are completely liberated, freed as it
were, from certain bonds closely held on us, and we employ a life separated from
generation” (DM 106.7–9). It seems that today the imaginal vessels of the theur­
gic art: the sacred animals, stones, plants, music and incantations are accessible
to most of us only in our dreams. The dream has become the breathing place for
the imaginal soul.
Because of the importance of dreams to depth psychology and the treasury of
images they provide for imaginal experience, it is not surprising that Hillman was
provoked to perhaps his greatest insights in his highly acclaimed work, The Dream
and the Underworld.84 Here, Hillman plays on the two themes discussed above: (1)
the necessity of seeing through the heroic ego and its “self” importance, and (2) the
power of dream images to work on us independently of our thinking. In this latter
respect, Hillman’s method is a reaction both to Freud, who wanted to interpret the
dream in the language of waking life, and to Jung, who saw dreams as compensat­
ing for conscious attitudes. Following Corbin, Hillman argues that the dream is
a reality of its own and should not be reduced to the concerns of waking reality.
Hillman understands that to tap the imaginal capacities in dreams we must resist
the assumptions of both Freud and Jung that “the dream requires translation into
waking language …”85 He encourages us to go dark, into the dream and away from
the literal view of a dayworld that cannot see, in Corbin’s terms, sensible things as
83 Subsequently, Hillman recognized his need to elaborate a metaphysics (“I have known this
for some time …”), discusses the importance of Corbin, and begins imagining a “psycho­
logical cosmology” following Bachelard‘s commentaries on Plato‘s Timaeus. See Hillman,
“Back to Beyond: on Cosmology,” in Archetypal Process: Self and Divine in Whitehead,
Jung and Hillman, ed. by David Ray Grifin (Evanston, Illinois: Northwestern University
Press, 1989), 214–224.
84 The Dream and the Underworld (New york: Harper & Row, 1979).
85 Ibid., 12.

ARCHETyPAL PSyCHoLoGy, DREAMwoRK, AND NEoPLAToNISM

345

the theurgies of Angels. To the rational mind, to the heroic ego, Hillman’s move is
madness and he dares to make his intentions plain. He announces that
...we must sever the link with the dayworld, foregoing all ideas that originate
there – translation, reclamation, compensation. We must go over the bridge and
let it fall behind us, and if it will not fall, then let it burn.86

Several archetypal psychologists have walked over this bridge and into the dark
world of dreaming. Mary Watkins described her journey in a raw and brilliant
study, Waking Dreams,87 and, in a more practical context, Robert Bosnak, who
was also touched deeply by Corbin, has developed a method of group dreamwork
that enacts the principles outlined by Hillman in The Dream and the Underworld.
It is in the praxis of Bosnak’s dreamwork that the theoretical similarities between
Iamblichean theurgy and archetypal psychology are most vividly revealed, yet be­
cause the praxis in both theurgy and dreamwork is based on experiential knowing,
it does not translate easily into the clarity of academic discourse. To equate theur­
gic rites with contemporary dreamwork is a conjecture, but one that I think may
shed light on the existential requirements of theurgy as well as establish dream­
work more clearly in the Neoplatonic tradition as a praxis or theurgy required by a
rigorously apophatic theology. In effect, I believe that the techniques of Bosnak’s
dreamwork ensure that Hillman’s theoretical insights into imaginal reality do not
become merely brilliant speculations but remain – as Jambet insisted – imaginal
experiences mysteriously linked to the ineffable paradoxes of the One.

III. Dreamwork and the Archai
… the Gods are seen, yet not seen at all.
Proclus

… meeting with primordial consciousness is frightening.
It threatens to burn the straight white mind.
Robert Bosnak

Robert Bosnak’s Tracks in the Wilderness of Dreaming88 is not a scholarly book.
It has no footnotes, no index, and the author does not try to establish the validity
of his claims against recognized positions in the scholarship on dreams. Along
with Bosnak’s earlier work, A Little Course in Dreams,89 his books read like the
86
87
88
89

Ibid., 13.
Mary watkins, Waking Dreams (Dallas: Spring Publications, 1984; 1976).
Robert Bosnak, Tracks in the Wilderness of Dreaming (New york: Delacorte Press, 1996).
Robert Bosnak, A Little Course in Dreams (Boston: Shambhala Press, 1988).

346

GreGory SHAw

ield notes of an ethnographer except the natives Bosnak studies inhabit another
reality altogether: the imaginal world of Henry Corbin. In his dreamwork Bos­
nak does not approach dreams as day-residues of the objective reality of waking
life (Freud) nor does he treat dream images subjectively as different parts of the
psyche awaiting understanding and integration (Jung). The people of our dreams,
Bosnak insists, are autonomous entities with a will and intentionality of their own;
they are not our “sub­personalities.”90 To meet these dream entities on their own
terms requires a slow and careful descent into their world, and it is the method
of this descent and the subtle etiquette of encountering dream igures that allows
Bosnak’s work to fulill Corbin’s criteria for entering the mundus imaginalis.
Bosnak has led dream groups into this alien world of dreams for over 30
years, so he is well aware of the obstacles that confront us when we try to cross
over into the darkness of dreaming.91 He highlights two episodes from Jung’s
autobiography to exemplify the dificulties we all face when we enter imaginal
reality.
During Jung’s travels in Africa, he recounts a powerful moment when, alone
in nature, with “the world as it has always been,” he felt himself drawn into a
timeless reverie, as if he were “the irst human being to recognize that this was
the world, but who did not know that in this moment he had irst really created
it.”92 Relecting on his awareness of nature, Jung continues: “Man, I, in an invis­
ible act of creation, put the stamp of perfection on the world by giving it objective
existence … Human consciousness created objective existence and meaning, and
man found his indispensable place in the great process of being …”93 Despite
Jung’s considerable experience with the unconscious, in this episode he seems
to exemplify the characteristics of the heroic ego criticized by Hillman, claiming
that his subjective awareness has created the world!
After his remarkable “confrontation with the unconscious” in 1913, Jung
visited “primitive” peoples whose containers for the unconscious were still ex­
plicit and functioning in their cultures. They served Jung as a conirmation and
continuation of his own internal discoveries, yet in the face of a truly archaic
reality, his habitual North European mentality reduced the signiicance of nature
and all creation to human proportions, imagining that “man” put the “stamp of
90 Bosnak, Tracks, 50.
91 I spent several years as a member of Robert Bosnak’s dreamwork group in Boston, be­
ginning in 1992. My research into Iamblichean theurgy happened to coincide with my
participation in Bosnak’s group. My comments about the nature of dreamwork and the
imaginal world relect my experience for over a decade of working with dreams. It led to the
publication of a previous article comparing theurgy to archetypal dreamwork, “Containing
Ecstasy: The Strategies of Iamblichean Theurgy,” Dionysius, Vol. XXI, Dec. 2003, 53–88;
this article stands alone but shares some elements with the 2003 publication.
92 Cited by Bosnak, Tracks, 91–92.
93 Ibid., 92.

ARCHETyPAL PSyCHoLoGy, DREAMwoRK, AND NEoPLAToNISM

347

perfection on the world” by recognizing it objectively in his mind. Later, when
Jung encounters one of the inhabitants of this archaic world, he has a profoundly
different experience. During his entire African trip Jung says that on only one
occasion did he dream of a “Negro,” and he was not an African but an American
who had once cut Jung’s hair in Chattanooga, Tennessee. He explains:
In the dream he was holding a tremendous, red­hot curling iron to my head,
intending to make my hair kinky – that is to give me Negro hair. I could already
feel the painful heat, and awoke with a sense of terror.94

Jung says that he realized then that he was “all too close to ‘going black,’” and
compares his experience to those of soldiers in the First World War who were
“pulled out the front lines when [they] started dreaming too much of war scenes,
for that meant [they] no longer possessed any psychic defenses against the impressions from outside.”95 Bosnak explains that when one of the inhabitants of
this primordial reality was about to penetrate Jung’s armor and share his “head,”
his curly and black way of envisioning the world, Jung is terriied and interprets
his situation in terms of combat with an alien intruder – he was in danger of “go­
ing black.”96
Bosnak made his own journey to a “primitive” culture among the Aboriginals
of Australia, and he highlights the Aboriginals’ view of nature and uses it as a
metaphor for his approach to dreams. Instead of imagining that human beings
bring the world into existence through our objective relection, the Aboriginals
fuse their awareness of nature with the speciic intelligence and intentionality of
the Ancient Beings who are – even now – dreaming the world into existence, into
what the Aboriginals call “songlines,” the landscape revealing the traces of this
“dreaming,” the physical world being their song. As Bruce Chatwin put it, in the
Dreaming, in the primordial time
[t]he Ancients sang their way all over the world. They sang the rivers and ranges,
salt-pans and sand dunes. They hunted, ate, made love, danced, killed: wherever
their tracks led they left a trail of music … They wrapped the whole world in a
web of song …97

A song the Aboriginals participate in directly in their dances, chanting, and care
of the land. Bosnak reports that his Aboriginal hosts tend a speciic songline, that
94 Ibid., 98.
95 Ibid., 94.
96 Ibid., 95. If one considers “blacks” in dreams, not sociologically but archetypally – as Hill­
man suggests – they may be seen as shades of the underworld menacing the ego with
death; in this light, it is no wonder that Jung was terriied. See Hillman, The Dream and the
Underworld, 144–46.
97 Bruce Chatwin, The Songlines (New york: Penguin Books, 1988), 73.

GreGory SHAw

348

of the lizard Ngintaka, and he shares his struggle to enter into the dreaming of
this Ancient Being. Bosnak writes:
Who enters the landscape enters its imagination, its story. We will follow Peren­
tie lizard, Ngintaka, inding ourselves inside the dreaming of Ngintaka. We are
part of his dreaming. He is the dreaming “I” who lives the story we will partici­
pate in for forty kilometers … My Western ego protests. It has always been the
center of its own dreaming, its perspective the one from which dreaming was
experienced. Who wants to be an extra in the imaginings of a lizard? Haven’t I
been contracted for the lead?98

How different this sounds from Jung’s African reverie! And in the same way
that the Aboriginals enter into the atmosphere and presence of their Ancients
through the “songlines” so, Bosnak explains, in dreamwork we enter into the
intelligence and intentionality of dream images. Though our “gods” may no
longer be contained for us in the landscape, they still reveal themselves in our
dreaming, inviting us to participate in their presences, however much I suppose
that “my” dreams refer only to me. After all, it is dificult to see through the
habit of feeling that my subjective awareness brings “reality” to the world. Not
only have we been contracted for the lead but we also believe that we’re sitting
in the director’s chair.
Bosnak continues the efforts of Hillman to undermine our habit of conscious­
ness that always sees itself as the lead, the center of signiicance and arbiter of
reality. In our heroic ixation we fear to lose control, to be penetrated by the other,
to “go black.” Like the Greeks of Iamblichus, like Jung in the barber chair, we
have become caught up in our self­importance and fear to re­enter the archaic
way, to feel our awareness curled back in epistrophē to the primordial rhythm of
the Egyptian, the African, the Aboriginal … not that we should try to mimic them
literally, but to encounter them theurgically, as symbols of what is most archaic
in the soul and most alien to our habitual consciousness.
Since 1979, Bosnak has been leading groups into these archaic and alienat­
ing experiences that form an essential part of his dreamwork. While “archaic
and alienating” sound mildly unappealing in the abstract, when we re­renter a
dream and descend into its atmosphere to feel its images viscerally, when we ind
ourselves inside the dream and it is no longer “in my head,” we are subjected to
much greater anxiety, vulnerability and pressure than we are accustomed to. Put­
ting a body on the ineffable paradoxes of the One can be nothing short of terrify­
ing. The irst principle in Bosnak’s work, therefore, is to create a vessel to contain
the pressure provoked by re-entering the dream. According to Bosnak, when a
group descends together into the atmosphere of a dream and is able to absorb
98 Bosnak, Tracks, 98.

ARCHETyPAL PSyCHoLoGy, DREAMwoRK, AND NEoPLAToNISM

349

the density of its images, the increased pressure is contained, and this allows the
dreamer and the dreamworkers to be penetrated, or “cooked” as Bosnak puts it,
by the atmosphere of the dream. This “pressure cooking” loosens our heroic ixa­
tion and gradually allows awareness to be distributed into several parts – deined
by the dream images – rather than remaining ixed and defended in our singular
daytime self­consciousness.
The loosening of the ego’s centrality in dreamwork corresponds to a funda­
mental principle in Iamblichean theurgy. Since our embodied identity is funda­
mentally alienated from the soul’s original nature, Iamblichus maintained that we
must conform ourselves to divinities that seem to come to the soul from the outside (exōthen) in order to recover the “more ancient” presence within the soul.99
The form the encounter takes is always relative to the capacity of the soul, yet
whether it comes in the form of animal sacriice, burning incense or chanting the
names of the gods, the soul is awakened to its lost divinity by immersing itself
in the ritual. To neglect these rites condemned the soul to a blind subservience to
those very powers that – if they were given containers – could awaken the soul to
its divinity. In fact, the soul’s disorders indicated to the theurgist what god needed
to be propitiated theurgically and given a ritual receptacle. In every theurgy, Iam­
blichus emphasized that our self-identity had to be suficiently drawn into the rite
to allow our awareness to fuse with the ritual actions and participate directly in
the activity of the god. As Iamblichus put it:
All of theurgy has a dual character. One is that it is a rite conducted by men
which preserves our natural order in the universe; the other is that it is empow­
ered by divine symbols (sunthēmata), is raised up through them to be joined
on high with the Gods, and is led harmoniously round to their order. This latter
aspect can rightly be called taking the shape of the Gods (DM 184.1–8).

Allowing for changes in culture and rhetorical style, the same process occurs in
dreamwork. Like theurgy, “all of dreamwork” is dual and in precisely the same
way. If we do not reduce dream images to external reality or to aspects of my
“self” but see them as autonomous entities, then we can appreciate that their of­
ten familiar appearances in dreams are shaped by our own receptivity and despite
the personal context from which the image is drawn, its essence remains inde­
pendent of my subjectivity. Rather than seeing the dream as a commentary on the
day, Hillman prefers to see it as a digestion of the dayworld,100 transforming it
into an imaginal reality and, in the process, drawing our day life ever closer to the
imaginal. “In dreams,” Hillman writes, “we are visited by the daimons, nymphs,

99 DM 165.14; cf. Shaw, Theurgy and the Soul, op. cit., 138–139.
100 Hillman, The Dream and the Underworld, 96.

350

GreGory SHAw

heroes and Gods shaped like our friends of last evening.”101 So in dreamwork,
although the dreamer’s associations to a dream igure may reveal characteristics
useful for the dreamworker’s sensitivity to the image and may provide emotional
texture to help strengthen the vessel of the dreamwork, the image itself is never
taken literally as the dreamer’s mother, father, sister, etc. Each is an imaginal
entity who takes on the shape of a familiar igure.
In dreamwork, to the degree that we are able to enter the atmosphere and ac­
tivity of the images, we become that atmosphere and can sense what the images
want, we feel their voice and their will lead us, inhabit us, possess us, and yet
we remain a small group of people sitting in a dimly lit ofice doing dreamwork.
Dreamwork shares theurgy’s duality: on the one hand the rite is conducted by
people with identities in this world, yet on the other hand, by means of the dream
images we are led into another reality, become possessed by its igures and, like
Iamblichus’s theurgists, “we take on the shape of the gods.” Just as the theurgic
sunthēma does its work on the soul without our thinking, so the dream images
inluence us to enter their dreaming, to participate in their world.
Lest “taking on the shape of the Gods” sounds too elevating and heroic, it is
important to remember that the shapes the gods most often present to us relect
the pathologies of the soul in the material order: the corruptions, ruptures, colli­
sions and decay of generated life. It is one thing to write about this process, quite
another to experience it: to feel involuntary spasms and contractions in the gut,
breathless constriction, quivering of limbs and the desperate panic of the mind.
Like Iamblichean theurgy, dreamwork too, begins with the material gods and the
pathological habits in which we have become coagulated and ixed. Like theurgy,
dreamwork also requires a irm foundation in those very elements we most abhor
and try to rise above: the shit, the mud, the ugliness of our existence.102 To con­
tain the pressure of these encounters requires great precision and care on the part
of dreamworkers. They must lead the dreamer slowly into the atmosphere of the
image at a pace determined both by the image and by the dreamer’s resistance
to the image. This process often requires drawing emotionally charged associa­
tions from the dreamer’s dayworld in order to strengthen the vessel of the work.
Bosnak provides an example.
He refers to the dream of a middle­aged man to show that associations from
the dayworld can be used to serve the nightworld. At the same time, he dem­
onstrates how a pathological image, properly contained, allows the dreamer to
reach the “god” who resides in the image. The dream:
101 Hillman, The Dream and the Underworld, 62.
102 Iamblichus speaks of the hieratic value of the image of mud in the egyptian symbol of the
lotus holding the god Harpokrates; see Shaw, Theurgy and the Soul, 63; Hillman, The
Dream and the Underworld, 183–85; Bosnak, Tracks, 47–59.

ARCHETyPAL PSyCHoLoGy, DREAMwoRK, AND NEoPLAToNISM

351

A middle­aged man dreams that he is sitting by a refrigerator. He feels lonely
and rejected. His wife has left. The refrigerator is empty.103

Through re-entering the dream and making a slow descent into this cold and
lonely place, the dreamer is led into the icy atmosphere of the refrigerator. He
remembers, by association, the coldness of his mother, the fears of being alone
as a child and now again as an adult. Rather than draw the dream images out
of the dark to focus on personal problems, Bosnak uses the emotions released
by the associations to strengthen the vessel of the work and move into a deeper
identiication with the dream image, importing the emotions of daily life to serve
the soul’s dreaming rather than exporting imagery out of the dream to serve the
dreamer’s “self-development.” Bosnak describes this deepening:
As we make this importing move, the feelings in the dream are magniied: he
suddenly feels himself in a deep freeze. A spontaneous transit has taken place to
the interior, frigid core of the freezer. The deep freeze pervades his entire body.
He begins to feel a drugged glow of well­being … He has been moved to the
core of cold. The feeling of isolation has been essentialized into a concentrated
emotional substance through distillation … The dreamer knows the essence of
coldness (my emphases).104

By penetrating to the essence of coldness, the dreamer begins to feel his loneli­
ness turn into “an ability to be alone,” clinging less to the warmth of his wife, and
in turn, the dream wife feels less constricted by the husband. The man’s dread
of loneliness and coldness which had poisoned him has been intensiied in the
pressure-cooking of dreamwork into its own antidote, a process Bosnak com­
pares to homeopathic distillation where the pharmakon as poison is transformed
into medicine: the dreadful coldness of the refrigerator becomes, in its essence, a
cure, allowing the dreamer to contain the “concentrated emotional substance” of
cold. In theurgic terms, the dreamer, plagued by daimons of loneliness, isolation
and cold, reconigures his awareness into a receptacle of the god who has author­
ity over these congealing and isolating powers. By properly receiving the god,
the dreamer is cured of its ill effects: loneliness, frigidity, and rejection.
This god, Iamblichus would tell us, is Kronos, whose ancient power “stabiliz­
es” the soul, but when improperly (unconsciously) received he is experienced as
“rigidity and coldness.”105 Ficino, similarly speaks of the power of Saturn (Kro­
nos) to effect a frozen experience like death.106 The arts of theurgy and dream­
work allow the soul to receive the god, to contain the “concentrated emotional
103 Bosnak, Tracks., 53.
104 Ibid., 53–54.
105 DM 55.5–10.
106 Thomas Moore, The Planets Within (Great Barrington, MA: Lindisfarne Books, 1990), 170.

352

GreGory SHAw

substance,” through a ritual in which the god reveals himself as “Refrigerator”:
the sunthēma of Kronos in his crystalizing power.
Clearly, there can be no map or guide book for these excursions into imagi­
nal reality. Abstract schemes, for example, that would equate refrigerators with
Kronos cannot help the dreamworker. The next refrigerator, after all, might be
full of cool, moist fruit, thus creating an atmosphere entirely foreign to Kronos­
The-Deep-Freezer. Similarly, the dreamworker cannot know how she will enter
the dream, but must learn how to trust her not-knowing and be willing to follow
the dreaming of imaginal beings, guided often only by the affects aroused by her
resistance to those beings. Bosnak admits to experiencing “a not-knowing so
profound that it makes me shiver. I passionately don’t know,” he says.107 Yet, like
the theurgists who share in this not-knowing, he enters the activity and atmos­
phere of dream images and learns how to swim in their currents. After a number
of such excursions, the dreamworker begins to recognize changes in the texture
and density of atmospheres in the imaginal realm, but this can only be learned
in increments of experience, not by theoretical study. Similarly, Iamblichus ex­
plains to Porphyry that knowledge of the gods in theurgy can only be learned by
experience. He says:
Only theurgists know these things in a precise way since they have experienced
these activities. Only they are able to know what the perfection of the sacred
operation is (DM 229.17–230.2).108

One element that may distinguish dreamwork from Neoplatonic theurgy is the
degree to which the participants are possessed by the images. In theurgy, the pos­
session was occasionally total and the theurgist sometimes entered a trance that
entirely obliterated discursive awareness.109 In dreamwork the participants ordi­
narily remain awake, and however much they are possessed by the atmosphere
of imaginal beings, they remain lightly tethered to this world. This is also what
distinguishes Jung’s active imagination from theurgic work with images, not – as
Hillman argued – that theurgy attempted to work on the gods and coerce spirits
to serve human desires. Perhaps because the cultural context of late antiquity
presented less resistance to the imaginal world, the trances that occurred in the­
urgy simply relect a cultural difference in boundaries with imaginal beings. As
regards such trances, I suspect the possessions in theurgy were different in de­
107 Bosnak, Tracks, 11.
108 Compare also his response to Porphyry’s theoretical approach to theurgy: “Some of these
[questions], such as require experience of actions for their accurate understanding, will
not be possible [to explain] by words alone (DM 6.6–7) … [I]t is not enough simply to learn
about these things, nor would anyone who simply knows these things become accom­
plished in the divine science” (DM 114.1–2).
109 DM 110.12–111.2.

ARCHETyPAL PSyCHoLoGy, DREAMwoRK, AND NEoPLAToNISM

353

gree, but not in kind, from the possessions in dreamwork. In fact, Iamblichus
maintains that the deepest contact with the gods come when the soul is in a hyp­
nagogic state, “between waking and sleeping” (DM 103.13), the kind of aware­
ness exercised in dreamwork.
Bosnak’s dreamwork may be described as a collective form of Jungian active
imagination. The difference in Bosnak’s method is that a group of participants
can intensify and contain images that might otherwise overwhelm an individu­
al and, more importantly, without the help of dreamworkers, it is unlikely that
dreamers could overcome their unconscious resistances to the dream. Before the
middle­aged man was able to enter the deep freeze, the participants in his dream
had probably already entered the frozen atmosphere and had begun to feel its
affects in their bodies, noting, through its location and intensity, resistances to
the image but not-knowing if this was their own resistance, that of the dreamer,
or both. This symbiotic capacity allows the dreamworker to use physical affects
as guides to gently ask the dreamer how his body or parts of his body feel, us­
ing whatever sensate image the dreamworker feels most likely to intensify the
affect in the dreamer’s body and deepen his experience of the image.110 By al­
lowing themselves to carry the affect of the refrigerator, the dreamworkers help
the dreamer do something he could not consciously will to do – experience an
identiication with the freezer.111 For someone who is terriied of the cold, this
transit would be impossible without the support of other “containers” sharing the
load, so to speak, so that he could experience the distillation of his fear and dread
into the essence of coldness.112
Identifying with refrigerators may seem to have very little to do with Neopla­
tonic theurgy, but that perception only relects our own literalness and rigidity as
regards the gods of Platonism. The Neoplatonists knew that no one has ever seen
the gods despite the abundance of theophanies reported in the literature. The gods
are entirely ineffable and invisible, so if they are seen, even in visions or dreams,
they are clothed in the imagination of the dreamer. Proclus explains this:
… the Gods are seen, yet not seen at all. In fact, those who see the Gods witness
them in the luminous garments of their souls … Each God is formless, even if
he is seen with a form. For the form is not in him but comes from him due to the
incapacity of the viewer to see the formless without a form. Rather, according
to his nature he sees by means of forms.113

110 Bosnak, Tracks, 21–26.
111 Ibid., 31.
112 Ibid., 59.
113 Cited in Shaw, Theurgy and the Soul, 246–247; from Proclus Commentary on the Republic
I.39.5–27; 28–40.

GreGory SHAw

354

The luminous garments described by Proclus refer to the soul’s ochēma, our
subtle vehicle or body which is intimately tied to the soul’s phantastikon, our
image-making power: the imagination. Since the ineffable symbols of the gods
are clothed “in accord with our nature,” then it should not be surprising if these
long-forgotten powers would appear to us, as Hillman says, shaped like familiar
friends, lovers, relatives, or even refrigerators! Our imaginal experiences today
tend to be restricted to dreams while in Iamblichus’s time daytime experiences
were also common, yet the soul’s imaginal body, its ochēma was, and continues
to be, the vehicle in which we encounter the gods. Hillman recognized the con­
nection between his imaginal work and the Neoplatonic ochēma for he writes,
describing dream images:
[They] become the means of translating life-events into soul, and this work,
aided by the conscious elaboration of the imagination, builds an imaginal vessel
or “ship of death” (a phrase taken from D. H. Lawrence), that is similar to the
subtle body, or ochēma of the Neoplatonists …114

Bosnak’s dreamwork is just such a labor, building a vessel of the imagination,
and while it would be unreasonable to think that dreamwork reproduces the the­
urgical art in an explicit way, it clearly follows the seven principles central to
Neoplatonic theurgy enumerated above:
1A. Just as theurgy was not an attempt to manipulate the gods, so dreamwork
is not so much our work on dreams as it is a discipline that allows dreams to
work on us.
2A. In each session of dreamwork, the group enters a trance-like state deined
by the contours of the dream. Although the dreamworkers become “possessed”
by the images of the dream, they remain tethered to their awareness that they are
doing dreamwork. Like theurgists, they inhabit two worlds.
3A. The descent into dream reality provokes intense emotional reactions that
would push us outside the dream unless a vessel is carefully built by the group
within the texture of the dream images. Like the theurgic hupodochē, the strength
of this vessel is determined by the capacity of the dreamer and of the group to
contain the intensity of emotions released.
4A. In dreamwork the “gods” appear in a variety of forms, veiling (and revealing) themselves through images of friends, relatives, or even household
appliances. Like the theurgic sunthēmata, these images allow us to contact the
depths hidden in the soul.
5A. Perhaps the most important and certainly the most dificult principle of
dreamwork is that dreamworkers do not know what the dream means nor what
114 Hillman, Archetypal Psychology, 28.

ARCHETyPAL PSyCHoLoGy, DREAMwoRK, AND NEoPLAToNISM

355

they will do with the dream until they are in it. As Iamblichus said of theurgy,
“we don’t perform these acts intellectually [i.e., interpretively] for then their en­
ergy would be intellectual and depend on us....”(DM 96.11–13). In the same way,
dreamwork is determined by the images and the subtle atmospheres in which
they are received. This follows Hillman’s appeal in Dream and the Underworld
to sever the link with the dayworld and resist our habit of translating the dream
into waking language.115
6A. Dreamwork is a discipline of the imagination and a way of consciously
re­entering a world where images “do not depend on us” but act on us, affecting
our mood and activity. The capacity to endure the pressures released in dream­
work is a function of the strength of our ochēma, a body of imagination that,
according to the Neoplatonists, endures the brokenness of embodied dismember­
ment as well as the beatitude of a uniied multiplicity.
7A. Hillman, following Jung, asserts that today the “gods have become dis­
eases” and that we must now recover the gods in our pathologies. To seek tran­
scendence prior to a full recognition of our psycho­pathology, Hillman says, is
“an exercise in self­deception.”116 Just as theurgy required a preliminary worship
of material gods who preside over the suffering of generated lives, so dreamwork
involves an encounter with these pathologies and understands that each agony,
each poison of the soul, is also a medicine, a god waiting to be properly received
in the pressure-cooking container of dreamwork.
Of course, there are also signiicant differences between contemporary dream­
work and theurgy. Iamblichus had the cultural support of well-respected tradi­
tions of worshipping the gods in sacriices and divination to which he could re­
fer. This provided a familiarity that archetypal psychologists lack, for they are
limited to dreams and illnesses as the only archaic and uncontrolled experiences
that we must, reluctantly, recognize in our psyche. It is, therefore, more dificult
today to draw people into imaginal reality because of the terror we feel in the face
of the unfamiliar, the other, the alien. Bosnak must therefore work through much
denser emotional resistance to the “other” than the theurgists of Iamblichus’s or
Ficino’s time. Because of our heroic resistance to darkness, the work must go
very slowly. Bosnak explains:
In dreamwork we constantly modulate pressure in order to keep a balance be­
tween the imperative of dreamwork to press deeper into the sensitive areas that
repel consciousness and the need of the dreamer to feel safe (my emphasis).117

115 James Hillman, The Dream and the Underworld, 13.
116 James Hillman, Re-Visioning Psychology, op. cit., 70.
117 Bosnak, Tracks, 73.

GreGory SHAw

356

To press too hard or too fast breaks the vessel and we rise to the surface, out of
the imaginal and into our opinions about the dream. Then we are no longer in the
dream, but the dream is in us and subject to our control. Iamblichus may have
spoken of similar details to his students, but we have no knowledge of it. He may
also have recognized a symbiotic way of knowing through a kind of physiologi­
cal grammar that Bosnak describes,118 but our evidence is too meagre to pursue it.

IV. Conclusion: Hailing Hermes
Our ancestors dedicated the discoveries of their
wisdom to this deity, inscribing all their own
writings with the name of Hermes.
Iamblichus

I have attempted to show that archetypal psychology and dreamwork in particu­
lar follow the trajectory of the theurgic Neoplatonism initiated by Iamblichus. By
reversing Plotinus’s disembodied psychology, Iamblichus was able to recover the
great wealth of Plotinus’s insights into our awareness of the gods in the material
world. Iamblichus elaborated these insights, and in theurgy he developed a praxis
that coordinated the needs of souls with appropriate ritual vessels to mediate the
presence of the gods and bring the soul back into their company. Because Hill­
man misread theurgy as an attempt to manipulate the gods he did not draw deeply
from Iamblichus’s insights but developed his own psychological praxis that coor­
dinates our psychic needs with images that contain the “gods” in a theurgic way
and effect the soul’s deepening. Following the ground-breaking work of Jung,
Hillman’s archetypal psychology is a brilliant contemporary expression of Neo­
platonic epistrophē, drawing the soul back to its archetypal roots, but the effect of
Hillman’s theoretical insights might be short­lived and the epistrophē perverted
if the principles of archetypal psychology are left in the hands of intellectuals,
who, like Iamblichus’s “Greeks”, worship at the altar of discursive brilliance.
Iamblichus was by no means anti­intellectual, but he understood the titanic
impulse of the discursive mind and knew that it needed to ind its limits, to be
contained. The praxis of theurgy provided that container. In a similar way, Robert
Bosnak’s dreamwork provides a container for the theoretical insights of Hill­
man’s archetypal psychology. Dreamwork moves intellectual insight into imme­
118 The symbiotic and telepathic knowing Bosnak reports among his Aboriginals (Tracks,
20–22) sound remarkably like the reports of supernatural powers attributed to the later
Platonists; see G. Shaw, “Platonic Siddhas: Supernatural Philosophers of Neoplatonism,”
in Beyond Physicalism, ed. by E. Kelly, A. Crabtree, P. Marshall (Lanham, Maryland: Row­
man & Littleield, 2014), 275–314.

ARCHETyPAL PSyCHoLoGy, DREAMwoRK, AND NEoPLAToNISM

357

diate experience, ensuring that the understanding so necessary for epistrophē is
not co­opted immediately by our discursive ability and the hubris that so often
attends it. The mysteries, Aristotle tells us, are not a matter of knowledge but
experience,119 and dreamwork is a contemporary expression of initiation into the
mysteries, the Neoplatonic mustagogia. If we wish to be more than intellectually
entertained at Hillman’s call to burn the bridge to the dayworld; if we dare to no
longer face and relect only the light of our habitual daytime knowing; if we are
willing to encounter shadows in darkness and become a shade ourselves, then we
must accept the unglamorous discipline exempliied in dreamwork.
The theurgists were right, I think, in attributing all their intellectual discov­
eries to Hermes, to a god capable of containing unbearable things, mysteries
that would inlate us. It seems that Hermes/Mercury must also be credited for
Bosnak’s discovery, for it was in an encounter with this god that he “stumbled
upon an insight speciic to my work.”120 While dreaming of his native Holland,
Bosnak inds himself near Leiden University, his alma mater. He notices an an­
cient statue in the canal and dives in the water to pull it up. “It is Mercury,” he
says exaltedly, “the one of the winged feet, carrying his staff with the two snakes,
his left hand up in the air in the way you would hail a cab in New York City (my
emphasis).”121 After a solemn struggle to pull the statue out of the water Bosnak
stands to look at it. He says:
It is at this point that I realize I am dreaming. I look at the bridge and see that
it is entirely real. I feel the ground under my feet and know it is irm. I look at
the sky and observe the clouds. This world is absolutely real, and yet I know for
sure that I am dreaming …122

Excited to share this knowledge with someone, Bosnak rushes out to the street to
stop a taxi. He continues:
The cabdriver lowers his window and looks at me, a questioning look on his face.
I yell at him, “I’m dreaming. This is all a dream. You are part of my dream!”
At irst the cabdriver looks incredulous. Suddenly he seems to realize that I
must be some kind of lunatic, and the expression on his face is a combination of
boredom and slight disgust. He rolls the window up and drives off.123

119 Describing the Eleusinian mysteries, Aristotle said those who enter the initiations “do not
learn anything (ou mathein ti ) but experience (pathein ) something by being put into a
changed state of mind (diatethenai )” Aristotle in Synesius Dio 10; cited by Marvin Meyer,
The Ancient Mysteries (New york: Harper Collins, 1987), 12.
120 Bosnak, Tracks, 50 (his emphasis).
121 Ibid., 11.
122 Ibid., 12.
123 Ibid., 12.

358

GreGory SHAw

We don’t know precisely how the face of this cabdriver affected Bosnak, but it
was enough to throw him out of the hubris of seeing dream igures as parts of his
personality. The “lucidity” Bosnak describes has become a much sought for ex­
perience by those wanting to control their dreams. Fortunately, in this initiatory
dream into the world of Hermes, Bosnak receives a profoundly different experi­
ence and lesson: the dream images are real, entirely real in the imaginal world of
dreams. The taxi driver is not part of me.
Hermes is the god who escorts the dead into the underworld, the winged god
who takes souls across the bridge into the world of dreams and shadows. Did
this wily god, the “very crafty, super subtle Hermes”124 appear twice for Bosnak?
Once in his traditional form, the Great Archetype pulled out of the waters to the
surface, and then later, after Bosnak looks at the god and his own surface aware­
ness is pulled into the dream, when Bosnak wants to announce his god-likeness
to someone, again Hermes appears, but now in the form of the taxi driver, the one
who takes us over the bridge. It is this living Hermes, hidden­and­revealed in his
archetypal activity, who teaches Bosnak with a wordless gesture that the entities
of the imaginal world are not sub-personalities, not parts of his dream. Dream
images must not be met while wearing our heroically inlated armor. Shades must
be met by a shadowy, imaginal ego. It was this taxi driver, Bosnak says, that
provided him with the key, his sunthēma to the imaginal world. Fortunately, this
cabdriver was just a bit disgusted with his discoverer, enough to allow Bosnak to
realize the autonomy and reality of dream images.

124 The Homeric Hymn to Hermes, 22–23, tr. by Charles Boer (Asphodel Press, 2006).

ARCHETyPAL PSyCHoLoGy, DREAMwoRK, AND NEoPLAToNISM

359

Gregory Shaw
is Professor of Religious Studies at Stonehill College, Massachusetts.
He is the author of Theurgy and the Soul: The Neoplatonism of Iamblichus
and a number of articles on the later Neoplatonists and on Iamblichus in particular.
He is currently working on a manuscript that explores the embodied aspects of
later Platonic philosophy and its similarity to the tantric traditions of South Asia.
Theurgy is an embodied Platonism very much at odds with the dualism
that has been identiied with Platonic philosophy.
gshaw@stonehill.edu

