A Geometry of Music

OXFORD STUDIES IN MUSIC THEORY
Series Editor Richard Cohn
Studies in Music with Text, David Lewin
Music as Discourse: Semiotic Adventures in Romantic Music, Koﬁ Agawu
Playing with Meter: Metric Manipulations in Haydn and Mozart’s Chamber Music for
Strings, Danuta Mirka
Songs in Motion: Rhythm and Meter in the German Lied, Yonatan Malin
Tonality and Transformation, Steven Rings
A Geometry of Music: Harmony and Counterpoint in the Extended Common Practice,
Dmitri Tymoczko

A Geometry of Music
Harmony and Counterpoint in the Extended
Common Practice

DMITRI TYMOCZKO

1
2011

3
Oxford University Press, Inc., publishes works that further
Oxford University’s objective of excellence
in research, scholarship, and education.
Oxford New York
Auckland Cape Town Dar es Salaam Hong Kong Karachi
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi
New Delhi Shanghai Taipei Toronto
With ofﬁces in
Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece
Guatemala Hungary Italy Japan Poland Portugal Singapore
South Korea Switzerland Thailand Turkey Ukraine Vietnam

Copyright © 2011 by Oxford University Press, Inc.
Published by Oxford University Press, Inc.
198 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10016
www.oup.com
Oxford is a registered trademark of Oxford University Press
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
without the prior permission of Oxford University Press.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Tymoczko, Dmitri, 1969–
A geometry of music : harmony and counterpoint
in the extended common practice / Dmitri Tymoczko.
p. cm. — (Oxford studies in music theory)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-19-533667-2
1. Harmony. 2. Counterpoint. 3. Musical analysis. I. Title.
MT50.T98 2010
781.2—dc22
2009046428
Oxford Web Music
Visit the companion website at:
www.oup.com/us/ageometryofmusic
For more information on Oxford Web Music, visit www.oxfordwebmusic.com

9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Printed in the United States of America
on acid-free paper

To the memory of my father, who predicted I’d someday
get tired of rock and want to understand other
musical styles as well.

This page intentionally left blank

acknowledgments

In college, I met four people who had a profound impact on my life. Milton Babbitt
gave me permission to be a composer, showing me that a serious artist could also be
a rigorous thinker. Stanley Cavell opened my ears to philosophy, demonstrating that
rigorous thinking could begin with scrupulous honesty. Hilary Putnam, who seemed
to know everything, reawakened my interest in science and math. And Noam Elkies
taught me what true intellectual and musical excellence looked like, setting standards
that I am happy to try to uphold, even though I might never actually meet them.
As a graduate student, I learned how to be a professional musician from Edmund
Campion, Steve Coleman, Bevan Manson, David Milnes, and David Wessel. Later,
my colleagues at Princeton University provided me with a supportive home, encouraging my nonconformist and cross-disciplinary tendencies. (Paul Lansky and Steve
Mackey in particular taught me not to worry about the slings and arrows of outraged
forefathers.) Rick Cohn, Dan Harrison, Fred Lerdahl, and Joe Straus all nurtured my
ﬂedgling theoretical career. Rick’s theoretical work was also quite inﬂuential, as it
pioneered the use of geometry to model chromatic voice leading. Conversations with
Clifton Callender, Ian Quinn, and Rachel Hall were crucial to developing a number of the ideas in this book, as can be seen from our various co-authored papers. I
still cherish the memory of fall 2004, when Cliff, Ian, and I—and occasionally Noam
Elkies—exchanged excited emails about the links between music and geometry.
Rick Cohn, John Halle, Dan Harrison, Christopher Segall, Bill Sethares, and Jason
Yust all read very large portions of the manuscript, providing countless substantive
and organizational suggestions. Jason’s highly professional copyediting, performed
on short notice, caught a number of embarrassing errors. Students in Princeton’s
Music 309, a mixed undergraduate/graduate theory course, read a ﬁrst draft of the
entire manuscript and offered many useful comments. One of these students, Andrew
Jones, produced the audio examples on the book’s companion website. Another, Jeff
Levenberg, proofread the book and produced the index. Still more comments were
provided by Koﬁ Agawu, Fernando Benadon, Poundie Bernstein, Elisabeth Camp,
Mark Dancigers, Robert Gjerdingen, Philip Johnson-Laird, Jon Kochavi, Yuhwon Lee,
Steve Rings, Dean Rosenthal, Lauren Spencer, and Dan Trueman. Students in Music
306 (a later iteration of 309) caught an inﬁnite number of typos while the book was
in page proofs.
Suzanne Ryan at Oxford University Press was a ﬁrm and relentless advocate;
her calm presence helped guide this unusual book past some formidable obstacles.
As series editor, Rick Cohn was a benevolent overseer from ﬁrst to last. Important

viii

Acknowledgments

ﬁnancial support was provided by Princeton University, the Radcliffe Institute for
Advanced Study, and the Guggenheim Foundation.
Finally, conversations with my wife, Elisabeth Camp, have provided more than a
decade of intellectual stimulation, emotional support, and just plain fun. Since 2008,
conversations with our son Lukas have been equally rewarding, though somewhat
less relevant to the concerns of this book.

contents

About the Companion Website xv
Introduction xvii
PART I

THEORY

chapter 1

Five Components of Tonality 3
1.1
1.2
1.3

1.4
1.5

chapter 2

The ﬁve features 5
Perception and the ﬁve features 8
Four claims 11
1.3.1 Harmony and counterpoint constrain one another 12
1.3.2 Scale, macroharmony, and centricity are
independent 15
1.3.3 Modulation involves voice leading 17
1.3.4 Music can be understood geometrically 19
Music, magic, and language 22
Outline of the book, and a suggestion for impatient
readers 26

Harmony and Voice Leading 28
Linear pitch space 28
Circular pitch-class space 30
Transposition and inversion as distance-preserving
functions 33
2.4 Musical objects 35
2.5 Voice leadings and chord progressions 41
2.6 Comparing voice leadings 45
2.6.1 Individual and uniform transposition 45
2.6.2 Individual and uniform inversion 45
2.7 Voice-leading size 49
2.8 Near identity 51
2.9 Harmony and counterpoint revisited 52
2.9.1 Transposition 53
2.9.2 Inversion 56
2.9.3 Permutation 58
2.10 Acoustic consonance and near evenness 61
2.1
2.2
2.3

x

Contents

chapter 3

A Geometry of Chords 65
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6
3.7
3.8
3.9
3.10
3.11
3.12
3.13

chapter 4

Scales 116
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.6
4.7
4.8
4.9
4.10

chapter 5

Ordered pitch space 65
The Parable of the Ant 69
Two-note chord space 70
Chord progressions and voice leadings in two-note chord
space 73
Geometry in analysis 76
Harmonic consistency and efﬁcient voice leading 79
Pure parallel and pure contrary motion 81
Three-dimensional chord space 85
Higher dimensional chord spaces 93
Triads are from Mars; seventh chords are from Venus 97
Voice-leading lattices 103
Two musical geometries 112
Study guide 114

A scale is a ruler 116
Scale degrees, scalar transposition, and scalar inversion 119
Evenness and scalar transposition 122
Constructing common scales 123
Modulation and voice leading 129
Voice leading between common scales 132
Two examples 136
Scalar and interscalar transposition 140
Interscalar transposition and voice leading 144
Combining interscalar and chromatic transpositions 150

Macroharmony and Centricity 154
5.1
5.2
5.3
5.4
5.5
5.6
5.7
5.8

Macroharmony 154
Small-gap macroharmony 156
Pitch-class circulation 158
Modulating the rate of pitch-class circulation 161
Macroharmonic consistency 164
Centricity 169
Where does centricity come from? 177
Beyond “tonal” and “atonal” 181
5.8.1 The chromatic tradition 181
5.8.2 The scalar tradition 186
5.8.3 Tonality space 189

Contents

PART II

HISTORY AND ANALYSIS

chapter 6

The Extended Common Practice 195
6.1
6.2
6.3

6.4
6.5
6.6
6.7
6.8

chapter 7

Functional Harmony 226
7.1
7.2
7.3
7.4
7.5
7.6

chapter 8

The thirds-based grammar of elementary tonal harmony 226
Voice leading in functional tonality 231
Sequences 238
Modulation and key distance 246
The two lattices 252
A challenge from Schenker 258
7.6.1 Monism 261
7.6.2 Holism 263
7.6.3 Pluralism 264

Chromaticism 268
8.1
8.2
8.3
8.4
8.5
8.6
8.7
8.8

chapter 9

Disclaimers 196
Two-voice medieval counterpoint 197
Triads and the Renaissance 200
6.3.1 Harmonic consistency and the rise of triads 202
6.3.2 “3 + 1” voice leading 204
6.3.3 Fourth progressions and cadences 207
6.3.4 Parallel perfect intervals 210
Functional harmony 212
Schumann’s Chopin 214
Chromaticism 217
Twentieth-century scalar music 220
The extended common practice 224

Decorative chromaticism 268
Generalized augmented sixths 272
Brahms and Schoenberg 276
Schubert and the major-third system 280
Chopin’s tesseract 284
The Tristan prelude 293
Alternative approaches 302
Conclusion 304

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music 307
9.1
9.2

Three scalar techniques 308
Chord-ﬁrst composition 314

xi

xii

Contents

9.2.1

9.3

9.4

9.5

Grieg’s “Drömmesyn” (“Vision”), Op. 62
No. 5 (1895) 314
9.2.2 Debussy’s “Fêtes” (1899) 316
9.2.3 Michael Nyman’s “The Mood That Passes Through
You” (1993) 318
Scale-ﬁrst composition 322
9.3.1 Debussy’s “Des pas sur la neige” (1910) 322
9.3.2 Janáček’s “On an Overgrown Path,” Series II,
No. 1 (1908) 326
9.3.3 Shostakovich’s Fs Minor Prelude and Fugue, Op. 87
(1950) 329
9.3.4 Reich’s New York Counterpoint (1985) 332
9.3.5 Reich’s The Desert Music, movement 1 (1984) 336
9.3.6 The Who’s “I Can’t Explain” (1965) and Bob Seger’s
“Turn the Page” (1973) 339
The subset technique 341
9.4.1 Grieg’s “Klokkeklang” (“Bell Ringing”), Op. 54
No. 6 (1891) 341
9.4.2 “Petit airs,” from Stravinsky’s Histoire du soldat
(1918) 343
9.4.3 Reich’s City Life (1995) 345
9.4.4 The Beatles’ “Help” (1965) and Stravinsky’s “Dance of
the Adolescents” (1913) 346
9.4.5 The Miles Davis Group’s “Freedom Jazz Dance”
(1966) 349
Conclusion: common scales, common techniques 349

chapter 10 Jazz 352
Basic jazz voicings 353
From thirds to fourths 357
Tritone substitution 360
Altered chords and scales 365
Bass and upper voice tritone substitutions 370
Polytonality, sidestepping, and “playing out” 374
Bill Evans’ “Oleo” 378
10.7.1 Chorus 1 378
10.7.2 Chorus 2 381
10.7.3 Chorus 3 382
10.7.4 Chorus 4 384
10.8 Jazz as modernist synthesis 387

10.1
10.2
10.3
10.4
10.5
10.6
10.7

Conclusion 391

Contents

appendix a Measuring Voice-Leading Size 397
appendix b Chord Geometry: A More Technical Look 401
appendix c Discrete Voice-Leading Lattices 412
appendix d The Interscalar Interval Matrix 418
appendix e Scale, Macroharmony, and Lerdahl’s “Basic Space” 424
appendix f Some Study Questions, Problems, and Activities 428
References 435
Index 445

xiii

This page intentionally left blank

about the companion website

www.oup.com/us/ageometryofmusic
The website contains audio ﬁles corresponding to each of the musical examples, as
well as a few additional soundﬁles and movies that further illustrate points in the
text. It is primarily intended to assist readers who have trouble playing or imagining
the notated examples.

This page intentionally left blank

introduction

When I was about 15 years old, I decided I wanted to be a composer, rather than a
physicist or mathematician. I had recently switched from classical piano to electric
guitar, and although I exhibited no obvious signs of compositional talent, I was fascinated by the amazing variety of twentieth-century music: the suavely ferocious Rite of
Spring, which made tubas sound cool; the encyclopedic Sgt. Pepper, which contained
multitudes; the hypnotic repetitions of Philip Glass, whose spirit seemed also to infuse
the music of Brian Eno and Robert Fripp; and the geeky sophistication of art rock
and new wave. I was aware of but intimidated by jazz, which seemed to be perpetually
beyond reach, like the gold at the end of a rainbow. (Told by my guitar teacher that
certain chords or scales were jazzy, I would inevitably ﬁnd that they sounded ﬂat and
lifeless in my hands.) To a kid growing up in a college town in the 1980s, the musical
world seemed wide open: you could play The Rite of Spring with your rock band, write
symphonies for electric guitars, or do anything else you might imagine.
I was somewhat surprised, therefore, to ﬁnd that my college teachers—famous
academics and composers—inhabited an entirely different musical universe. They
knew nothing about, and cared little for, the music I had grown up with. Instead,
their world revolved around the dissonant, cerebral music of Arnold Schoenberg and
his followers. As I quickly learned, in this environment not everything was possible:
tonality was considered passé and “unserious”; electric guitars and saxophones were
not to be mixed with violins and pianos; and success was judged by criteria I could
not immediately fathom. Music, it seemed, was not so much to be composed as constructed—assembled painstakingly, note by note, according to complicated artiﬁcial
systems. Questions like “does this chord sound good?” or “does this compositional
system produce likeable music?” were frowned upon as naive or even incoherent.
I studied many things in college: seventeenth-century masses, eighteenth-century
Lutheran chorales, and twentieth-century avant-garde music. I learned about
Heinrich Schenker, who purported to reduce all good tonal pieces to a small number of basic templates. I absorbed mathematical tools for constructing and deconstructing atonal compositions. But I did not learn anything whatsoever about jazz,
Debussy, Ravel, Shostakovich, Messiaen, or minimalism. In fact, even the music of
Wagner and Chopin was treated with a certain embarrassment—acknowledged to be
important, but deemed suspiciously illogical in its construction. Looking back, I can
see that the music I encountered was the music my teachers knew how to talk about.
Unfortunately, this was not the music I had come to college wanting to understand.
Twenty years later, things are different, and a number of the barriers between musical styles have fallen. Many composers have returned to the tonal ideas that my own

xviii

Introduction

teachers deemed irrelevant. Electric guitars now mix freely with violins, and everything
is indeed permitted. But despite this new freedom, tonality remains poorly understood. We lack even the most rudimentary sense of the musical ingredients that contribute to the sense of “tonalness.” The chromatic music of the late nineteenth century
continues to be shrouded in mystery. We have no systematic vocabulary for discussing
Debussy’s early 20th-century music or its relation to subsequent styles. Graduate students in music often know nothing about bebop, or about how this language relates
backward to classical music and forward to contemporary concert music. As a result,
many young musicians are essentially ﬂying by the seat of their pants, rediscovering for
themselves the basic techniques of modern tonal composition.
The goal of this book is to understand tonality afresh—to provide some new theoretical tools for thinking about tonal coherence, and to illuminate some of the hidden
roads connecting modern tonality to that of the past. My aim is to retell the history
of Western music so that twentieth-century tonality appears not as an aberration, the
atavistic remnant of an exhausted tradition, but as a vital continuation of what came
before. I hope that this effort will be useful to composers who want new ways to write
tonal pieces, as well as to theorists, performers, and analysts who are looking for new
ways to think about existing music.
While my primary audience consists of composers and music theorists, I have
tried to write in a way that is accessible to students and dedicated amateurs: technical
terms are explained along the way, and only a basic familiarity with elementary music
theory (including Roman numeral analysis) is presumed. (Specialists will therefore
need to endure the occasional review of music-theoretical basics, particularly in the
early chapters.) More than anything else, I have attempted to write the sort of book
I wish had existed back when I ﬁrst began to study music. It would make me happy
to think that these ideas will be helpful to some young musician, brimming with
excitement over the world of musical possibilities, eager to understand how classical
music, jazz, and rock all ﬁt together—and raring to make some new contribution to
musical culture.

PART I

Theory

This page intentionally left blank

chapter 1

Five Components of Tonality
The word “tonal” is contested territory. Some writers use it restrictively, to describe
only the Western art music of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. For them,
more recent music is “post-tonal”—a catch-all term including everything from Arvo
Pärt’s consonances to the organized sonic assaults of Varèse and Xenakis. This way
of categorizing music makes it seem as if Pärt, Varèse, and Xenakis are clearly and
obviously of a kind, resembling one another more than any of them resembles earlier
composers.
“Tonal” can also be used expansively. Here, the term describes not just eighteenthand nineteenth-century Western art music, but rock, folk, jazz, impressionism, minimalism, medieval and Renaissance music, and a good deal of non-Western music
besides. “Tonality” in this sense is almost synonymous with “non-atonality”—a
double negative, most naturally understood in contrast to music that was deliberately written to contrast with it. The expansive usage accords with the intuition that
Schubert, the Beatles, and Pärt share musical preoccupations that are not shared by
composers such as Varèse, Xenakis, and Cage. But it also raises awkward questions.
What musical feature or features lead us to consider works to be tonal? Is “tonality” a
single property, or does it have several components? And how does tonality manifest
itself across the broad spectrum of Western and non-Western styles? Faced with these
questions, contemporary music theory stares at its feet in awkward silence.1
The purpose of this book is to provide general categories for discussing music
that is neither classically tonal nor completely atonal. This, in my view, includes
some of the most fascinating music of the twentieth century, from impressionism to
postminimalism. It also includes some of the most mysterious and alluring music of
Chopin, Liszt, and Wagner—music that is as beloved by audiences as it is recalcitrant
to analytical scrutiny. My goal is to try to develop a set of theoretical tools that will
help us think about these sophisticated tonal styles, which are in some ways freer and
less rule-bound than either eighteenth-century classical music or twentieth-century
modernism.

1 Fétis (1840/1994), who popularized the term “tonality” in the early nineteenth century, was one of the
ﬁrst scholars to try to provide a general account of the phenomenon. (For more on the early history of the
term “tonality” see Simms 1975 and Dahlhaus 1990.) More recently, Joseph Yasser (1975), Richard Norton (1984), William Thomson (1999), Brian Hyer (2002), Carol Krumhansl (2004), and Matthew Brown
(2005) have offered different perspectives on the subject.

4

theory

More speciﬁcally, I will argue that ﬁve features are present in a wide range of
genres, Western and non-Western, past and present, and that they jointly contribute
to a sense of tonality:
1. Conjunct melodic motion. Melodies tend to move by short distances from note
to note.
2. Acoustic consonance. Consonant harmonies are preferred to dissonant
harmonies, and tend to be used at points of musical stability.
3. Harmonic consistency. The harmonies in a passage of music, whatever they
may be, tend to be structurally similar to one another.
4. Limited macroharmony. I use the term “macroharmony” to refer to the total
collection of notes heard over moderate spans of musical time. Tonal music
tends to use relatively small macroharmonies, often involving ﬁve to eight notes.
5. Centricity. Over moderate spans of musical time, one note is heard as being
more prominent than the others, appearing more frequently and serving as a
goal of musical motion.
The aim of this book is to investigate the ways composers can use these ﬁve features
to produce interesting musical effects. This project has empirical, theoretical, and
historical components. Empirically, we might ask how each of the ﬁve features contributes to listeners’ perceptions of tonality: which is the most inﬂuential, and are
there any interesting interactions between them? For instance, is harmonic consistency more important in the context of some scales than others? Theoretically, we
might ask how the various features can in principle be combined. Is it the case, for
example, that diatonic music necessarily involves a tonic? Conversely, is chromatic
music necessarily non-centric? Finally, we can ask historical questions about how
different Western styles have combined these ﬁve tonal ingredients—treating the features as determining a space of possibilities, and investigating the ways composers
have explored that space.
This book is primarily concerned with the theoretical and historical questions.
I am a musician, not a scientist, and although I will sometimes touch on perceptual
issues, I will largely leave empirical psychology to the professionals. Instead, I will
ask how composers have combined and might combine the ﬁve features. Part I of the
book develops theoretical tools for thinking about the ﬁve features. Part II uses these
tools to argue for a broader, more continuous conception of the Western musical
tradition. Rather than focusing narrowly on the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries
(the so-called “common practice period”), I attempt to identify an “extended common practice” stretching from the beginning of Western counterpoint to the music of
recent decades. The point is to retell the history of Western music in such a way that
the tonal styles of the last century—including jazz, rock, and minimalism—emerge as
vibrant and interesting successors to the tonal music of earlier periods.
My central conclusion is that the ﬁve features impose much stronger constraints
than we would intuitively expect. For example, if we want to combine conjunct
melodic motion and harmonic consistency, then we have only a few options, the most
important of which involve acoustically consonant sonorities. And if we want to

Five Components of Tonality

combine harmonic consistency with limited macroharmony, then we are led to a collection of very familiar scales and modes. Thus the materials of tonal music are, in
Richard Cohn’s apt description, “overdetermined,” in the sense that they are special or
distinctive for multiple different reasons.2 This suggests that when we look closely, we
should ﬁnd important similarities between different tonal styles: since there are only
a few ways to combine the ﬁve features, different composers—from before Palestrina
to after Bill Evans—will necessarily use the same basic techniques. In the second part
of this book I make good on this claim, tracing common practices that connect the
earliest examples of Western counterpoint to music of the very recent past.

1.1

the five features

Let’s consider the ﬁve features in more detail, with an eye toward understanding
why they might be so widespread throughout Western and non-Western music.
A preference for conjunct melodic motion likely derives from the features of the auditory system that create a three-dimensional “auditory scene.”3 An eardrum, in effect,
is a one-dimensional system that can only move back and forth. From this meager
input our brains create a vivid three-dimensional sonic space consisting of individually localized sounds: the phone ringing in front of you, the honk of a car horn
outside your window, and the sound of a droning music theorist off to your right.
To accomplish this dazzling transﬁguration, the brain relies on a number of computational tricks, one of which is to group sonic events that are nearby in pitch.4 Thus,
a sequence like Figure 1.1.1a tends to be heard as belonging to a single sound source,
whereas Figure 1.1.1b creates the impression of multiple sources. In this sense, small
melodic steps are intrinsic to the very notion of “melody.”
Acoustic consonance, or intrinsic sonic restfulness, is another very widespread musical feature.5 Figure 1.1.1 Small movements
Many styles make heavy use of consonant inter- sound melodic (a), while large
vals such as the octave and perfect ﬁfth, assign- registral leaps create the impression
of multiple melodies (b).
ing them privileged melodic and harmonic roles.
Scales containing a large number of consonant
intervals are found in seemingly independent
musical cultures, and there is evidence from infant
psychology that the preference for consonance
is innate.6 At present, however, we do not know
2 See Cohn 1997.
3 See Bregman 1990, Narmour 1990, and Vos and Troost 1989. Huron 2007 contains data about statistical properties of Western melodies, including conjunct melodic motion.
4 Wessel (1979) suggests that the relevant variable might be the “spectral centroid,” which in normal
listening circumstances is highly correlated with pitch.
5 Izumi (2000) and Hulse et al. (1995) indicate that nonhuman animals such as monkeys and birds can
distinguish consonance from dissonance.
6 Crowder, Reznick, and Rosenkrantz 1991, Zentner and Kagan 1996 and 1998, Trainor and Heinmiller
1998, Trainor, Tsang and Cheung 2002, and McDermott and Hauser 2005.

5

6

theory

for certain how universal or innate this preference is. Fortunately, this issue is largely
irrelevant in the present context: what matters is just that many listeners, both Western
and non-Western, do have a fairly deep-seated preference for consonant sonorities.
Slightly more general than acoustic consonance is harmonic consistency, or the use
of sonorities that resemble one another. For example, Figure 1.1.2a features a series
of major and minor chords, all audibly similar. Their resemblance gives the passage
a kind of smoothness, and we experience the chords as belonging together. Likewise,
Figure 1.1.2b uses a series of very dissonant chromatic clusters that also seem to
belong together. By contrast, Figure 1.1.2c uses very different-sounding harmonies,
switching aimlessly between different sonic worlds. This sort of harmonic incongruity is quite unusual in Western music, and often provokes spontaneous laughter—
suggesting that the expectation of harmonic consistency is very strong, even though
it is rarely discussed.
Figure 1.1.2 Harmonic consistency using consonant sonorities
(a) and dissonant sonorities (b). Sequence (c) does not exhibit
harmonic consistency.

In most Western and non-Western music, pitches are drawn from a relatively
small reservoir of available notes—typically, between ﬁve and eight.7 As a result,
Western music has a two-tiered harmonic consistency: at the local (or instantaneous)
level, a passage like Figure 1.1.3 presents a series of major and minor chords, which
are audibly related, while over larger time spans it articulates a scale by using only
seven different notes. The scale can thus be considered a kind of “large” or macro
harmony that subsumes the individual chords.8 Even though there is no one instant
at which this larger harmony is presented, it nevertheless has a signiﬁcant effect on
our listening experience: scale-based melodies are easier to remember than nonscalar
melodies, and notes outside the scale sound more pungent than notes in the scale. As
we will see, macroharmonies can be relatively consonant, like the diatonic or pentatonic scale, or relatively dissonant, like the chromatic scale. They can also participate
in larger-level voice leadings analogous to those connecting individual chords.
Finally, we often hear some pitches or notes as being more important (or “central”)
than others. These pitches tend to serve as points of musical arrival, to which others
are heard as “leading” or “tending.” Thus, one and the same sequence of notes—such
as that in Figure 1.1.4—can be heard in a variety of ways. If we hear it in a musical

7 Burns 1999 and Dowling and Harwood 1986. The range “ﬁve to eight” recalls familiar facts about the
limitations on human short-term memory (see Miller 1956 on “seven plus or minus two”).
8 Thanks to Ciro Scotto for suggesting this term.

Five Components of Tonality
Figure 1.1.3 Major and minor triads
belonging to the same diatonic scale.

Figure 1.1.4 A single melody will sound
different in different harmonic contexts.

context where C is the most stable pitch, then it sounds like a beginning that is in
need of some sort of continuation, ending with a comma rather than a period. But
in a context where F is stable, it sounds more complete, as if it ends with a period or
exclamation point. Centricity is again a very widespread feature of human music,
appearing in a large number of seemingly unrelated musical cultures. However, different styles can emphasize the tonic note to different extents: as Harold Powers once
noted, there is a much stronger feeling of centricity in Indian music than in Renaissance polyphony.9
Of these ﬁve features, harmonic consistency is clearly the most culturally speciﬁc.
The idea that music should consist of rapidly changing chords is a deeply Western
idea, in a double sense: it is deep, insofar as it characterizes much Western music
since before the Renaissance; and it is Western, since there are many cultures in which
the notion of a “chord progression” simply plays no role. (Many traditional nonWestern styles are purely monophonic, or feature an unchanging “drone” harmony;
however, there are now a large number of syncretistic styles that combine Western
harmonies with non-Western melodic and rhythmic ideas.) Acoustic consonance is
also somewhat culture-speciﬁc: although many cultures make some use of consonant
intervals, and although some have recognizably Western conceptions of consonance,
other non-Western styles sound quite dissonant to Western ears. By contrast, the three
other features—conjunct melodic motion, limited macroharmony, and centricity—
are common to virtually all human music. This near universality may be attributable,
at least in part, to features of our biological inheritance.10
Now for an important disclaimer. While I think that typical Western listeners prefer music that exempliﬁes the ﬁve features, I do not mean to suggest that such music is
intrinsically better than any other kind of music. “Tonal,” for me, is not synonymous
with “good.” (Nor is “popular,” for that matter: there is plenty of unpopular, nontonal
music that I happen to like, from Nancarrow to Xenakis to Ligeti.) In particular, I
have no interest in arguing that atonal composers are misguided, ﬁghting against
biology, or anything of the sort. Instead, the purpose of this book is an afﬁrmative
one: to develop new theoretical tools for thinking about tonality, and to provide new
insights into the relations between various musical styles. My hope is that this investigation will be useful to composers and theorists of all varieties, as even the advocates
of atonality will stand to gain from a deeper understanding of that which they are
trying to avoid.

9 Powers 1958.
10 Dowling and Harwood 1986, Narmour 1990.

7

8

theory

1.2

perception and the five features

This book is primarily concerned with what composers do, rather than what listeners
hear: the goal is to describe various ways in which the ﬁve features have been or might
be combined. But it is not possible to avoid perceptual issues altogether. After all, readers have a right to wonder whether my ﬁve features do indeed contribute to the experience of tonality, and if so, whether they are the only factors that contribute.
The ﬁrst question can be easily answered: all one needs to do is constrain randomly
generated notes according to each of the ﬁve features. Insofar as the constraints cause
random music to sound increasingly tonal, or at least ordered, then I am right about
their psychological importance. Furthermore, the same experiment can be used not
just to show that these features have important psychological effects, but also what
particular psychological effects they have. This is useful because familiar styles tend
either to combine many of the features, and hence be fully tonal in a traditional sense,
or else to abandon most of them à la radical atonality. Consequently, existing musical
works do not always help us to understand the speciﬁc contributions made by each
of our ﬁve components individually.
I strongly urge you to try this experiment for yourself: the results are not subtle,
and they demonstrate the powerful psychological effects that can be obtained with
simple musical means. (In particular, I encourage you to use the book’s companion website, which contains a number of illustrative examples.11) Unfortunately,
this is a case where a musical experience is worth a thousand words: no amount
of merely verbal description on my part will substitute for your own investigation.
Nevertheless, it is worth trying to describe these effects, if only to persuade you
to actually perform the experiment. Figure 1.2.1a presents a series of completely
random three-note chords, with pitches chosen arbitrarily from the range C2 to
C7. It provides a baseline against which subsequent examples can be judged. (Some
people, myself included, ﬁnd this sort of random texture to be oddly appealing.)
Figure 1.2.1b constrains the randomness by requiring that the notes move just a few
semitones from chord to chord. What results is very rudimentary sort of counterpoint, consisting of three independent melodic strands. Although it is considerably
less random-sounding than the pointillistic texture of (a), the harmonic structure
of the sequence still sounds somewhat indistinct, providing the ear with relatively
little to grab onto. Figure 1.2.1c combines conjunct melodic motion with harmonic
consistency, requiring that each chord be a “stack of fourths.” The melodic lines,
rather than wandering aimlessly, now seem to create chords with a distinctive harmonic identity, which in turn gives the passage a feeling of increased consistency.12
(This example might seem reminiscent of some Stravinsky or Hindemith.) Finally,

11 www.oup.com/us/ageometryofmusic
12 With a little practice it is easy to distinguish harmonically consistent sequences from those involving
random, unrelated chords. However, it should be said that some chords (such as the major triad or stack
of fourths) have a very distinctive sound, while others (such as C-Cs-Ds) are more generic. It takes more
compositional work to create a palpable sense of harmonic consistency using these generic chords.

Five Components of Tonality

Figure 1.2.1d restricts the chords to the same diatonic scale. To complete the transition from utter randomness to something recognizably tonal, I have replaced the
“fourth chords” of (c) with more consonant diatonic triads. Although the result will
not win any composition prizes, it does demonstrate that a kind of rudimentary
tonalness is in fact generated by my ﬁve features. Indeed, the differences between
Figures 1.2.1a–d are striking and unmistakable, even for a layperson with no specialized musical training.
Informal experiments like these suggest that, for typical listeners, the ﬁve features
play an important role in determining the tonalness (or perhaps “orderedness”) of
musical stimuli. Furthermore, I strongly suspect that for many listeners, “tonalness,”
“orderedness,” and “pleasantness” are correlated: all else being equal, music displaying
many of the ﬁve features will be preferred to music that does not.13 This constitutes
the testable psychological theory lurking at the core of this book. Personally, I think
it would be interesting to try to determine not just that the ﬁve features have important psychological effects, but also their relative importance. What makes a larger
difference to listeners’ perceptions, harmonic consistency, acoustic consonance, or
conjunct melodic motion? We lack even the most rudimentary data that would allow

Figure 1.2.1 Four randomly generated sequences. Sequence (a) is completely random;
(b) exhibits efﬁcient voice leading; (c) exhibits harmonic consistency and efﬁcient
voice leading; (d) exhibits harmonic consistency, efﬁcient voice leading, and limited
macroharmony.

13 Some preliminary studies, conducted by John Muniz, Cynthia Weaver, and Asher Yamplosky (graduate students at Yale University), suggest that conjunct melodic motion may contribute more to “orderedness” than “pleasantness.” Disentangling these issues is a subject for future research.

9

10

theory

us to answer this question. One of my hopes is that some psychologist readers will
be motivated to undertake the obvious experiments suggested by the ideas I will be
discussing.
Figure 1.2.1 shows that the ﬁve features can contribute fairly dramatically to the
sense of tonality. But are they necessary for creating tonal effects? And if so, are they
the only such features or are there others?
In some ways, I think the question is misguided. The point here is not to police
the use of the word “tonality” by setting strict limits on what may or may not be
described with the term, but rather to replace the crude opposition “tonal/atonal”
with a more nuanced set of distinctions. You can decide for yourself whether to use
“tonal” to describe (say) diatonic music without a tonal center, or chromatic music
with a strong sense of harmonic consistency; my job is just to show that the term
“tonality” typically applies to music that exhibits my ﬁve basic features. I should also
point out that I am neglecting important issues such as rhythm, motivic variation,
timbre, form, performance, and rubato, all of which can contribute to the sense of
tonality. (My goal is not to provide a complete theory of all music, but rather to
discuss a few general features whose musical importance is for the most part unquestioned.) That said, however, I confess that it is difﬁcult for me to imagine that I would
ever want to use the term “tonal” to describe music in which acoustic consonance
plays no role, in which there is no conjunct melodic motion or harmonic consistency,
in which no tone is heard as central, and which does not limit itself to a relatively
small number of pitch classes over short stretches of time. In this sense, it seems that
at least some of the ﬁve features are necessary for tonality, at least as I personally
understand it.
Throughout the twentieth century, composers devised new musical languages—
some idiosyncratic, some very widely used—intended to replace traditional tonality.
It is instructive to subject these alternative systems to the experimental test described
above: that is, to constrain random musical notes according to their basic principles,
and to listen for the perceptual differences that result.14 To that end, Figure 1.2.2 uses
“constrained randomness” to investigate one of the most prominent alternatives to
tonality, the twelve-tone system.15 On a ﬁrst (or even tenth) listening, I do not ﬁnd
the sequences in Figure 1.2.2 to be dramatically different from randomly generated
sequences such as Figure 1.2.1b. Indeed, if someone were to present the three passages
in a psychology experiment, I doubt I would notice that one was random while
the other two were not. This is not to say that twelve-tone structure makes no audible
difference, or that one cannot learn to hear the coherence in Figure 1.2.2, but rather

14 It is exceedingly difﬁcult to judge the effects of a musical syntax if we only encounter it in the context
of complete compositions, since compositional skill may mask the contributions of the syntax itself.
15 Figure 1.2.2a uses three successive rows to generate a sequence of 12 three-note chords. Figure 1.2.2b
sets the row in counterpoint against its inversional and retrograde-inversional forms, producing a series
of 12 three-note chords. I have borrowed the 12-tone row from Schoenberg’s ﬁrst consistently twelve-tone
piece, his Op. 25 Suite for piano.

Five Components of Tonality

11
Figure 1.2.2
Randomly
generated twelvetone music.

that the psychological effects here are relatively subtle—considerably less dramatic
than those produced by our ﬁve features.
Does this show that twelve-tone music is aesthetically problematic? Or that the
twentieth-century quest for alternatives to traditional tonality is fruitless? Not at all.16
But it does suggest that twelve-tone rows produce less powerful psychological consequences than harmonic consistency, conjunct melodic motion, acoustic consonance,
macroharmony, and centricity.17 And while twelve-tone music is just one twentiethcentury musical system, similar comments might be made about other approaches.
To my mind, this suggests that the ﬁve features are unusually powerful tools for creating musical coherence. To say this is not to deny that alternative tools may in principle
exist, but simply to reiterate the basic point that tonality constitutes a fairly unique
solution to some elementary compositional problems. If this is right, then the task of
providing an alternative to tonality is much more difﬁcult than one might intuitively
have imagined.

1.3

four claims

The argument of this book revolves around four basic claims, each of which concerns
ways in which the ﬁve features can interact with or constrain one another. In this
section I’ll brieﬂy outline these claims as a way of foreshadowing some of my central
preoccupations.

16 First, it is possible that there are gifted listeners who respond strongly and immediately to the nonrandom features of the sequences in Figure 1.2.2. Second, it is possible that with extensive training ordinary listeners can sensitize themselves to the sequences’ structure—as when one gradually starts to discern
the details in an all-gray painting. Third, it is possible that there are speciﬁc compositional techniques that
can make twelve-tone structure psychologically transparent. Fourth, it is possible that some listeners simply enjoy random pitch structures. And ﬁfth, it is possible that twelve-tone music can be attractive in ways
that make up for any potential absence of interesting pitch structure.
17 Schoenberg (1975, p. 215) observed that “composing [using twelve-tone techniques] does not
become easier, but rather ten times more difﬁcult” (see also Dubiel 1997).

12

theory

1.3.1 Harmony and Counterpoint Constrain
One Another
Imagine a composer, Lyrico, who would like to combine conjunct melodic motion
with harmonic consistency; that is, he would like to write melodies that move by
short distances while using harmonies that are structurally similar to one another.
Intuitively, it might seem that there are innumerable ways to satisfy these two constraints—that there is an entire universe of syntaxes consistent with these fundamental principles. But in fact, there are just a few ways in which they can be combined.
Consider the simplest possible situation. Suppose Lyrico decides to combine an
unchanging “drone” harmony with a moving melodic voice. Harmonic consistency
is thus obtained trivially: the chords in the passage will all be similar because there
is only one chord. Let us further imagine that Lyrico chooses to use a C major chord
as his drone. If he were to conﬁne the melody to the notes of this chord, the result
would be a series of unmelodic leaps (Figure 1.3.1a). This is because its notes are all
reasonably far apart. To obtain conjunct melodic motion, Lyrico can therefore introduce “passing tones” that connect the chord tones by short melodic steps. The result,
shown in Figure 1.3.1b, is a scale covering an entire octave, in which successive notes
are connected by relatively small distances, and in which chord tones alternate with
nonchordal “passing tones.” Lyrico can now write melodies that move freely along
this scale, alternating between stable and unstable notes.
But suppose Lyrico wakes up
Figure 1.3.1 (a) Conﬁning a melody to the notes
one day in a more ornery mood
of the C major chord produces large leaps, so it is
and decides to use the dissonant
necessary to add “passing tones” (b).
chromatic cluster {B, C, Df} as
his drone. Here the compositional
situation is reversed: where the
major chord is consonant, and has
its notes spread relatively far apart,
this chord is very dissonant and has
all its notes close together. Consequently, by conﬁning himself to the
notes of the chord, Lyrico can obtain conjunct melodies, as in Figure 1.3.2. However,
it takes a large number of passing tones to connect the Df in one octave to the B in the

Figure 1.3.2 (a) Conﬁning a melody to the notes of the cluster
{B, C, Df} produces conjunct melodic motion, but changing
octaves requires a large number of passing tones (b).

Five Components of Tonality

13

next. Since the resulting scale does not exhibit a regular alternation of stable “chord
tones” and unstable “passing tones,” it is difﬁcult to hear the nonharmonic tones as
connective devices that simply decorate an underlying harmony.
These two examples suggest a general moral: harmony and melody constrain one
another. Different types of chords suggest different musical uses. In particular there is
a fundamental difference between chords like {C, E, G}, whose notes are all far away
from each other, and chords like {B, C, Df}, whose notes are clustered close together.
When a chord’s notes are clustered close together, it is possible to create conjunct
melodies that use only the chord’s notes, but it is not possible to create scales that
have a regular alternation between chord tones and passing tones. When a chord’s
notes are relatively spread out, it is not possible to create conjunct melodies by using
only the notes of the chord, but it is possible to create scales with a nice arrangement
of chord and non-chord tones.
Now consider a more sophisticated problem. Suppose Lyrico decides to write a
C major chord followed by an F major chord, its transposition by ascending perfect
fourth. As shown in Figure 1.3.3, every note in the C major chord is near some note
in an F major chord: C is common to both,
E is one semitone from F, and G is two semi- Figure 1.3.3 (a) Every note of the
tones from both F and A. This means that C major triad is near some note of
Lyrico can write a sequence of C and F major the F major triad. (b) It is possible to
use a series of C and F major triads to
chords that articulates three separate melodies,
construct three simultaneous melodies.
each moving by small distances. This is counterpoint—a group of simultaneous melodies,
or voices, articulating mappings, or voice leadings, between successive chords. For example,
the ﬁrst voice leading in Figure 1.3.3b maps
G to A, E to F, and C to C. This voice leading is efﬁcient because all the voices move by
short distances. Clearly, efﬁcient voice leading
is simply conjunct melodic motion in all parts
of a contrapuntal texture.
As it happens, the major chord is particularly well suited for contrapuntal music.
Figure 1.3.4 shows that any two major chords can be connected by stepwise voice leading in which no voice moves by more than two semitones. This means that Lyrico can
write a harmonic progression without worrying about melody; that is, for any sequence

& œœ b œœ œœ # œœ œœ b œœ œœ # œœ œœ œœ œœ b œ œœ œœ œœ b b œœ œœ œœ œœ œœ œœ # # œœ
& bœ
œ
œ œ œ b œ œ œ œ œ œ b b œœ œ œ œ œ œ # œ œ b œ œ œ

Figure 1.3.4 Any
two major triads
can be linked by
stepwise voice
leading; in the
case of the tritone,
this requires
four voices.

14

Figure 1.3.5
Chromatic
clusters cannot
always be linked
by efﬁcient voice
leading.

Figure 1.3.6
Chromatic
clusters allow
conjunct melodic
motion to be
combined with
harmonic stasis.

theory

of major triads, there is always some way to connect the notes so as to form stepwise melodies. Conversely, Lyrico can write any melody whatsoever without worrying
about harmony, as there will always be some way to harmonize it with a sequence of
efﬁcient voice leadings between major chords.
But what if Lyrico writes the chromatic cluster {B, C, Df} followed by {E, F, Gf},
its transposition by ascending fourth? Here, none of the notes of the ﬁrst chord are
within two semitones of any note in the second, and hence there is no way to combine
a sequence of these chords so as to produce conjunct melodies (Figure 1.3.5). At the
same time, however, the chromatic cluster can do things that the C major chord can’t:
Figure 1.3.6 shows that it is possible to write contrapuntal music in which individual
melodic lines move by short distances within a single, unchanging harmony. Clearly,
this is possible only because the chord’s notes are all clustered together, ensuring that
there is always a short path between any two of them. The resulting music produces
a feeling of burbling within stasis, a kind of melodic activity within overall harmonic
restfulness.18
Once again, we see that different kinds of chords are useful for different purposes.
Chords that divide the octave very unevenly, such as {B, C, Df}, are ideally suited
for static music in which harmonies do not change. By contrast, chords that divide
the octave relatively evenly, like C major, can be connected to their transpositions
by efﬁcient voice leading, and are therefore suited for
contrapuntal music in which harmonies change quickly.
Remarkably, the most nearly even chords in twelve-tone
equal temperament are the familiar chords of Western music: perfect ﬁfths, triads, seventh chords, ninth
chords, and familiar scales. Besides being well suited for
contrapuntal music, these chords are all acoustically consonant, or restful and stable-sounding. This, then, is an
example of Cohn’s “overdetermination,” a situation in
which a familiar musical object is remarkable for multiple reasons: nearly even chords are interesting not just
because they permit the combination of harmonic consistency and conjunct melodic motion, but also because
they can be acoustically consonant.19
More generally, it would seem that composers who
wish to combine harmonic consistency and conjunct
melodic motion have relatively few options: they can either use familiar sonorities in
more or less familiar ways, or they can use chromatic chords whose notes are clustered

18 This sort of texture was popularized during the 1960s by composers such as Ligeti and Lutosławski;
precursors to the technique include Bartók’s Out of Doors (“Night Music”) and Ruth Crawford Seeger’s
String Quartet.
19 This observation has been made by Agmon (1991) and Cohn (1996), in the special case of the triad.
Both writers explained the specialness of the triad in terms of the way it is embedded in a larger collection.
In the following chapters, I provide an account that applies to consonant chords more generally and that
does not presuppose embedding into a larger scale.

Five Components of Tonality

together. The next few chapters will elaborate on this point, using the notion of near
symmetry to explain exactly how chord structure constrains contrapuntal function.
Later chapters will trace the practical consequences of this interdependence, considering a range of superﬁcially different styles, from Renaissance polyphony to contemporary jazz, and showing that they all utilize fundamentally similar procedures. Our
theoretical work will demonstrate that these similarities are not simply the byproduct
of historical inﬂuence, but also of the more fundamental ways in which the ﬁve features constrain one another. In other words, they testify to the fact that there are only
a few ways to combine harmonic consistency and stepwise melodies.

1.3.2 Scale, Macroharmony, and Centricity are
Independent
My second claim is that we need to distinguish the closely related phenomena of
scale, macroharmony, and centricity. A scale, as I use the term, is a means of measuring musical distance—a kind of musical ruler whose unit is the “scale step.” Relative
to the C diatonic scale, the notes E and G are two scale steps apart, since there is
precisely one white note between them (Figure 1.3.7).20 These same notes are one
step apart relative to the pentatonic scale C-D-E-G-A and three steps apart relative
to the chromatic scale. Similarly, C and E are two steps apart relative to the diatonic
and pentatonic scales, and four apart relative to the chromatic scale. The three scales
therefore give us three different ways of measuring musical distance, and three different estimates of the relative sizes of the intervals C-E and E-G. In principle, we should
not ask whether the intervals C-E and E-G are “the same size” unless we also specify a
particular musical “ruler.” As we will see, the richness of tonal music lies partly in the
way it exploits these various conceptions of musical distance.
If a scale is a musical ruler, then a macroharmony is the total collection of notes
used over small stretches of musical time. Typically, macroharmonies are also scales: a
composer might (for example) use only the white notes on the piano keyboard, while
also exploiting the unit of distance deﬁned by adjacent notes (the “scale step”). But in

Figure 1.3.7 Scale steps provide a means of measuring musical distance. The intervals C-E
and E-G are two steps large relative to the diatonic scale (a), two and one steps large relative
to the pentatonic scale (b), and four and three steps large relative to the chromatic scale (c).

20 Here and elsewhere, I use the term “C diatonic scale” to refer to the notes of the C major scale (i.e.
the white notes) without suggesting that the note C is special in any way. I use the term “C major” (or “C
ionian”) in contexts where C is a tonal center.

15

16
Figure 1.3.8
The music
makes use of two
scales to create
a chromatic
macroharmony.

theory

principle it is possible to separate the
two phenomena. Figure 1.3.8 shows a
passage of “polytonal” music in which
the upper staff moves systematically
along the C diatonic scale, while the
lower staff moves along Gf pentatonic. To explain how this music works, we need to postulate two different scales, one
for each staff. (Of course it would be possible to combine the notes in both staves into
a single chromatic scale, but the resulting collection would be useless for explaining
why the individual voices move as they do.) Here, then, is a passage of music that uses
pentatonic and diatonic scales to create a chromatic macroharmony. The concept of
“scale” allows us to describe the structure within each voice, while the concept “macroharmony” allows us to describe the global harmony they produce.
A second fundamental distinction is between macroharmony and centricity. “Centricity” refers to the phenomenon whereby a particular pitch is felt as being more
stable or important than the others. (In traditional tonality this is the tonic note; in
modal theory, it is the “ﬁnal.”) Chapters 4 and 5 will suggest that macroharmony and
centricity are completely independent: it is entirely possible, for example, to write
diatonic music in which no note is heard as a tonal center, just as one can write chromatic music with a very clear center. There is, however, a strong historical association between the two, with diatonic music often being centric and chromatic music
centerless. The explanation for this connection lies in the fact that some prominent
musicians believed that the diatonic scale had a unique “natural” tonic, and hence
that a centerless chromaticism was the main alternative to traditional tonality. Other
musicians, believing that centricity and macroharmony were independent, felt free to
explore a much wider range of scales and modes. Chapter 5 will thus propose that the
cleavage between the “scalar” and “chromatic” traditions, exempliﬁed by composers
such as Debussy and Schoenberg, was exacerbated by a fundamental disagreement
about the relationship between macroharmony and centricity.
Together, scale, macroharmony, and centricity are the three principal components of what I think of as the “general theory of keys”—a set of tools for describing
music that is tonal in the broad sense, even though it may not conform to the speciﬁc
conventions of eighteenth-century tonality. One of this book’s goals is to consider
various sorts of “generalized keys” in Western music. Particularly interesting here is
the gradual emergence of a musical language that combines a wide variety of macroharmonies and tonal centers. The earliest Western music explored the tonal centers contained within a relatively static and largely diatonic macroharmony (Figure
1.3.9).21 Classical music, which reduced the available modes to just major and minor,
created large-scale harmonic contrasts by juxtaposing different scalar collections (e.g.
G major and C major). It was only in the last decades of the nineteenth century
that these two procedures were combined, as composers began to feel free to use any

21 The presence of unnotated accidentals (musica ﬁcta) complicates matters somewhat.

Five Components of Tonality
Figure 1.3.9 (a) In earlier music, composers emphasized different centers within a single
ﬁxed diatonic collection. (b) In classical music, composers restricted the available modes to
two, creating long-term harmonic change by emphasizing different major or minor scales.
(c) Only in the twentieth-century were these two techniques systematically combined,
creating a much wider range of tonal areas to choose from.

of the seven modes of any of the twelve diatonic collections. This scalar vocabulary
was further extended with the use of additional nondiatonic scales—including the
pentatonic, whole tone, melodic minor, harmonic minor, and octatonic—creating
hundreds of possible combinations of macroharmony and tonal center. What results
is a dazzling proliferation of “generalized keys” providing a wealth of alternatives to
traditional major and minor modes.

1.3.3 Modulation Involves Voice Leading
My third claim is that tonal music makes use of the same voice-leading techniques
on two different temporal levels: chord progressions use efﬁcient voice leading to link
structurally similar chords, and modulations use efﬁcient voice leading to link structurally similar scales.22 As a result, tonal music is both self-similar and hierarchical,
exploiting the same procedures at two different time scales.
Figure 1.3.10 shows the opening of the last movement of Clementi’s D major
Piano Sonata, Op. 25 No. 6. The two parallel phrases present a series of three-voice
chord progressions: I–V6–I followed by I–IV–I and then V7/V–V. The bottom staff
shows that we can ﬁnd a higher-level harmonic motion relating two diatonic collections: the ﬁrst six measures limit themselves to the seven notes of D major, while the
rest of the phrase abandons the Gn in favor of the Gs. As we will see in Chapter 4, this
modulation, or motion between macroharmonies, can be represented as a voice leading in which the Gn moves by semitone to Gs. This means that the music exhibits two
sorts of efﬁcient voice leading: on the level of the half measure, there is a sequence of
eight efﬁcient voice leadings between triads; while on a larger temporal level there is a

22 This is not all that modulation does, of course, but it is typically part of it.

17

18

theory

Figure 1.3.10
Two levels of
voice leading in
Clementi’s Op. 25
No. 6.

single efﬁcient voice leading between D major and A major scales, occurring somewhere near the seventh measure of the example.
Figure 1.3.11 shows that similar processes occur in twentieth-century music. The
top system depicts the main theme of Debussy’s prelude “Le vent dans la plaine,”
which uses the pitches of Ef natural minor. When the theme returns, Bf moves by
semitone to Bff, producing a collection that is enharmonically equivalent to Fs
melodic minor ascending. Debussy’s “modulation” is thus analogous to Clementi’s,
although it involves modes that Clementi himself would never have used. Here, then,
we have a familiar tonal technique appearing in the context of a signiﬁcantly expanded
modal vocabulary. As we will see in Chapter 9, this same technique has been used by
a number of twentieth-century composers, including Stravinsky, Shostakovich, and
the minimalists. There are also a few non-Western styles that use voice leading to link
closely related scales.23
The idea that tonal music is hierarchically self-similar is central to the work of
Heinrich Schenker, who claimed that tonal pieces consisted of recursively embedded
patterns. The theory I have described is similar to Schenker’s insofar as I consider

23 Morton 1976 and Hall 2009.

Five Components of Tonality

19
Figure 1.3.11
Voice leading
between
macroharmonies
in Debussy’s
“Le vent dans la
plaine.”

tonal music to utilize efﬁcient voice leading at two temporal levels. Unlike Schenker,
however, I view macroharmonies and scales (rather than chords or melodic lines)
as the primary vehicles of long-range harmonic progression: for me, the long-term
voice leading in Figure 1.3.10 connects the D and A major scales rather than D and A
major tonic triads. By contrast, a Schenkerian would likely interpret the passage—and
indeed the entire piece—as involving chord progressions at all hierarchical levels. In
Chapter 7 I will return to these issues, suggesting that my approach, though perhaps
less uniﬁed than Schenker’s, more closely reﬂects the cognitive processes involved in
composition.

1.3.4 Music Can Be Understood Geometrically
My fourth claim is that geometry provides a powerful tool for modeling musical
structure. This is because there exists a family of geometrical spaces that depict the
voice-leading relationships among virtually any chords we might care to imagine.
Some of these (such as the familiar “circle of ﬁfths”) are relatively simple, but others (such as the Möbius strip containing two-note chords) are considerably more
complex. One goal of the book is to provide a user-friendly introduction to these
musico-geometrical spaces, explaining how they work, and showing how they allow
us to visualize a wealth of musical possibilities at a glance.
Suppose, by way of illustration, that our friend Lyrico decides to write music using
only the seven triads in the C diatonic collection. After a little exploration, he ﬁnds
that some of these are closer together than others: for example, he can turn a C major
triad into an A minor triad by moving only one note by one diatonic step, whereas
he must move each voice to turn C major into D minor (Figure 1.3.12). Pondering
this a little further, Lyrico eventually realizes that the diatonic triads can be linked in a
“circle of thirds” (Figure 1.3.13), where each chord can be connected to its neighbors
by a single-step motion. This circle allows him to deﬁne a kind of “distance” according

20

Figure 1.3.12
Voice leading
between diatonic
triads.

Figure 1.3.13
Single-step voiceleading between
diatonic triads
can be modeled
with a circle.

theory

to which C major and A minor are one step apart (since they are adjacent on the circle)
while C major and D minor are three steps apart (since there are two chords between
them).
Now suppose that Lyrico’s rival Avanta becomes frustrated with all this conservatism. “Why limit yourself to just the triads in that one seven-note scale?” she asks,
stamping her foot. “There’s a whole world out there beyond
the white notes, you know!” Avanta then proceeds to demonstrate some of the musical possibilities not represented in
Lyrico’s simple circular model: she shows that in the familiar chromatic scale, the C major chord can be linked to four
separate triads by single-semitone voice leading, and to seven
triads by a pair of semitone steps (Figure 1.3.14). What is the
analogue, in Avanta’s expanded musical world, to Lyrico’s circular map? How can she depict the voice-leading possibilities between all the triads
in the chromatic scale?
The answer turns out to be surprisingly complicated: instead of a simple sevenchord circular model, Avanta needs the three-dimensional, 40-chord lattice shown in
Figure 1.3.15. This ﬁgure provides a map of all the contrapuntal possibilities available to a composer who wants to use traditional triads, but is willing to step outside
the conﬁnes of a single diatonic scale. This complex-looking construction provides
the ﬁrst hint that ordinary musical questions might sometimes lead to nontrivial
geometrical answers. In fact, Chapter 3 shows that Avanta’s lattice lives in what mathematicians would call “the interior of a twisted triangular two-torus,” otherwise
known as a triangular doughnut. This space contains all possible three-note chords
in any conceivable scale and any conceivable tuning system. Analogous spaces depict

Five Components of Tonality

21
Figure 1.3.14
(a) Onesemitone voice
leading and (b)
two-semitone
voice leading
among triads.

Figure 1.3.15 This three-dimensional graph represents single-semitone voice leading
between major, minor, augmented, and diminished triads—represented by dark spheres,
light spheres, dark cubes, and light cubes respectively. Chords on the same horizontal crosssection are related by major-third transposition; vertical motion corresponds to semitonal
transposition, and the top face is glued to the bottom with a 120° twist. We will explore this
ﬁgure more thoroughly in Chapter 3.

voice-leading relations among four-note chords, ﬁve-note chords, and so on. We will
use them throughout this book, both for modeling chords and scales and for analyzing speciﬁc pieces.
For now, it is enough to note that the world of chromatic voice leading, as represented by Figure 1.3.15, is signiﬁcantly more complicated than the simple circle
representing diatonic triads. Because of this complexity, the fundamental logic animating nineteenth-century music has not always been clearly understood: theorists
have sometimes depicted chromaticism as involving whimsical aberrations, departures from compositional good sense, rather than as the systematic exploration of a
complex but coherent terrain. This has in turn led historians and composers to depict
nineteenth-century chromaticism as pushing tonal logic to its breaking point, such
that the step to complete atonality became all but inevitable. I will argue against this
point of view, using new geometrical tools to demonstrate that the music of Chopin
and Wagner can be just as rigorous as the music that preceded it.

22

theory

1.4

music, magic, and language

Having sketched some major themes, let me now step back to make a few remarks
about my approach to music theory. In this book I am primarily interested in the
idealized composer’s point of view: my goal is to describe conceptual structures
that can be used to create musical works, rather than those involved in perceiving
music. I stress the adjective “idealized,” as my goal is not to undertake a historical investigation of the way past composers actually conceived of their music, but
rather to describe concepts contemporary composers might ﬁnd useful—in other
words, to answer the question “what concepts would be helpful if I wanted to compose music like this?” Music theory, understood in this way, helps composers steal
from one another in a sophisticated fashion, allowing us to appropriate general
procedures and techniques rather than particular chords or melodies. Of course
it can also help performers and analysts understand music “from the inside,” by
showing how composers make use of the options available to them.
Of course, composer-based music theory cannot ignore listeners entirely: the
point is to write music that other people want to listen to, and this can only occur
if composers are dealing with musical features that listeners care about. But though
composers and listeners need to be synchronized in general, there is room for considerable divergence when it comes to the details. For example, classical composers
evidently considered it important to conclude a piece in the tonic key, even though
listeners are relatively insensitive to this feature of musical organization.24 This means
that theorists should not assume that the cognitive structures involved in making
music are the same as those involved in perceiving it: ideas that are central to the composer’s craft, such as the principle that a classical sonata should recapitulate the second theme in the tonic key, may have only a glancing relevance to ordinary listeners.
I ﬁnd it useful here to consider the analogy with magic. A stage magician uses various tricks to cause the audience to have extraordinary experiences—bunnies seem to
disappear, beautiful assistants seem to be sawed in half, and so on. Enjoying a magician’s performance does not require you to understand how the tricks are done; in
fact, understanding may actually diminish your astonishment. Nor is the magician’s
“ideal audience” composed of professional magicians: the point is to perform the
trick for people who will genuinely be fooled. In much the same way, I understand
composition to be a process of using technical musical tools to ensure that audiences
have certain kinds of extraordinary experiences. When composing, I make various
choices about chords, scales, rhythm, and instrumentation to create feelings of tension, relaxation, terror, and ecstasy, to recall earlier moments in the piece or anticipate later events. But I do not in general expect listeners to be consciously tracking
these choices. Listeners who do (“ooh, a dissonant s9 chord in the trombones, in
polyrhythm against the ﬂutes and inverting the opening notes of the piece!”) are like
professional magicians watching each others’ routines—at best, engaged in a different

24 Cook 1987, Marvin and Brinkman 1999.

Five Components of Tonality

sort of appreciation, and, at worst too intellectually engaged to enjoy the music as
deeply as they might.
One might contrast this approach with an alternative, on which the composer’s
and listener’s perspectives are thought to be more closely aligned. Here the relevant
analogy is not to magic, but to language: the idea is that composers write music that
contains various sorts of patterns, including familiar sequences of chords and keys,
thematic recurrences, and so on, while the listener’s job is to recover these patterns.
Expert listeners recover more patterns than inexpert listeners, and are consequently
more qualiﬁed to pass aesthetic judgment on particular pieces of music. Insofar as
some composers place patterns in their music that cannot be decoded aurally by
expert listeners, their compositions are thereby aesthetically ﬂawed.25 On this view,
music essentially involves a language-like transmission of syntactic patterns from
producer to receiver.
The linguistic model is attractive, and there is no doubt some truth to it. But I
think it understates the extraordinary distinctiveness of human language. Linguistic
abilities are remarkable both for their accuracy and for their homogeneity: if you say
“there is a tiger nearby,” I have no trouble repeating the sentence word for word, writing it down, or explaining what it means. Furthermore, almost any English speaker
can effortlessly distinguish grammatical utterances such as “there is a tiger nearby”
from nongrammatical ones like “nearby tiger is.” By contrast, musical abilities are
both heterogeneous and fairly inaccurate. First, there is an enormous spectrum ranging from congenital amusics to gifted listeners with extraordinarily accurate absolute pitch. These individuals have radically different musical capabilities as both
producers and consumers of music. Second, while competent language-listeners
are typically also competent language-speakers, this is not the case for music: most
people enjoy listening to music, while only a few enjoy creating it. Third, even expert
listeners lose a large amount of the “signal” in even moderately complicated music.
I have had more than three decades of musical training, and yet I—like most other
“expert” listeners—would have trouble notating, or recreating at the piano, the notes
and rhythms in a ten-second excerpt from an unfamiliar four-voice Baroque fugue.
Musically, in other words, I am analogous to a person who cannot reliably understand all the words in the sentence “there is a tiger nearby.”26
These differences no doubt reﬂect the fact that music largely lacks semantic content. A listener who does not understand “be quiet, there’s a tiger nearby” is a serious
danger to himself and others; consequently, there is tremendous pressure for speakers and listeners to converge on the same interpretation of sentences. By contrast, a
listener who does not follow the detailed syntax of a Beethoven symphony, but who
nevertheless enjoys it, creates no problems whatsoever. In some important sense it

25 See Babbitt 1958, Lerdahl 1988, Raffman 2003, and Temperley 2007.
26 Of course, musical signals are in some respects more complex than spoken sentences: listening to a
Bach fugue is like listening to four people speak at the same time. But this should make us wonder why we
tolerate higher information content in music.

23

24

theory

simply does not matter whether you follow all the details of a piece’s syntax; what matters is that you follow the piece well enough to enjoy what you hear. For in the end,
the composer’s well-being depends on your willingness to listen, not on whether you
interpret music in the same way that he or she does. Or to revert to our earlier analogy: what is important is not that you understand the magic trick, but simply that
you feel the force of the illusion.
I should pause here to mention that I have a personal perspective on these
issues, since I sometimes create music with the aid of algorithms and computers.
In these cases I can be fairly removed from the underlying syntactical structure
of the music I create, whether that be some complex melodic process, a gradually
shifting probability distribution over the twelve chromatic notes, or a harmonic
structure derived from a mathematical analysis of Mozart’s music. Here my compositional role is that of a gatekeeper or judge, selecting the computer-generated
passages that strike me as intuitively compelling, and arranging them, in a collagelike fashion, so as to produce the best musical effect. (Typically, I augment these
algorithmic passages with music composed intuitively, producing a ﬁnal product that blends the human and the inhuman.) The fact that some people seem to
like this music only serves to highlight the oddness of the linguistic approach. For
here the composer is only vaguely aware of the structures that, on the linguistic
model, the listener is supposed to be recovering. Given that I am not at all sure
that I am hearing these structures accurately, it seems presumptuous for me to
demand much more from my listeners. Instead, I am hoping that listeners will
be directly affected by the music in the same way I am—that is, tickled, amused,
impressed, or awed.
Faced with this situation, I draw several morals.
First, there is a potential for real divergence between what we might call “composer’s grammar” and “listener’s grammar.” Listeners may potentially grasp only a
fraction of the underlying syntax of a Bach fugue, a Beethoven symphony, or a John
Coltrane solo. (Some authors have claimed that this is particularly true when we consider the artiﬁcial syntaxes of twentieth-century atonality, and this may be true; but
the more important point is that there will be signiﬁcant gaps whenever we consider
music of any complexity.27) In this sense, listening is like trying to catch up to a train
that is forever just beyond your reach; indeed, the very fact that we miss so much
structure is no doubt part of what leads us to study scores, or listen repeatedly to
the same pieces. This means that there are at least two separate projects that music
theorists can engage in: modeling what composers actually do, and modeling what
listeners actually experience. We should be careful not to conﬂate these by acting as if
listening is “composing in reverse.”

27 See Lerdahl (1988, 2001) and Raffman (2003). Lerdahl asserts that it is desirable for “composer’s
grammar” and “listener’s grammar” to be close together, and suggests this is true for classical music. Furthermore, he postulates lossless musical perception, in which listeners have subconscious but completely
accurate access to most of the details in a musical score. He therefore believes the gap between composer
and listener is signiﬁcantly less severe than I do.

Five Components of Tonality

Second, we should be careful not to assume that there is any one thing that “listening” is. It is possible that some listeners are adept at recovering a large amount of the
structure in muscial pieces, but many listeners are not. The heterogeneity of musical
abilities makes it difﬁcult to abstract away from individual variation in favor of some
idealized “competent” listener. Can we describe as “competent” the listener who loves
Beethoven, but who performs poorly on standard ear-training tests? What about the
listener who hates music but perceives it very accurately? Does the “ideal” musical
listener have absolute pitch? A perfect memory for every musical detail? Is the point of
listening to music to experience aesthetic enjoyment, or is it to recover a kind of musical “syntax” that the composer placed in his or her music? Personally, I suspect there is
no uncontroversial answer to these questions: there simply is no “competent” or “ideal”
listener that is analogous to the “idealized speaker” of contemporary linguistics.
Third, listeners’ perceptions may in some respects be more crude and statistical than we would initially think. We do not determine the meaning of sentences
by estimating the proportion of nouns to verbs, but we do respond very strongly to
relatively crude global features of the musical stimulus. Does the piece use consonant
or dissonant harmonies? Does it restrict itself, over moderate spans of musical time,
to a small set of notes, and do these notes themselves change over larger time spans?
Do melodies in general move by short distances? The answers to these questions tell
us an enormous amount about how untrained listeners will respond to a piece. Hence
my ﬁve features might be compared to a set of basic tools which composers can use
to perform their musical magic.
Fourth, musical heterogeneity poses special problems for composers, who confront an audience of widely varying interests and abilities. Traditional tonal composers dealt with this by writing music that was immediately attractive, largely by virtue
of exploiting the ﬁve features. Many composers also built into their music layers of
additional, more complicated structure—complex thematic and formal interrelationships, intricate rhythmic devices, sophisticated contrapuntal tricks, and so on.
The result was a kind of music that listeners could engage with in multiple ways:
laypersons could simply enjoy a piece for the gross statistical features it shared with
many other compositions in the same style, while cognoscenti could become more
involved in the subtleties particular to that work.
I ﬁnd it fascinating that so many twentieth-century musicians chose to abandon this strategy. Composers such as Schoenberg, Webern, Berg, and Varèse—and
later Babbitt, Boulez, Cage, Xenakis, and Stockhausen—wrote music that listeners often found quite unpleasant. In many cases, this was because these composers rejected not just acoustic consonance, but also harmonic consistency, conjunct
melodic motion, limited macroharmony, and centricity. Some early modernist composers may have hoped that ordinary listeners would adapt to this new musical style,
adjusting their ears to the absence of familiar musical structures and coming to enjoy
atonality as deeply and directly as traditional music. But after several decades of
avant-garde exploration, composers began to realize that this might never occur. The
locus classicus of this new perspective is Milton Babbitt’s 1958 manifesto “Who Cares
if You Listen?”—in which he cheerfully acknowledged that his music was not enjoyed

25

26

theory

by laypersons, but only by a specialist musical community analogous to the specialist
community of professional mathematicians.28
Rather than criticizing this point of view, let me just say that I am interested
in music that does not make this choice: I like music that brings people together,
rather than dividing them, and I think the traditional strategy—writing immediately
attractive music that also contains deeper levels of structure—is as potent as it ever
was. (Indeed, it may be all the more necessary in an economic and cultural environment in which notated music is somewhat marginal.) In this book, therefore, I will
be primarily concerned with effects that can be achieved within a broadly attractive sound-world. From a technical standpoint, this restriction is relatively unconstraining, as a large number of avant-garde techniques are easily applied within a
consonant harmonic context: it is perfectly possible, for example, to write music that
is diatonic, or more generally macroharmonically consonant, while also being serial,
aleatoric, indeterminate, wildly polyrhythmic, and so on.29 Thus, the choice between
superﬁcial accessibility and off-putting dissonance is not forced on us by our interest
in particular musical techniques. Instead, it is a relatively independent reﬂection of
our own aesthetic preferences.

1.5

outline of the book, and a suggestion for
impatient readers

The book is divided into two halves, with the theoretical material front-loaded into the
ﬁrst ﬁve chapters. Chapter 2 reviews basic theoretical concepts and introduces simple
geometrical models of musical structure, representing pitches as points on a line and
pitch classes as points on a circle. These models are then used to investigate the relations between conjunct melodic motion, harmonic consistency, and acoustic consonance. Chapter 3 introduces higher-dimensional “maps” of musical space, providing
powerful tools for visualizing the interactions between harmony and counterpoint.
Chapter 4 introduces scales, describing them as musical “rulers” that allow musicians
to measure the distance between notes; it then identiﬁes a set of familiar scales that are
interesting for a number of distinct reasons. Finally, Chapter 5 describes the components of the generalized theory of keys. It proposes various tools for representing macroharmony and centricity, and contrasts two traditions in twentieth-century music:
the chromatic tradition, which largely abandons scales in favor of highly chromatic
textures, and the scalar tradition, which makes use of an expanded range of scales and
modes. Since Chapters 2–4 are the most technically demanding portion of the book,
Appendix F provides a series of study questions to help reinforce the material. These
questions make good homework assignments when the book is used in a classroom.

28 Babbitt 1958.
29 Avant-garde techniques have been used in consonant contexts by composers like Conlon Nancarrow,
Paul Lansky, Steve Reich (Cohn 1992), and “totalists” such as Mikel Rouse (Gann 2006).

Five Components of Tonality

The second part uses these ideas to reinterpret the history of Western music.
Chapter 6 proposes that there is an “extended common practice” stretching from the
beginning of Western counterpoint to the tonal music of the twentieth century. What
links these different styles is the combination of harmonic consistency and conjunct
melodic motion: the idea that music should have a two-dimensional coherence, both
harmonic (or vertical) and melodic (or horizontal). Chapter 7 uses geometrical models to investigate the functional harmony of the classical period, brieﬂy considering
the relation between traditional harmonic theory and the views of Heinrich Schenker. Chapter 8 explores the ways in which nineteenth-century composers exploited
efﬁcient voice leading in chromatic space, suggesting that there is more structure
to chromatic music than we might expect. Chapter 9 argues that twentieth-century
tonal composers used scales to counteract the trend toward a saturated chromaticism,
fusing chromatic voice-leading techniques with the limited macroharmony of earlier
periods. Finally, Chapter 10 treats what I call the “modern jazz synthesis,” a contemporary common practice that unites impressionist chords and scales, chromatic voice
leading, and the functional harmony of the classical era.
The design of the book means that readers will need to absorb a considerable
amount of theoretical material before reaching the analytical payoff in the second
half. Readers who are less interested in theory for its own sake may therefore want
to read the book out of order. Chapter 8 can largely be read directly after Chapters 2
and 3, although the discussion of Tristan will be enhanced by familiarity with the
material in §§4.8–10. Chapter 9 can be read directly after Chapter 4. This abbreviated
path hits the main theoretical highlights (new tools for understanding voice leading
and scales), as well as the most important analytical applications: to the chromatic
tonality of Schubert, Chopin and Wagner, and to the twentieth-century scale-based
tonality of Debussy, Stravinsky and Reich. When using the book in an advanced
undergraduate theory class, I have assigned pieces from Chapters 8–9 as homework
assignments early in the semester, while students are still reading the introductory
chapters. (For instance, I assign Chopin’s E minor prelude and F minor mazurka in
the week when students are reading Chapter 3.) That way, students have an opportunity to work with the music on their own before being introduced to my own particular perspective on these remarkable works.
Finally, a word of encouragement: it is possible to understand the gist of later chapters even while remaining somewhat fuzzy about the technical material in Chapters 2–4.
So don’t be afraid to forge ahead, returning to earlier sections as the need arises.

27

chapter 2

Harmony and Voice Leading
The enterprise of “musical set theory” aspires to catalogue all the chords available
to contemporary composers. Unfortunately, this project turns out to be more complicated than one might imagine. This is, ﬁrst, because chords have an intrinsic and
sophisticated geometry, with distance being determined by voice-leading size. Second, basic musical concepts such as “transposition,” “inversion,” “triad,” and “chord
type” can all be relativized to scales; thus two chords may belong to the same category
relative to one scale but not another. (To make matters worse, we can also do set
theory in an unquantized space that admits a continuous inﬁnity of notes between B
and C. This perspective can even teach us useful lessons about the discrete world of
ordinary musical experience.) Third, chord tones themselves can be differentiated in
terms of their importance, leading to phenomena such as rootedness and centricity.
Finally, in the most sophisticated versions of set theory, the objects of comparison
may themselves be chord progressions, with musical categorization proceeding ﬂexibly and according to an ever-changing variety of symmetry operations (to be discussed shortly).
The next four chapters will try to address these issues, describing a new approach
to chords and rebuilding “musical set theory” from the ground up. This chapter
introduces the basic concepts and deﬁnitions. We begin with elementary geometrical
models of musical structure, representing notes as points on a line (pitch space) and
on a circle (pitch-class space). We then turn to higher-order objects—chord progressions and voice leadings—that describe motion through time. (Because this formalism sets the stage for much of the rest of the book, I encourage you to work through
the study questions in Appendix F.) Next we consider the importance of symmetry in music theory, asking under what conditions harmonic consistency and conjunct melodic motion can be combined. This leads to our ﬁrst signiﬁcant theoretical
result: a general understanding of the interdependence between acoustic consonance,
efﬁcient voice leading, and harmonic consistency.

2.1

linear pitch space

Sound consists of small ﬂuctuations in air pressure, akin to changes in barometric
pressure. These ﬂuctuations are heard as having a deﬁnite pitch when they repeat
themselves (at least approximately) after some period of time t (Figure 2.1.1). The

Harmony and Voice Leading
Figure 2.1.1 Pitched sounds are periodic. The fundamental frequency is equal to
1/t, where t is the duration of the cycle.

reciprocal of the period, 1/t, is the fundamental frequency of the sound—a number
that measures how many repetitions occur per unit of time. Musicians without absolute pitch are sensitive not to fundamental frequencies as such, but rather to the ratios
between them. Suppose, on Tuesday, a typical person whistles a tune whose pitches
have frequencies f, g, h,. . . . On Wednesday, if asked to reproduce the tune, she is likely
to whistle the frequencies cf, cg, ch, . . ., where c is some number close to one. Musicians
say that the whistler has transposed the notes, changing their fundamental frequencies
so as to preserve the ratios between them. This suggests that frequency ratios represent a kind of musical distance, and that listeners are more attuned to the distances
between notes than to their absolute positions in frequency space.1
Musicians do not like to work with fundamental frequencies, since ratios are awkward and division is hard; furthermore, we typically measure numerical distances
using subtraction rather than division. It is useful, therefore, to relabel pitches by
mapping every fundamental frequency f onto a number p according to an equation
of the form
p = c1 + c2log2 ( f/440)
Don’t be put off by the logarithm: the important point is that in the new system,
the whistler whistles the pitches p, q, r, . . . on Tuesday, and p + x, q + x, r + x, . . . on
Wednesday. The distance between two pitches p and q is now calculated by subtraction (|p − q|) rather than division ( f/g).
The equation in the preceding paragraph has two constants, c1 and c2, the ﬁrst of
which determines the number corresponding to the frequency A440, and the second
of which determines the size of the octave. In this book, I will always choose c1 = 69
and c2 = 12. This creates a linear pitch space in which the unit of distance is the semitone
and middle C is (arbitrarily) assigned the number 60. (Note that the term “semitone”
is deﬁned in continuous space, without presupposing any particular temperament or
chromatic scale.) As shown in Figure 2.1.2, labels for familiar equal-tempered pitches

1 Transposition preserves these distances, since f/g = cf/cg. McDermott and Hauser (2005) suggest that
this measure of musical distance is innate and that it is common to at least some nonhuman animals.
Dowling and Harwood (1986) suggest it is a musical universal.

29

30

theory
Figure 2.1.2 Linear pitch space is a continuous line, containing a
point for every conceivable pitch.

can be determined by counting keys on an ordinary piano, so that the Cs above middle C is 61, the D above that is 62, and so on. Since the space is continuous, we can
use fractional numbers, labeling the pitch 17 hundredths of a semitone (or cents)
above middle C as 60.17. In principle, we could eschew letter-names for the remainder of this book, conducting the discussion entirely in numerical terms. For clarity,
however, I will use familiar letter names whenever possible. These should be taken as
shorthand for numerical pitch labels: “Cs4” and “61,” like “Bob Dylan” and “Robert
Zimmerman,” are different ways of referring to the same thing.

2.2

circular pitch-class space

In linear pitch space octaves are not special, and the distance 12 is no different from
any other. However, human beings hear octave-related pitches as having the same
quality, color, or—as psychologists call it—chroma.2 (As Maria puts it in The Sound
of Music, the note “Ti” brings us back to “Do.”) Music theorists express this by saying
that two pitches an octave apart belong to the same pitch class. Geometrically, pitch
classes can be represented using a circle (Figure 2.2.1). A single point in this space

Figure 2.2.1 Circular pitch class space. The
number 0.17 refers to the pitch class seventeen
cents above the pitch class C, while the number
2.5 refers to the pitch class Dμ, or D quartertone sharp, halfway between D and Ef.

2 Octave equivalence seems to be nearly universal in human cultures (Dowling and Harwood 1986),
and there is some evidence for it in nonhuman animals (Wright et al. 2000).

Harmony and Voice Leading

corresponds to the quality that is common to all the pitches sharing the same chroma:
thus, the point “2” represents the quality (“D-ishness”) that is shared by the pitches
D0, D1, D2, D3, and so on.3 Alternatively, we can take points on the circle to represent
categories of notes all sharing the same chroma.
It is important to understand that pitch and pitch-class space are not separate
and independent: pitch-class space is formed out of pitch space when we choose to
ignore, or abstract away from, octave information.4 As a result, many properties of
linear pitch space are transferred to circular pitch-class space. For example, it is not
necessary to devise a new system of naming pitch classes, as we can simply use pitch
names in the range 0 £ x < 12 to refer to the chromas they possess (Figure 2.2.1). The
terms “above” and “below” also inherit their meaning from pitch space: the phrase
“the pitch class a quarter tone above pitch class D” simply refers to the chroma possessed by any pitch a quarter tone above any pitch with chroma D. (Of course, since
pitch-class space is circular, it is not meaningful to say that one pitch class is absolutely above or below another; the pitch class E is both two semitones above D and
ten semitones below it.) Finally, the distance between two pitch classes can be deﬁned
as the shortest distance between any two pitches belonging to those pitch classes.
Thus, when a musician says “pitch class E is four semitones away from C,” this means
that for every pitch with chroma C, the nearest pitch with chroma E is precisely four
semitones away.
Ultimately, pitch classes are important because they provide a language for making
generalizations about pitches. The statement “pitch class E is four semitones above C”
implies the statements “E4 is four semitones above C4,” “E5 is four semitones above
C5,” and so on. Since it would take too long to list these statements individually, musicians instead use the convenient shorthand that pitch classes provide. Readers may
ﬁnd it useful here to consider the analogy between pitch class and time of day. The
question “what’s the distance from C to Cs?” is exactly analogous to “how long is it
from 8 am to 9 am?” The answer “there is one hour between 8 am and 9 am,” means
that on any given day, 9 am occurs precisely one hour after 8 am. (Similarly, we can
say “9 am is one hour after 8 am” or even “9 am is 23 hours before 8 am,” much as
we might observe that pitch class A is both one semitone above and eleven semitones
below Gs.) Here we use time of day to summarize inﬁnitely many facts about times:
the statement “there is one hour between 8 am and 9 am” implies that there is one

3 Here I am using scientiﬁc pitch notation, in which numbers refer to octaves, with octave 4 ranging
from middle C to the B above and with octave 5 starting at the next C. (Thus B4 is a semitone below C5.)
Note that there is a subtle difference between the languages of psychology and music theory: psychologists say that the pitches D3 and D4 possess the same chroma (“D-ishness”), while music theorists say that
the pitches belong to the same category (“the pitch class D”). The difference is analogous to the contrast
between whiteness (a property) and the collection of all white things (a group). Points in pitch-class space
can be taken to represent either of these.
4 Consequently, pitch-class space is circular only in an abstract sense. One shouldn’t think of it as being
embedded in a larger two-dimensional space, the way an ordinary circle exists on a two-dimensional piece
of paper. Instead, one should think of it as a one-dimensional space unto itself. Here it can be useful to imagine a pointlike inhabitant of the space: from its perspective, “circularity” consists in the fact that a “straight
line”—for example, a counterclockwise path—eventually returns to its starting point.

31

32

theory

hour between 8 am and 9 am on Monday, August 8, 2006, one hour between 8 am and
9 am on Tuesday, August 9, 2006, and so on ad inﬁnitum.
One unusual feature of this book is that I use paths in pitch-class space to represent
intervals, or particular ways of moving from one pitch class to another.5 The motivation here is that progressions like the ﬁrst three in Figure 2.2.2 are closely related: in
each case a C moves up by four semitones to an E, with the only difference being the
octave in which the motion occurs. In the ﬁnal three cases, C also moves to E, but
differently—by eight descending semitones or 16 ascending semitones. We can capture what is similar about the ﬁrst three cases, and their difference from the others, by
modeling intervals using phrases such as “start at C and move up by four semitones.”
These combine an initial pitch class (C), a direction (up), and a distance (4), and
can be notated C ±› E. Geometrically, these phrases correspond to ways of moving
around the pitch-class circle: C ±› E is represented by a four-semitone clockwise
(ascending) path, whereas C —° E is represented by an eight-semitone counterclockwise (descending) path. (Motions can even wrap around the circle one or more times,
as shown on the ﬁgure.) By contrast, music theorists have traditionally represented
motion in pitch-class space using phrases like “start at C and move to E however you

Figure 2.2.2 The passages in (a)−(c) are similar in that they move C to E by four ascending
semitones. The passages in (d)−( f ) also move C to E, but differently—by eight descending
semitones or by sixteen ascending semitones. We can capture what is similar about (a)−(c)
by modeling these progressions as paths in pitch-class space. The progressions in (a)−(c)
move C to E clockwise by four semitones along the pitch-class circle; (d) and ( f ) move eight
semitones counterclockwise, and (e) moves sixteen clockwise semitones.

5 For more on paths in pitch-class space see Tymoczko 2005 and 2008b. Mazzola 2002 contains related
ideas.

Harmony and Voice Leading

want.” This gives us no way to formalize the elementary musical observation that the
ﬁrst three progressions in Figure 2.2.2 are particularly closely related.6

2.3

transposition and inversion as
distance-preserving functions

Since musicians are primarily sensitive to the distances between notes, we have reason
to be interested in the distance-preserving transformations of musical space. It turns
out that there are only two of these—transposition and inversion, corresponding to
the geometrical operations of translation and reﬂection. These transformations play
an important role in many different musical styles, and are central to contemporary
music theory.
Transposition, discussed in §2.1, moves every pitch in the same direction by the
same amount: the transposition of pitch p by x semitones, written Tx(p), is equal
to p + x (Figure 2.3.1). The distance moved represents the size of the transposition:
virtually any listener can immediately distinguish a passage of music from its transposition by ﬁve octaves, while even the most subtle absolute-pitch listeners, extensively trained at the best conservatories, cannot discern the effects of transposition by
0.00001 of a semitone.
The second type of distance-preserving transformation, inversion, turns musical
space upside-down. (Warning: music theorists use the term “inversion” in two unrelated senses, which go by the names of “registral inversion” and “pitch-space inversion”; I am talking about the second of these.7) Figure 2.3.2 depicts inversion as it
operates on the theme of Bach’s A minor prelude from Book II of the Well-Tempered
Clavier. Where the left hand of (a) begins with an ascending octave leap, followed by
a series of descending semitones, the left hand of (b) begins with a descending octave
leap followed by a series of ascending semitones. In other words, the direction of
motion has changed while the distances remain the same. (The passages in the upper

Figure 2.3.1 Transposition moves every point in the same
direction by the same amount. Here, the arrows indicate ascending
transposition by two semitones.

6 Traditional pitch-class intervals can sometimes be useful, however—for instance when we would like
to categorize root progressions in functionally tonal music (§7.1).
7 Registral inversion changes the octave in which notes appear (for instance, transforming a root position chord C4-E4-G4 into a ﬁrst-inversion E4-G4-C5). In §2.4 I call this “the O symmetry.” Pitch-space
inversion turns all of pitch space upside-down (for instance, transforming a major chord C4-E4-G4 into a
minor chord G4-Ef4-C4). In §2.4 I call this “the I symmetry.”

33

34

theory
Figure 2.3.2 (a−b) Inversionally related passages in Bach’s A minor prelude, WTC II.
(c) Inversion as reﬂection in pitch space. Here, the note A3 is unaltered by the inversion, so
the inversion can be written I A3
A3. All other notes move by twice their distance from A3.

staff are also related by inversion, although the Figure 2.3.3 The chords in each
ﬁrst and last notes are altered slightly.) Because measure are inversionally related,
they are direction reversing, inversions change the and sound more similar to each
other than to either of the chords
character of musical passages more dramatically
in the other measure.
than transpositions: nobody would ever mistake
the inverted form of Bach’s theme for the original.
Nevertheless, inversionally related chords often
sound reasonably similar, at least in the grand
scheme of things: the chords in Figure 2.3.3a contain a minor third, a minor seventh, and a perfect ﬁfth, and sound reasonably restful,
while those in (b) contain a perfect ﬁfth, a tritone, and a minor second, and have
a distinctive, dissonant “bite.”8 For this reason, many twentieth-century composers
consider inversionally related chords to be similar.
Inversion can be represented mathematically by subtraction from a constant value:
the inversion that maps pitch x to pitch y, written I xy (p), is (x + y) − p.9 Geometrically,
inversion corresponds to reﬂection: if we were to place a two-sided mirror at point
A3 on Figure 2.3.2c, then every pitch would be sent to the place where its reﬂection

8 Major and minor triads are of course importantly different, even though they are related by inversion; nevertheless, they are more similar to one another than to three-note chromatic clusters. With other
chords, inversional relationships are even more striking: in informal tests with undergraduate music
majors, students could easily distinguish the two categories of chords in Figure 2.3.3, but had much more
trouble distinguishing the inversionally related chords within each category.
9 The notation is a tad confusing, since the variables x and y serve to label the function I xy (p). For a
particular choice of x and y, we get a general function that takes any pitch p as input, and outputs another
A3
(p) is a function acting on any pitch p; when p = A3, the function outputs B3.
pitch. Thus IB3

Harmony and Voice Leading

would be. The point A3 is a ﬁxed point of the
inversion, since it is unaltered by the reﬂection.
Every inversion has a ﬁxed point, although it
may lie between piano keys: for instance, the
inversion that maps E4 to F4 has a ﬁxed point
at Eμ4—the E quarter-tone sharp halfway
between E4 and F4.10 (Note that inversions
move each pitch by twice its distance to this
ﬁxed point.) Inversions, unlike transpositions,
cannot be distinguished by their size, since for
any distance x, an inversion will move some
pair of pitches by that amount.
Transposition and inversion can also be
deﬁned in pitch-class space. Figure 2.3.4 shows
that transposition is represented by rotation
while inversion is represented by reﬂection:
the inversion around C sends every pitch class
to the point where its image would appear, if there were a pointlike mirror at C. Note
that every pitch-class inversion ﬁxes two antipodal points on the circle, whereas pitch
inversion ﬁxes only a single point.11 Our earlier mathematical formulas continue to
apply: if p is a pitch class, then its transposition by x semitones is p + x, while the
inversion that sends x to y is (x + y) − p. However, when operating with pitch classes
we should always add or subtract 12 until the result lies in the range 0 £ x < 12. This
can lead to odd-looking equations like 6 + 3 + 1.5 + 1.5 = 0, since 12 and 0 are equivalent in pitch-class arithmetic.12
Figure 2.3.4 In circular pitch class
space, transposition corresponds to
rotation, while inversion corresponds
to reﬂection.

2.4

musical objects

Understanding music is a matter of ignoring, or abstracting away from, information:
we interpret the violinist’s C4 and the cellist’s C4 to be two instances of the same
pitch, ignoring subtle differences in timbre and instrument. Similarly, we conceptualize the violinist’s note, a little sharp and ever-so-slightly before the beat, as an
in-tune note played on the beat. We can model this process using the mathematical
concept of symmetry: to abstract away from musical information is to deﬁne a collection of symmetry operations that leave the object’s “essential identity” unchanged.
Mathematicians say that objects related by a symmetry operation belong to the
same equivalence class—the group of objects that are mutually “equivalent” under
10 The ﬁxed point of I xy is (x + y)/2.
11 Pitch inversion around middle C sends Fs4 to Fs3, preserving the chroma of the note, but changing
its register. If we ignore octaves, Fs becomes a second ﬁxed point of the inversion.
12 Pitch-class arithmetic is simply a continuous version of what mathematicians call “modular” (or
“clock”) arithmetic. Transposing pitch class 2.5, or Dμ, by −5 semitones produces 2.5 − 5 = −2.5. To move
this pitch into the range 0 £ x < 12, we add 12, shifting the octave. The result is the pitch class 9.5, or Aμ.

35

36

Figure 2.4.1
The basic
musical object
(C4, E4, G4) can
appear either
harmonically or
melodically.

theory

the effects of the symmetry operation. These equivalence classes can in turn be taken
to represent the properties or attributes the objects share, much as the group of all
white things can be taken to represent the property of whiteness. As we will see, many
different music-theoretical concepts can be understood in this way.
We can begin by deﬁning a basic musical object as an ordered series of pitches,
uncategorized and uninterpreted.13 Basic musical objects can be ordered in time or
by instrumental voice: thus the object (C4, E4, G4) could represent an ascending C
major arpeggio or a simultaneous chord in which the ﬁrst instrument plays C4, the
second E4, and the third G4 (Figure 2.4.1). (Instruments can be labeled arbitrarily;
what matters is simply that we distinguish them somehow.) Basic musical objects are
so particular as to be uninteresting. Until we have deﬁned some symmetry operations, some way of grouping objects into larger categories, the object (C4, E4, G4)
is absolutely different from and absolutely unrelated to (E4, C4, G4). Of course, the
fact that we instinctively consider them to be similar
shows that we categorize musical objects unthinkingly;
indeed, it is difﬁcult to conceive of music without
grouping objects together in some way.
During the early eighteenth century, Jean-Philippe
Rameau articulated the modern notion of a chord, classifying basic musical objects based on their pitch-class
content rather than their order or registral arrangement.14 Rameau implicitly suggested that three basic operations preserve the “chordal”
or “harmonic” identity of a musical object: octave shifts, permutation (or reordering),
and cardinality change (or note duplication). For instance, one can transform (C4, E4,
G4) by reordering its notes to produce (E4, G4, C4), transposing the second note up
an octave to produce (C4, E5, G4), or duplicating the third note to produce (C4, E4,
G4, G4)—all without changing its right to be called a “C major chord.” Furthermore,
as shown in Figure 2.4.2, these transformations can be combined to produce an endless collection of objects, all representing the same chord: (E4, G4, C5), (G3, G4, C5,
E4), (E2, G3, C4, E4, E5), and so on. To be a C major chord is simply to belong to this
equivalence class—or in other words, to contain all and only the three pitch classes
C, E, and G. We can therefore represent the C major chord as the unordered set of
pitch classes {C, E, G}. (Note that I use curly braces to represent unordered collections,
reserving parentheses for ordered collections.) Geometrically, chords correspond to
particular collections of points on a circle, as in Figure 2.4.2.
Traditional theory uses terms like “major chord” and “minor chord” to represent
chord types, or collections of transpositionally related chords. We can interpret these
terms as referring to equivalence classes formed by four symmetry operations: octave
shifts, permutations, cardinality changes, and transpositions (Figure 2.4.3).15 (Note

13 For more on this general approach to chord classiﬁcation, see Callender, Quinn, and Tymoczko 2008.
14 See Lester 1974 and Rameau 1722/1971.
15 Octave shifts allow us to change the octave of just one note in an object. Transposition, by contrast, moves all the notes in an object in exactly the same way. (If we were to let transposition act on just

Harmony and Voice Leading
Figure 2.4.2 (a) All of these musical objects represent the C major chord, and are related
by some sequence of octave shifts, permutations (or rearrangement of voices), and note
duplication. (b) The C major chord can be represented by an unordered set of points in
pitch-class space.

Figure 2.4.3 (a) All of these musical objects represent major chords, and are related by
some combination of octave shifts, reordering of voices, note duplication, and transposition.
(b) Any two major chords relate by rotation on the pitch-class circle and divide the pitch
class circle into arcs that are 4, 3, and 5 semitones large, moving clockwise from the root. The
ﬁgure shows the C and D major triads.

that contemporary music theorists sometimes prefer the term transpositional set class
to the more colloquial “chord type.”) Geometrically, two chords belong to the same
type if one can be rotated into the other in circular pitch-class space (Figure 2.4.3b).
Such chords will share the same sequence of distances between their adjacent notes:

one of the notes in an object, then we could transform any n-note object into any other, and we would no
longer be able to make any distinctions among them.) It is also worth noting that the “cardinality change”
operation is rather delicate mathematically; for details, see Callender, Quinn, and Tymoczko 2008.

37

38

theory

for example, major chords divide the pitch-class circle into arcs of four, three, and ﬁve
semitones, reading clockwise from the root.
Since inversionally related chords share many properties (and sound reasonably
similar), contemporary theorists often group them together as well. Music theorists
say that two objects belong to the same set class if they are related by any combination of ﬁve symmetry operations (the “OPTIC” symmetries): octave shifts (O), permutations (P), transpositions (T), inversions (I), and cardinality changes (C) (Figure
2.4.4).16 Figure 2.4.5 shows that the C major chord divides pitch-class space into arcs
that are four, three, and ﬁve semitones large, reading clockwise from C, while its inversion, the C minor chord, divides the pitch-class circle into arcs that are four, three,
Figure 2.4.4 (a) Each of the ﬁve OPTIC operations allows you to transform a musical object
in some way. Musical objects belong to the same set class if they can be transformed into each
other (or into some third chord) by some sequence of OPTIC transformations. (b) These
objects all belong to the same set class, and relate to the initial (C4, E4, G4) by octave shift,
reordering of voices, transposition, inversion, or cardinality change.
Operation

Allowable Action

Octave

Move any note
into a new octave.

Permutation

Reorder the object, changing
which voice is assigned to
which note.

Transposition

Transpose the object, moving
all of its notes in the same
direction by the same amount.

Inversion

Invert the object by turning it
“upside down.”

Cardinality change

Add a new voice duplicating
one of the notes in the object.

16 Huron (2007, p. 121) expresses some doubt about the musical signiﬁcance of both chord types and
set classes; however, in my experience students readily confuse inversionally related three-note chords such
as those in Figure 2.3.3. Furthermore, when listening to sequences such as Figure 1.2.1c I can easily determine what set class is being used, though I sometimes have trouble identifying which inversion is present.

Harmony and Voice Leading

and ﬁve semitones large reading counterclockwise from G. Chords belonging to the same set
class will always share the same sequence of arc
lengths, although this sequence may progress
either clockwise or counterclockwise around
the pitch-class circle.
A speciﬁc example will help reinforce this
approach to chord classiﬁcation. Figure 2.4.6
begins with the basic musical object (E4, G4,
Bf4, D5)—a half-diminished chord starting
on the E above middle C. We then exploit the
octave symmetry to produce (E3, G4, Bf3,
D4). The permutation symmetry then rearranges the voices in which the notes appear,
transforming (E3, G4, Bf3, D4) into (E3, Bf3, D4, G4); now the order of the voices
corresponds to their registral order. We then use the transposition symmetry to
shift the entire object up by semitone, giving (F3, B3, Ds4, Gs4)—recognizable
as the ﬁrst chord in Wagner’s Tristan. Next, we apply the I symmetry to invert the
chord around the point halfway between A3 and Bf3, transforming (F3, B3, Ds4,

39
Figure 2.4.5
Major and minor
chords relate by
inversion, and
divide the pitchclass circle into
arcs that are 4, 3,
and 5 semitones
large, proceeding
either clockwise
(major) or
counterclockwise
(minor).

Figure 2.4.6
Using OPTIC
operations
to transform
musical objects.

40

theory

Gs4) into (D4, Gs3, E3, B2). The octave and permutation symmetries can then be
used to give us (E3, Gs3, D4, B4), which is the second chord in Tristan. Finally, we
can use cardinality changes to create additional voices that double notes already
in the chord.
Musical classiﬁcation thus proceeds by the progressive discarding of information. When we understand music as a sequence of pitches, we disregard many speciﬁc features of the acoustic signal, such as timbre, vibrato, duration, and rhythm.
When we think in terms of pitch classes, we disregard the particular octave in which
notes appear. To form chords, we ignore even more information, considering only the
pitch-class content of a group of notes, rather than their order or multiplicity. Finally,
we form chord types (or set classes) by focusing on the distances between a chord’s
notes rather than its pitch classes. Thus when we say that an object is a major chord,
we are neglecting an enormous number of musical details, leaving behind something
that is very abstract—an ordered sequence of clockwise distances around the pitchclass circle.
Although chords, chord types, and set classes are central to contemporary theory,
they are not the only possibilities to consider. In certain situations it may be useful to
talk about unordered sets of pitches rather than pitch classes (“chords” of pitches), or
to distinguish the multiset {C, C, E, G}, which contains two copies of the pitch class C,
from {C, E, G}, which contains only one C. We may at other times want to consider
“tone rows” or ordered sequences of pitch classes, such as (C, E, G). (Order is particularly important when modeling melody, of course.) As shown in Figure 2.4.7, each
of these terms corresponds to a unique combination of the ﬁve OPTIC symmetries.
These alternatives all represent potentially useful ways of classifying musical objects,
and there is no one optimal degree of abstraction: since different musical purposes
require different kinds of information, we need to remain somewhat ﬂexible about
how we conceptualize music. To this end, it can be quite instructive to work out the
musical signiﬁcance of all 32 combinations of the OPTIC symmetries.

Figure 2.4.7 Music-theoretical terms and the symmetry operations to which they
correspond. A “chord” is a group of musical objects related by octave shifts, permutations,
and note-duplications, while a “multiset” is a group of objects related by octave shifts and
permutation. (Thus, when we are talking about multisets, the number of times a note appears
is important; when we are talking about chords it is not.) In a “tone row,” as deﬁned by
Schoenberg, order is important: we are permitted only to shift octaves and introduce note
duplications.
Term

Symmetry

chord

OPC

“chord type” or transpositional set class

OPTC

set class

OPTIC

multiset of pitch classes

OP

chord (of pitches)

PC

“tone row” (ordered set of pitch classes)

OC

Harmony and Voice Leading

2.5

voice leadings and chord progressions

Having reviewed some basic objects of music theory, our next task is to consider
progressions, or sequences of musical objects, as musical entities in their own right.
In other words, we will shift from an object-based approach (whose subject is single
chords such as {C, E, G}) to a transformational approach (whose subject is progressions such as “C4, E4, G4 followed by C4, F4, A4”).17 This increased level of abstraction can be a little confusing, and readers may want to brace themselves for a slight
uptick in the level of theoretical difﬁculty.
We can classify progressions using the very same OPTIC symmetries described in
the preceding section. The main complication is that progressions are “higher-order”
constructions containing multiple individual objects, which means that each symmetry can be applied in two different ways: we can either apply the exact same operation to
each object in a progression or we can use different versions of the same symmetry on
the progression’s two objects. Take the progression (C4, E4, G4)–(C4, F4, A4), whose
ﬁrst object is (C4, E4, G4) and whose second is (C4, F4, A4). To apply the permutation symmetry uniformly is to reorder each of the two objects in precisely the same
way, for instance producing (E4, G4, C4)–(F4, A4, C4) (Figure 2.5.1). (Here we have
moved the ﬁrst note in each object to the end.) Individual permutations apply different reorderings to the two objects in the progression, and can produce results such as
(C4, E4, G4)–(F4, C4, A4). (Here we leave the ﬁrst object unchanged, while switching
the ﬁrst two notes in the second object.) The distinction between “individual” and
“uniform” can be applied to the other symmetries as well: the progression (C4, E4,
G4)–(C4, F4, A4) can be transposed uniformly to produce (D4, Fs4, A4)–(D4, G4, B4)
and individually to produce (D4,
Fs4, A4)–(Ef4, Af4, C5). Since Figure 2.5.1 (b) relates to (a) by uniform
each of the ﬁve OPTIC symmetry permutation. To get from (a) to (b) move all notes
operations can be applied uni- downward by one staff, shifting the bottom staff to
formly, individually, or not at all, the top. (c) relates to (a) by individual permutation,
there are many more categories since it applies different permutations to each chord.
Similarly, (d) and (e) relate to (a) by uniform and
of progressions than there are of
individual transposition, respectively.
individual objects.
Of these, two are particularly
important for our purposes:
voice leadings, which describe
how individual musical “voices”
move from chord to chord,
and chord progressions, which
describe successions of harmonies with no regard for musical

17 The shift from objects to transformations is central to Lewin 1987, though he favors group-theoretical models of harmonic relationships, whereas I am oriented toward geometrical models that represent
counterpoint as well. For more, see Tymoczko 2007, 2008a and 2009b.

41

42

Figure 2.5.2
Three voice
leadings between
G7 and C.

theory

voices. Intuitively, voice leadings can be represented by phrases such as “move the
C major triad to a Cs diminished triad by shifting the note C up by semitone,”
while chord progressions correspond to phrases such as “move the C major triad
to the Cs diminished triad however you want.” Mathematically, it turns out that
voice leadings arise from uniform applications of the permutation symmetry, while
chord progressions arise from individual applications of the permutation and cardinality-change symmetries. (These individual transformations destroy the identity of musical “voices,” since they change the two chords in different ways.) One
way or another, voice leadings and chord progressions will occupy us for the rest
of the book.
We’ll begin with voice leadings in pitch space, which represent mappings from one
collection of pitches to another.18 For example, Figure 2.5.2a presents the voice leading (G2, G3, B3, D4, F4)®(C3, G3, C4, C4, E4), in which the voice sounding G2 in the
ﬁrst chord moves to C3 in the second chord, the voice sounding G3 in the ﬁrst chord
continues to sound G3 in the second, the voice sounding B3 moves up to C4, and so
on. (Note that I use an arrow to represent voice leadings.) Since the overall order in
which the voices are listed is not signiﬁcant, one could also represent this voice leading as (F4, D4, G2, B3, G3)®(E4, C4, C3, C4,
G3); what matters is simply that we describe
how the notes in one chord move to those in
the next.19 Voice leadings are like the atomic
constituents of musical scores, the basic building blocks of polyphonic music.
Clearly, the voice leading in Figure 2.5.2b
is closely related to that in Figure 2.5.2a;
all that has changed is the octave in which
some voices appear. We can represent what is common to them by writing
5, 0, 1, -2, -1

(G, G, B, D, F) ¾¾¾¾¾® (C, G, C, C, E). This indicates that one of the voices
containing G, whatever octave it may be in, moves up ﬁve semitones to C; the other
voice containing G is held over into the next chord; the B moves up by semitone to
C; and so on. I will refer to such octave-free voice leadings as voice leadings between
pitch-class sets or pitch-class voice leadings.20 The numbers above the arrow, here (5, 0,
1, −2, −1), are paths in pitch-class space that describe how the voices move (§2.2).
The two pitch-space voice leadings in Figure 2.5.2a–b are both instances of the pitch5, 0, 1, -2, -1

class voice leading (G, G, B, D, F) ¾¾¾¾¾® (C, G, C, C, E). Figure 2.5.2c is

18 More formally, voice leadings in pitch space are equivalence classes of pairs of basic musical objects
(ordered pitch sets) generated by uniform applications of the permutation symmetry.
19 In other words, we do not change the voice leading when we apply permutation uniformly.
20 Mathematically, voice leadings in pitch-class space are equivalence classes of progressions generated
by uniform applications of the octave and permutation symmetries. Previous theorists (Roeder 1984, 1987,
1994, Lewin 1998, Morris 1998, Straus 2003) deﬁne voice leadings using traditional pitch-class intervals
rather than “paths in pitch-class space” (§2.2). Hence they do not, for instance, distinguish one-semitone
ascending motion from eleven-semitone descending motion. For more, see Tymoczko 2005, 2006, 2008b,
and Callender, Quinn, and Tymoczko 2008.

Harmony and Voice Leading

not an instance of this voice leading, since G moves to C by seven descending semitones rather than ﬁve ascending semitones. (The speciﬁc path matters!) For simplicity, I will omit the numbers over the arrow when the number of semitones moved
by each voice lies in the range −6 < x £ 6. Thus I will write (G, G, B, D, F)®(C, G,
C, C, E) for the pitch-class voice leading in Figures 2.5.2a–b. This indicates that each
voice moves by the shortest possible path to its destination, with the arbitrary convention being that tritones ascend.
Pitch-class voice leadings are abstract schemas that are central to the enterprise
of Western composition. Without them, a composer would need to conceptualize
the voice leadings in Figure 2.5.3 as being entirely unrelated, and this would pose
overwhelming burdens on his or her memory. It is far simpler, and more practical, to
understand the two voice leadings as examples of a single principle: you can transform
a C major triad into an F major triad by moving the E up by semitone and the G up by
two semitones. The concept “pitch-class voice leading” is simply a tool for formalizing
such principles, and thus for modeling one important aspect of the composer’s craft.
Of course, in actual compositions voice leadings are always represented by speciﬁc
pitches, and composers always think very carefully about register. Nevertheless, it is
also true that composition requires a general sense of the various “routes” from chord
to chord, and these routes are precisely what pitch-class voice
leadings describe.
Geometrically, a pitch-space voice leading corresponds to
a collection of paths in linear pitch space. Figure 2.5.4a represents the pitch-space voice leading in Figure 2.5.2a, with the
dotted lines showing how each pitch moves to its destination.
Similarly, a pitch-class voice leading can be represented as a

Figure 2.5.4
(a) Voice leadings in
pitch space can be
represented as paths on
a line. (b) Pitch-class
voice leadings can be
represented as paths on
a circle. These paths can
move in either direction
by any distance, and
may complete one or
more circumferences of
the circle.

43

Figure 2.5.3
Two instances of
the same voiceleading schema.

44

theory

collection of paths in circular pitch-class space. In principle these paths can be arbitrarily long, with notes taking one or more complete turns around the pitch-class
circle. Indeed, any collection of paths on the pitch-class circle, between any points
whatsoever, deﬁnes a voice leading in pitch-class space. In some cases, it can be useful to represent voice leadings by a continuous process (which could be shown as a
movie) in which each note glides along the appropriate path to its destination, beginning and ending at the same time.21
By contrast, chord progressions (as I deﬁne them) are simply successions of
chords, with no implied mappings between their notes. Typically, the term “chord
progression” is understood to refer to a sequence of unordered pitch-class sets.
Thus {C, E, G, Bf}Þ{E, Gs, B}, or C7ÞE, is a chord progression whose ﬁrst chord
is {C, E, G, Bf} and whose second chord is {E, Gs, B}, but which does not associate the note C with any particular note in the second chord.22 (Note that I use the
double arrow for chord progressions, reserving the single arrow for voice leadings.)
However, we could also deﬁne a pitch-space chord progression as a pair of unordered
pitch sets, as in {C4, E4, G4}Þ{C4, F4, A4}. Again, there is no implication that
the note E4 moves to F4 or to any other pitch in the chord. (When we are talking
about chord progressions in pitch or pitch-class space, we are focusing on the
harmonies and ignoring how individual voices might happen to move.) Figure
2.5.5 shows that chord progressions can be modeled as successions of unordered
points in either linear pitch space or circular pitch-class space. Geometrically, we
can imagine each chord occupying its own individual frame of a movie, with the
motion between them being instantaneous and giving us no reason to associate any
pair of notes.
Figure 2.5.6 summarizes this discussion, showing that each of these different theoretical concepts applies the ﬁve OPTIC symmetries in different ways.

Figure 2.5.5 The chord progression {C, E, G, Bf}Þ{E, Gs, B}.

21 On the companion website I have provided a series of movies of this sort.
22 Mathematically, chord progressions result from the individual application of the octave, permutation, and cardinality-change symmetries.

Harmony and Voice Leading

2.6

Term

Symmetry

voice leading in pitch space

uniform P

voice leading in pitch-class space

uniform OP

pitch-space chord progression

individual PC

chord progression

individual OPC

path in pitch-class space

uniform O
(one-note progressions only)

45
Figure 2.5.6
Musictheoretical terms
for progressions,
along with the
symmetries that
generate them.

comparing voice leadings

We’ll now start to think about how voice leadings relate to one another. The
interesting wrinkle is that we’ll consider not just uniform relationships, in which the
same operation applies to both objects in a voice leading, but also their individual
counterparts.

2.6.1 Individual and Uniform Transposition
The voice leadings (C, E, G)®(C, F, A) and (G, B, D)®(G, C, E) are very similar,
exhibiting the same musical pattern at different transpositional levels: each holds the
root of a major triad ﬁxed, moves the third up by semitone, and the ﬁfth up by two
semitones (Figure 2.6.1). Since we transpose both chords in the same way, the two
voice leadings are uniformly transpositionally related, or uniformly T-related. The voice
leadings (C, E, G)®(C, F, A) and (G, B, D)®(Fs, B, Ds) are also similar, albeit slightly
less so; each maps the root of the ﬁrst chord to the ﬁfth of the second, the third of
the ﬁrst chord to the root of the second, and the ﬁfth of the ﬁrst chord to the third of
the second. Figure 2.6.1b
shows that one voice leading can be transformed
into the other by applying a different transposition to each chord: (C,
E, G) is seven semitones
away from (G, B, D), but
(C, F, A) is six semitones
away from (Fs, B, Ds).
These voice leadings can thus be said to be individually transpositionally related, or
individually T-related.

2.6.2 Individual and Uniform Inversion
The distinction between individual and uniform relatedness extends naturally to inversion. Figure 2.6.2a shows that (C, E, G)®(C, F, A) can be inverted to produce (G, Ef,
C)®(G, D, Bf). These are uniformly inversionally related (or uniformly I-related) voice

Figure 2.6.1
Uniformly and
individually
T-related voice
leadings.

46

theory
Figure 2.6.2 Uniformly and individually I-related voice
leadings. Here, pitch-space inversion around Eı 4 (E quartertone ﬂat, halfway between Ef4 and E) sends C4 to G4, E4 to
Ef4, F4 to D4, G4 to C4 and A4 to Bf3.

leadings. By contrast, (C, E, G)®(C, F, A) and (G, Ef, C)®(Gs, Ds, B) are individually
inversionally related, or individually I-related, since it takes two different inversions to
transform the ﬁrst into the second. (Figure 2.6.2b inverts the ﬁrst chord around Eı4,
or E quarter-tone ﬂat, while inverting the second around E4.) Note that as I am using
the term, “individual I-relatedness” requires that each chord in the ﬁrst voice leading
be related by some inversion to the corresponding chord in the second voice leading;
it is not permissible to invert only one of the two chords.
The signiﬁcance of uniform transposition is clear, as it moves the same musical
pattern to a different transpositional level. Uniform I-relatedness is somewhat more
abstract: (C, E, G)®(C, F, A) sounds rather different from (C, Ef, G)®(Bf, D, G),
which is uniformly I-related to it. Note however that the two voice leadings are mirror images of each other: the ﬁrst moves one voice by zero semitones, one voice up by
one semitone, and one voice up by two semitones; the second moves one voice by zero
semitones, one voice down by one semitone, and one voice down by two semitones.
The distances are the same but the directions have been reversed. Some theorists have
asserted that individually I-related voice leadings are perceptually or metaphysically
similar.23 From our perspective, what is more important is that the answers to theoretical questions often come in I-related pairs. For example, suppose we want to catalogue
voice leadings between major and minor triads in which no voice moves by more than
a semitone; since the inversion of any such “semitonal” voice leading is also semitonal,
each of these voice leadings has an inversionally related partner (Figure 2.6.3). This
makes it much easier to conceptualize and remember them.
The musical signiﬁcance of individual T and I relationships is perhaps even less
0, 1, 2
clear, since the voice leading (C, E, G) ¾¾¾
® (C, F, A) sounds like a standard I–IV
-1, 0, 1
chord progression, while (C, E, G) ¾¾¾
®(B, E, Gs), individually T-related to it,
evokes Schubertian chromaticism. Nevertheless, there is a sense in which the two are
similar: each relates structurally analogous notes (moving the root of the ﬁrst chord

23 These include Hauptmann, Riemann, and contemporary “neo-Riemannians.” For more discussion,
see Tymoczko 2008b and forthcoming.

Harmony and Voice Leading
Figure 2.6.3 The semitonal voice leadings between major and minor triads. Since
inversion preserves the distance moved by each voice, these voice leadings can be
grouped into uniformly I-related pairs.

to the ﬁfth of the second, the third of the ﬁrst chord to the root of the second, and the
ﬁfth of the ﬁrst to the third of the second); and the voices in the second voice leading
end up exactly one semitone lower than in the ﬁrst (moving by −1, 0, and 1 semitones
rather than 0, 1, and 2). Very similar points can be made about individually I-related
voice leadings.24 We will see that it is often advantageous to focus on these sorts of
relationships, as they allow us to make interesting analytical observations that would
otherwise be very hard to express.
For example, Figure 2.6.4 compares the opening progressions in Wagner’s Tristan,
Brahms’ Op. 76 No. 4, and Debussy’s Prelude to “The Afternoon of a Faun.”25 I think
it is likely that both Brahms and Debussy, despite their ambiguous feelings about
Wagner, had Tristan somewhere in the backs of their minds: the opening gesture, by
which a half-diminished seventh chord slides chromatically to a dominant seventh,
is unmistakably Tristanesque. (Note that Brahms’ opening chord even uses the same
pitch classes as Wagner’s.) But rather than blatantly copying Tristan, both Brahms
and Debussy do something similar to yet different from the earlier piece. The concept
of individual T-relatedness provides a precise way to describe this sense of “similarity-with-difference”: what Brahms and Debussy did, essentially, was transpose the second chord in Tristan up by semitone. (In Debussy’s case, he also transposes the entire
voice leading by tritone, rearranging the voices somewhat.) In all three cases, the
result is a two-semitone voice leading between half-diminished and dominant seventh chords, an unfamiliar chromatic motion linking familiar chords. Furthermore,

24 Individual transposition adds a constant to the numbers representing the paths in a voice leading;
individual inversion subtracts these numbers from a constant (see Tymoczko 2008b).
25 I have removed Wagner’s “voice crossings,” as will be discussed in Chapter 8.

47

48

theory

all three voice leadings move root to root, third to third, ﬁfth to ﬁfth, and seventh to
seventh. Yet at the same time, the connection to Tristan has been disguised: what has
been borrowed is not the progression itself, but
Figure 2.6.4 The opening
rather something more abstract—a general
progressions in Wagner’s Tristan (a),
voice-leading schema rather than a particular
Brahms’ Intermezzo Op. 76 No. 4
(b), and Debussy’s Prelude to “The
way of resolving the half-diminished chord.
Afternoon of a Faun.”
(Thus we see how theoretically savvy composers can steal without getting caught!) Whether
this is a matter of defusing, one-upping, or
“correcting” Wagner is an interesting critical
question.
In classical music, individually T-related
voice leadings often appear in sequential contexts. Figure 2.6.5a presents a nice example
from the opening of Mozart’s C minor Fantasy,
K. 475. The music invokes a relatively standard chromatic sequence in which iv6–V7
chord progressions move downward by major second: beginning with A7, we have
f 6–G7 followed by what we expect to be ef6–F7. But Mozart transposes the last chord
up by semitone so that the ﬁnal pair is individually T-related to the pair preceding it,
with the sequence ending on Fs7 rather than the expected F7. This maneuver, which
transforms a minor-key iv6–V7 progression into a major-key iii6–V7 progression, is
reasonably common in tonal music. Figure 2.6.5b cites an analogous progression
from the recapitulation of the ﬁrst movement of Beethoven’s Ef major Piano Sonata,
Op. 31 No. 3.26 Here the sequence moves downward by diatonic thirds, with each
chord preceded by its applied dominant. If the passage were strictly sequential, it
would cycle through all seven diatonic triads before returning to the tonic Ef; however, Beethoven arranges an earlier return by inserting a descending diatonic second
into the sequence of thirds. Once again, the structural similarity of the voice leadings

Figure 2.6.5 Individually T-related voice leadings in sequential passages from
Mozart (a) and Beethoven (b).

26 A very similar sequence appears at m. 45 of the ﬁrst movement of Beethoven’s F major piano sonata,
Op. 54.

Harmony and Voice Leading

masks the deviation from strict sequential procedure: we hear successive voice leadings as being similar, even though they are not related by exact transposition. Again,
the concept of “individual T-relatedness” provides a precise tool for describing this
sort of similarity.

2.7

voice-leading size

Polyphonic music uses independent melodies to articulate efﬁcient voice leadings
between meaningful harmonies (Figure 2.7.1). To be sure, it also involves following many other rules that are particular to speciﬁc styles and time periods: in some
genres, for example, parallel perfect ﬁfths are forbidden, while in others they are
allowed. (Similarly, in some genres the bass is more likely to move by leap, while in
others the bass is essentially similar to the other voices.) Later chapters will deal with
these style-speciﬁc nuances. For now, I want to focus on the basic conditions under
which polyphony itself is possible.
Clearly, to write this sort of music, composers need to be able to compare the
overall efﬁciency, or “size,” of different voice leadings. But how is this done? In
some situations, comparisons seem unproblematic: for instance, a voice leading
that moves just one note by just one semitone seems obviously smaller than a voice
leading that moves three notes by six semitones each. But other cases are considerably more difﬁcult. Is (C, E, G)®(Df, F, Af) larger or smaller than (C, E, G)®(C,
E, A)? The ﬁrst voice leading moves its voices by a greater total distance (three semitones vs. two semitones), while in the second, the largest distance moved is greater
(two semitones vs. one semitone). Which is more important? Is the smaller voice
leading the one that minimizes the total amount of motion or the largest distance
moved by any voice?
Although pedagogues have long enjoined their students to use small voice leadings, they have never bothered to provide speciﬁc answers to these sorts of questions.
(Students, it seems, are supposed to intuit which of the available voice leadings is the
smallest.) More recently, theorists have proposed a variety of very precise methods
of measuring voice-leading size. Unfortunately, musical practice does not allow us
to adjudicate between these different proposals, leaving us with many plausible but
incompatible solutions to the same problem. Rather than adopting one of these, my
strategy here is to try to remain as neutral as possible about the issue. (Precision is a
virtue only when it is not arbitrarily imposed!) Happily, it turns out that “reasonable”
measures of voice-leading size agree about a number of important cases.

Figure 2.7.1 The opening phrase of the Bach chorale
“O Herzensangst.” This music can be represented as the
sequence of voice leadings (Ef, G, Ef, Bf)®(Ef, Bf,
-7,-2,0,5
®(Af, Af, Ef, C)®(Af, F, D, Bf). I have
Ef, G) ¾¾¾¾
ignored the starred (“nonharmonic”) note at the end of
the ﬁrst measure.

49

50

theory

I consider a measure of voice-leading
size to be “reasonable” if it satisﬁes two basic
requirements: ﬁrst, it should depend only
on how far the individual voices move, with
larger motion leading to larger voice leadings; and second, it should judge voice leadings with voice crossings to be larger (or at
the very least, no smaller) than their natural
uncrossed alternatives. This is illustrated by
Figure 2.7.2. The ﬁrst requirement is basic to the very notion of voice-leading size;
the second mandates a kind of musical “division of labor,” according to which it is
preferable to have more voices moving by small amounts, rather than fewer voices
moving by larger amounts. (The connection between avoiding voice crossings and
the division of musical labor is not obvious, although it can be proved mathematically.27) Thus Figure 2.7.3a, in which two voices move by three and four semitones,
should be at least as small as Figure 2.7.3b, in which one voice moves by seven
semitones. Both principles are consistent with Western musical practice, and to my
knowledge no composer, theorist, or pedagogue has ever proposed a method of
measuring voice leading that violates either principle.28
Appendix A summarizes the technical
Figure 2.7.3 Generally speaking, Western
issues involved in measuring voice leadcomposers prefer smaller amounts of
ing. For our purposes, the important point
motion in more voices (a) to larger
is that the two constraints are powerful
amounts of motion in fewer voices (b).
enough to imply a number of theoretical
The pattern in (a) is common in the inner
voices in classical music; (c) provides an
results: for instance, they imply that the
example from the Bach chorale “Nun lob’
more evenly a chord divides the octave,
mein’ Seel’ den Herren.”
the smaller the voice leadings to its various transpositions; they also imply that E
and Af major triads can be linked to the
C major triad by smaller voice leadings
than any other major triads. Indeed, the
constraints are so powerful that, in many
contexts, it is unnecessary to specify a particular method of measuring voice leading,
because all reasonable metrics will agree. For most of this book, we will therefore be
able to speak of “large” and “small” voice leadings without getting into the details of
how to measure voice leading. Readers should feel comfortable trusting their musical intuitions, interpreting the term “efﬁcient voice leading” as a synonym for “voice
leadings in which all voices move by short distances.”
Figure 2.7.2 The principle of avoiding
crossings tells us that (a) should be no
larger than (b) and (c) should be no
larger than (d).

27 See Tymoczko 2006.
28 It bears repeating that this notion of voice-leading size is meant to model composers’ behavior
rather than listeners’ experience. See Callender and Rogers 2006 for some work on listeners’ judgments of
voice-leading distance.

Harmony and Voice Leading

2.8

near identity

So far we have grouped chords into categories based on transpositional and inversional equivalence. But this insistence on exact equivalence is actually quite restrictive: in many contexts, it is useful to describe two chords as being similar even though
they are not exactly the same.29 This is particularly important when investigating
matters of intonation and tuning: for instance, music theorists might speak about
the “acoustically pure perfect ﬁfth {C, G},” the “equal-tempered ﬁfth {C, G},” the
“quarter-comma meantone perfect ﬁfth {C, G}” and so on. The language suggests
that these different tunings are variations on the same object, which may come in
a variety of closely related forms. Yet from our perspective the different tunings of
{C, G} belong to different chord types, since no transposition or inversion relates
them. Thus there is a mismatch between ordinary musical thinking and the extremely
precise terminology we have been developing.
The problem is not limited to matters of tuning and intonation. The dominant
seventh chord {C, E, G, Bf} is in the grand scheme of things rather similar to the
minor seventh {C, Ef, G, Bf}, which differs only in that it has an Ef rather than En.
Although they do not belong to the same set class, the two chords are clearly more
similar to each other than either is to the dissonant cluster {Fs, G, Af, A}. Consequently, {C, E, G, Bf}Þ{C, Ef, G, Bf} feels like a progression between two more-orless similar chords, while {C, E, G, Bf}Þ{Fs, G, Af, A} is quite jarring, connecting
very different harmonies. Our discussion, rather than trying to model to this fact, has
instead treated harmonic identity as an all-or-nothing affair.
It therefore seems that exact identity stands at one end of a continuum of musical
relatedness. The equal-tempered chord {C, E, G, Bf} is exactly identical to itself, and
is very closely related to the just-intonation chord {C, E, G, Bf}. Both of these chords
are somewhat related to the minor-seventh chord {C, Ef, G, Bf}, and are not very
similar at all to the chromatic cluster {Fs, G, Af, A}. Notice that these “degrees of
relatedness” seem to mirror facts about voice leading: there is a very small voice leading from the equal-tempered {C, E, G, Bf} to its just-intonation counterpart, and
a reasonably small voice leading from {C, E, G, Bf} to {C, Ef, G, Bf}, but it takes a
relatively large voice leading to get from {C, E, G, Bf} to {Fs, G, Af, A}. This suggests
that we may be able to use voice leading to model at least some of our intuitions of
musical similarity.30
Metaphors of distance are useful here. We can think of the acoustically pure perfect ﬁfth {0, 7.01} as being close to the equal-tempered ﬁfth {0, 7}, as if the two chords
were nearby in some abstract “space of all chords.” Conversely, the chord {3, 4} is

29 The notion of similarity is central to the work of Ian Quinn (1996, 2001, 2006).
30 In principle, voice leading provides just one of many possible notions of musical distance. We might
sometimes want to conceive of musical distance harmonically (based on common tones or shared interval
content), or in a way that privileges membership in the same diatonic scale—so that the F major triad is
closer to C major than E major is. (See, for example, Quinn 2001, 2006, and 2007, and Tymoczko, forthcoming.) However, we will see that conceptions based on voice leading are extremely versatile and can be
useful in a wide range of contexts.

51

52

theory

much farther from {0, 7} than {0, 7.01} is, since it takes a larger voice leading to
connect {3, 4} to {0, 7}. Chapter 3 will show that this talk of distance is not just a
metaphor: it is possible to describe geometrical spaces containing all chords with a
particular number of notes, and in which the distance between any two chords corresponds to the size of the minimal voice leading between them. Musical “similarity” can therefore be represented by distance in these spaces. In anticipation of this
discussion, I will say that chords are “near” or “close to” each other when they can be
linked by efﬁcient voice leading.
We can extend these ideas to chord types as well. Two chord types can be said
to be similar if there is a relatively small voice leading between their transpositions.
Thus the diminished triad is closer to the minor triad than to the chromatic cluster,
since there is a very small voice leading taking C diminished to C minor, but no similarly small voice leading connecting any diminished triad to any chromatic cluster.31
Another way to make the point is to say that any particular diminished triad is nearly
transpositionally related to any minor triad: for example, C diminished is nearly transpositionally related to F minor, since {C, Ef, Gf} is near {C, Ef, G} which is in turn
transpositionally related to {F, Af, C}. In the same spirit, we could say that {C, Df, G}
is nearly inversionally related to {Ef, G, A}, meaning that {C, Df, G} is near {C, D, Fs},
which is inversionally related to {Ef, G, A}. What results is a more ﬂexible conception
of harmonic similarity: rather than considering two chords to be similar only when
they are exactly related by transposition or inversion, we can consider them similar
when they are nearly (or approximately) related by these same transformations. This
is useful insofar as actual composers are often more concerned with approximate
than with exact musical relationships.

2.9

harmony and counterpoint revisited

In Chapter 1, we observed that Western music has a kind of two-dimensional coherence: vertical or harmonic principles dictate that chords should be audibly similar,
while horizontal or contrapuntal principles dictate that chords should be connected
by efﬁcient voice leading. Figure 2.9.1 shows these constraints operating in a wide
range of different Western styles, including classical music, contemporary jazz, latenineteenth-century chromaticism, and even modern atonality. To be sure, composers
often deviate from these norms for expressive reasons—just as, when driving, one
sometimes takes a scenic detour rather than following the most direct route. And to
be sure, different styles always involve additional constraints over and above these
very basic norms. But the norms themselves are relatively robust, shared by a wide
range of styles spanning several centuries.

31 The single-semitone voice leading (C, Ef, Gf)®(C, Ef, G) links diminished to minor, but it takes at
least four semitones to link a diminished triad to a chromatic cluster.

Harmony and Voice Leading
Figure 2.9.1 Harmonic consistency and efﬁcient voice leading in a range of styles. (a) A
common upper-voice pattern for the classical I–IV–I–V–I chord progression. (b) A common
jazz-piano “left-hand voicing” for the descending-ﬁfths progression D7–G7–C7–F7. The voicings
add ninths and thirteenths and omit roots, ﬁfths, and elevenths, as is common in jazz. (c) Two
celebrated examples of Wagnerian chromaticism; the ﬁrst is a simpliﬁcation of the opening of
Tristan and the second is the opening of The Ring’s “Tarnhelm” motif. (d) Chromatic clusters
of the sort often found in late twentieth-century music, particularly in the music of Ligeti and
Lutosławski.

So under what circumstances is it possible to ﬁnd an efﬁcient voice leading
between nearly transpositionally or inversionally related chords? In other words, how
is it possible to write music that is both harmonically and melodically coherent?
Chapter 1 noted that this is possible when a chord divides the octave very evenly
or very unevenly. Here I want to replace the contrast “even/uneven” with the more
powerful concept of near symmetry. It turns out that one can combine harmonic
consistency and efﬁcient voice leading only by using nearly symmetrical chords,
which are typically near chords that are completely symmetrical under transposition,
inversion, or reordering. Nearly even chords (such as the major triad) are near the
symmetrical chords that divide the octave perfectly evenly (such as the augmented
triad). Clustered chords (such as {B, C, Cs}) are near the symmetrical chords that
contain many copies of one speciﬁc pitch class (such as the “triple unison” {C, C,
C}). But there are other symmetrical chords as well: transpositionally symmetrical
chords such as {C, Cs, Fs, G}, which do not divide the octave particularly evenly,
and inversionally symmetrical chords such as {C, D, E}, which are neither particularly even nor particularly uneven. Thus an approach based on symmetry leads to a
much deeper understanding of the fundamental connection between harmony and
counterpoint—opening our eyes to new compositional possibilities and revealing
regularities latent in the music of the past.
We will begin by considering efﬁcient voice leading between chords exactly related
by transposition or inversion; then, at the end of the section, we will broaden the
discussion to include near transposition or near inversion.

2.9.1 Transposition
A chord is transpositionally symmetrical if it is unchanged by some transposition.
Thus, when we transpose an augmented triad by a major third, we produce the same
pitch classes we started with. Figure 2.9.2 shows that there are two kinds of transpositionally symmetrical chords, those that divide the pitch-class circle evenly and those

53

54

theory
Figure 2.9.2 Transpositionally symmetrical chords either divide the octave evenly (a), or can
be decomposed into equal-size subsets that themselves do so (b). Here, the transpositionally
symmetrical chord {C, F, Fs, B} can be decomposed into tritones {C, Fs} and {B, F}.

that can be decomposed into equal-size subsets that do so.32 For example, {B, C, F, Fs}
does not divide the circle into four even parts, but it can be decomposed into a pair
of tritones that each divide the circle in half.
If a chord is near one of these symmetrical chords, then it can be linked by efﬁcient voice leading to some of its transpositions. Consider {C, E, G}, which is near
{C, E, Gs} since the voice leading (C, E, G)®(C, E, Gs) is small. It follows that the E
major chord must also be near the C augmented triad. This is because we can transpose the small voice leading (C, E, G)®(C, E, Gs) uniformly by ascending major
third, obtaining (E, Gs, B)®(E, Gs, C). This is an efﬁcient voice leading from E major
to C augmented. Figure 2.9.3 shows that we can retrograde this second voice leading
and attach it to the earlier one, producing (C, E, G)®(C, E, Gs)®(B, E, Gs). Here
we have the conjunction of two small voice leadings. Removing the middle chord will
give a small voice leading from C major to E major: (C, E, G)®(B, E, Gs). In other
words, if C major is close to an augmented triad, then its major third transposition
must also be close to that same augmented triad, and since C and E major are both
close to the same chord, they must also be close to each other.
Of course, there is nothing particularly special about major or augmented chords.
Take any chord A close to a symmetrical chord S that is unchanged by transposition Tx. Then Tx(A) will also be close to Tx(S), which is the same as S; and since A
and Tx(A) are both near S, they are also near each other. Speaking somewhat metaphorically, the symmetrical chord passes on its symmetry to nearby chords in the
form of efﬁcient voice leading. These nearby chords are not themselves symmetrical,
but they are nearly so, which is to say that they can be linked to their x-semitone
transpositions by efﬁcient voice leading. It follows that transpositional symmetry is

32 See Starr and Morris (1977).

Harmony and Voice Leading
Figure 2.9.3 Any chord that is near an augmented triad can be connected to its major-third
transposition by efﬁcient voice leading.

a limiting case of efﬁcient voice leading: as chord A moves closer and closer toward a
transpositionally symmetrical chord, the size of the minimal voice leading between
A and Tx(A) decreases, reaching zero when the chord is exactly symmetrical.
Let’s consider a second example. The chord {B, C, E, Fs} appears commonly in
jazz, but does not divide the octave particularly evenly. However, it is near the transpositionally symmetric {B, C, F, Fs}, which contains two separate tritones. Beginning
with the small voice leading (B, C, E, Fs)®(B, C, F, Fs), we transpose by tritone to
produce (F, Gf, Bf, C)®(F, Gf, B, C) (Figure 2.9.4). Retrograding this and gluing it
to the original voice leading, we obtain (B, C, E, Fs)®(B, C, F, Fs)®(Bf, C, F, Gf).
Removing the middle chord gives (B, C, E, Fs)®(Bf, C, F, Gf), which efﬁciently links
tritone-related chords. Chapter 10 will show that this sort of voice leading plays a role
in jazz “tritone substitutions.” For now, however, the focus should be on the general
form of the argument: since chord
Figure 2.9.4 Since both {C, E, Fs, B} and its tritone
A is close to the tritone-symmetritransposition are close to {B, C, F, Fs} (a−b), they
cal chord S, then so is the tritone are close to each other. In (c), we retrograde the
transposition of A; and since A and voice leading in (b) and attach it to (a). Removing
its tritone transposition are close to the middle chord gives us the voice leading in (d).
the same chord, they must also be
close to each other.
There is one complication that
should be mentioned here. Suppose a three-note chord, such as
{C, F, Fs}, is near a transpositionally

55

56

theory
Figure 2.9.5 A larger chord can take advantage of the symmetries of a smaller chord, but it
requires additional voices.

symmetrical two-note chord, such as {C, Fs} (Figure 2.9.5). Proceeding as we did earlier, we begin with the three-voice voice leading (C, F, Fs)®(C, Fs, Fs); retrograding
and transposing by tritone we obtain (Fs, C, C)®(Fs, B, C). Note that we cannot
simply glue these two voice leadings together, since (C, Fs, Fs) is not the same as (Fs,
C, C). However, if we double a voice in each voice leading, we can attach them. What
results is a four-voice voice leading between {C, F, Fs} and its tritone transposition, (C,
C, F, Fs)®(C, C, Fs, Fs)®(B, C, Fs, Fs) or (C, C, F, Fs)®(B, Cs, Fs, Fs) upon removing the middle chord. The fourth voice is the price the three-note chord has to pay
for exploiting the symmetry of a two-note chord. In general, extra voices will always
be necessary whenever a larger chord exploits the symmetries of a smaller chord. In
Chapter 7 we will see that there are common tonal routines, such as the voice leading
(C, C, E, G)®(A, C, F, F), which exploit this very procedure (§7.2). It follows that the
familiar major triad is special not just because it divides the octave into three nearly
even parts, but also because it is reasonably close to the tritone.

2.9.2 Inversion
A chord will be unchanged by inversion if its notes are arranged symmetrically
around an “axis of symmetry” crossing the pitch-class circle at two antipodal points,
with tones placed freely on either of these points. For example, Figure 2.9.6 shows
that the axis of the inversionally symmetrical {C, D, E} contains the notes D and Af;
since C and E are arranged symmetrically around this axis, inversion around D leaves
the chord unchanged.
The nonsymmetrical chord {C, Ds, E} is near {C, D, E}, since the voice leading
(C, Ds, E)®(C, D, E) is small. Inverting this entire voice leading around the ﬁxed

Harmony and Voice Leading
Figure 2.9.6 To form an inversionally symmetrical
chord, choose two antipodal points to act as an
axis of symmetry—here, {D, Af}. One can place
notes on either axis point (or both), as they will
be unaffected by the inversion. For any points
not lying on the axis, such as a, one must also
add its inversional partner, symmetrically placed
on the other side of the axis. Here, a is 60°
counterclockwise from the upper axis point, while
a' is 60° clockwise from that point. The antipodal
points can also lie between equal-tempered pitch
classes.
Figure 2.9.7 Any chord that is near an inversionally symmetrical chord can be connected
to its inversion by efﬁcient voice leading.

point D produces (C, Df, E)®(C, D, E). Reversing this voice leading and gluing it
to the earlier one produces (C, Ds, E)®(C, D, E)®(C, Df, E). Removing the middle
chord gives us a small voice leading between inversionally related chords: (C, Ds,
E)®(C, Df, E) (Figure 2.9.7). As in the transpositional case, the inversionally symmetrical chord passes its symmetry on to nearby chords: if chord A is near a chord S
that is invariant under some inversion I xy , then I xy (A) will also be near S, and hence A
and I xy (A) can be linked by efﬁcient voice leading.
Figure 2.9.8 provides a real-world example. We begin with the efﬁcient voice
leading (F, Af, Cf, Ef)®(F, Af, Cf, D), which uses a single-semitone motion to
transform the F half-diminished chord into a fully diminished seventh. The next
voice leading inverts the ﬁrst uniformly around A4/Bf4, producing an efﬁcient voice

57

58

theory
Figure 2.9.8 The F half-diminished chord is close to a diminished seventh chord (a).
Inverting this voice leading uniformly around A4/Bf4, we get an efﬁcient voice leading from
E7 to the same diminished chord. In (c), we retrograde the voice leading in (b) and attach it
to (a). Removing the middle chord (d ) gives us an efﬁcient voice leading from the
F half-diminished chord to E7, a voice leading that plays a central role in Wagner’s Tristan.

leading from the E dominant seventh to the same diminished seventh chord. In
Figure 2.9.8c we reverse this and glue it to the ﬁrst voice leading. Removing the
symmetrical chord gives us an efﬁcient voice leading from F half-diminished to E7,
strongly reminiscent of the opening of Tristan. We conclude that this celebrated
nineteenth-century progression exploits the near I-symmetry of the half-diminished
and dominant seventh chords.

2.9.3 Permutation
The third symmetry is a little bit different from the others. Suppose we model chords
as multisets that may contain multiple copies of a single note. From this point of view,
the chord {C, C, C} is different from {C, C}, since they have a different number of copies of the note C. Let’s also imagine that (contrary to fact) we could somehow keep
track of these different copies, which we can represent with subscripts like {Ca, Cb, Cc}.
Now consider (Ca, Cb, Cc)®(Cc, Ca, Cb), a voice leading that permutes the notes in the
chord {C, C, C}. Since none of the voices in this voice leading actually moves, we can
say that {C, C, C} is permutationally symmetrical. “Permutation symmetry” is just a
fancy synonym for “has multiple copies of one or more of its notes.”
Permutationally symmetrical chords are themselves rather boring, but the nearby
chords are quite interesting. The chromatic cluster {B, C, Df} is near {C, C, C} since
(B, C, Df)®(C, C, C) is small. Retrograding and reordering voices, we obtain (C, C,
C)®(C, Df, B). Gluing the two voice leadings together gives us (B, C, Df)®(C, C,
C)®(C, Df, B); upon removing the middle chord, we obtain (B, C, Df)®(C, Df,
B), a small voice leading from {B, C, Df} to itself. (Figure 2.9.9 attempts, somewhat
lamely, to illustrate.) Once again, the symmetrical chord passes its symmetry on to
nearby chords: given a small voice leading A®S, from chord A to the permutationally symmetrical chord S, we can permute both chords uniformly to obtain the small
voice leading P(A)®P(S), or P(A)®S, since S is permutationally symmetrical. Retrograding and gluing together gives us A®S®P(A); upon removing the middle chord,
we have A®P(A), an efﬁcient voice leading between A and itself. The general procedure here is precisely the same as in the cases of transposition and inversion; the only
difference is the nature of the symmetry.

Harmony and Voice Leading
Figure 2.9.9 Any chord that is near a chord with pitch-class duplications can be connected
to its untransposed form by efﬁcient voice leading.

It may seem surprising to place permutation alongside transposition and inversion, since we are accustomed to thinking of chords as inherently unordered objects.
But the discussion in §2.4 should ameliorate any feelings of unease: we form chords
by abstracting away from the order of the notes in a musical object, just as we form
set classes by abstracting away from the distinction between transpositionally and
inversionally related objects. And just as transpositionally symmetrical chords are
special (because there are fewer transpositions to abstract away from) so too are permutationally symmetrical chords (because there are fewer orderings to abstract away
from). Voice leading reveals this “specialness” by providing a musical mechanism for
rearranging the notes in an unordered chord. As a result, it should not be too surprising that there is a close analogy between permutational symmetry and the more
familiar symmetries considered previously. Transpositional near-symmetry guarantees efﬁcient voice leading between transpositionally related chords; inversional nearsymmetry guarantees efﬁcient voice leading between inversionally related chords; and
permutational near-symmetry guarantees efﬁcient voice leading between a chord and
itself. Here we see the advantages of a more ﬂexible approach to chord classiﬁcation,
in which we embrace a wide variety of musical transformations. From our point of
view, permutation is just another kind of symmetry, with its own distinctive collection of musical consequences.
The arguments in this section show that if a chord is near a symmetrical chord
then it will inherit this symmetry in the form of efﬁcient voice leadings. One might
also wonder whether the converse is true: is it the case that if there is an efﬁcient
voice leading from a chord A to one of its transpositions or inversions, then chord
A is nearly symmetrical under transposition, inversion, or permutation? That is, is it

59

60

theory

the case that our three symmetries are the only symmetries there are—the only symmetries we need to understand if we want to know how to combine efﬁcient voice
leading with harmonic consistency? Basically, the answer is “yes,” at least insofar as
we understand the term “harmonically consistent” to mean “using chords that are
approximately related by transposition or inversion.”33 It follows that every instance
of efﬁcient voice leading between structurally similar chords—in any scale or tuning
system—can be understood in terms of the three basic symmetries we have just discussed. This is precisely what will allow us, in Part II, to interpret a large number of
Western musical practices as variations on the same basic techniques.
It is very important to realize that the symmetrical chords relevant to voice leading will not necessarily lie on the ordinary piano keyboard. The familiar pentatonic
scale, {C, D, F, G, Bf} or {0, 2, 5, 7, 10}, is quite close to the chord that divides the
octave into ﬁve equal pieces: {0, 2.4, 4.8, 7.2, 9.6}. Consequently, the pentatonic scale
can be efﬁciently linked to its transpositions, as in (C, D, F, G, Bf)®(C, D, F, G, A).
While both of these chords belong to the equal-tempered universe, and can be played
on an ordinary piano, the perfectly even ﬁve-note chord does not. Yet this missing
chord nevertheless exerts its inﬂuence on twelve-tone equal-tempered music; indeed,
twelve-tone equal-tempered ﬁve-note chords can be linked to their transpositions by
efﬁcient voice leading only if they are close to this phantasmic and elusive chord. This
is just one of many cases where a deep understanding of the discrete musical universe
requires us to think in continuous terms. Even though we are ultimately concerned
with equal-tempered music, we ﬁnd that we can understand this music best when we
consider the continuous space in which equal temperaments are embedded.34

33 It is relatively easy to demonstrate the connection between efﬁcient voice leading and near symmetry; the harder point is to explain the circumstances under which nearly symmetrical chords are near
chords that are perfectly symmetrical. (This becomes clear only when we examine the geometrical spaces
described in Chapter 3.) With respect to the ﬁrst issue, here is a simple argument connecting efﬁcient voice
leading and near symmetry. Suppose there is some function F over the pitch classes, which could be a
transposition or an inversion or something else altogether. Now let us suppose that there is some efﬁcient
voice leading between chords A and F(A). We can therefore represent A®F(A) as the product of two separate voice leadings (ai, aj, ak, . . .)®(ax, ay, az, . . .)®(F(ax), F(ay), F(az), . . .). The ﬁrst of these rearranges the
notes of A while the second simply applies F to each note. (The ﬁrst voice leading need not be a permutation, and it may involve doublings.) Now consider (ax, ay, az, . . .)®(ai, aj, ak, . . .) and (ax, ay, az, . . .)®(F(ax),
F(ay), F(az), . . .). These voice leadings must be approximately equal. (This follows from the fact that the
original voice leading is efﬁcient, and hence moves none of its voices very far.) The ﬁrst rearranges the
notes of A, the second applies F to each note; hence there is some rearrangement that is approximately
equal to applying F. This is just what it means to be nearly symmetrical under F.
34 John Clough (in unpublished work) and Rick Cohn (1996, 1997) articulated a special case of the
central claim of this section, observing that major and minor triads are a semitone away from augmented
chords, and that this allows them to be connected by efﬁcient chromatic voice leading. (Cohn further
generalizes to chromatic scales whose size is divisible by three, and speculates that analogous claims can
be made about tetrachords and hexachords in the standard chromatic scale.) This section generalizes this
important observation by articulating a somewhat broader principle: if a chord A is near a chord that is
F-symmetrical, then A and F(A) can be connected by efﬁcient voice leading. I also observe that the converse of this statement is true: if A and F(A) can be connected by efﬁcient voice leading, then A is nearly
symmetrical under F (see the preceding note). Furthermore, my notion of “nearness” is somewhat more
general, since I consider chords like {C, E, G} to be “near” {C, Fs}. I also show that the symmetrical chord
need not appear in the relevant scale—for instance, the diatonic collection is near the equiheptatonic collection, which does not appear in the twelve-tone chromatic scale.

Harmony and Voice Leading

Finally, note that nothing really changes when we adopt the more ﬂexible notion
of harmonic relatedness discussed in §2.8. For suppose we would like to ﬁnd an
efﬁcient voice leading between two chords A and B that are nearly—rather than
precisely—transpositionally or inversionally related. Since A is nearly transpositionally or inversionally related to B, there is a small voice leading F(A)®B, where F is
some transposition or inversion. And if the voice leading A®B is small, then the voice
leading A®F(A) must also be small, as both A and F(A) will be close to B. In the
cases of musical interest, F will be some nonzero transposition or inversion, which
means that A is itself nearly symmetrical.35 (The same argument shows that B must
also be nearly symmetrical.) Thus, expanding our notion of “harmonic consistency”
does not expand the realm of musical possibilities: a chord A can be linked by efﬁcient voice leading to one of its near-transpositions or near-inversions only if A is
itself nearly symmetrical under transposition, inversion, or permutation.

2.10

acoustic consonance and near
evenness

We now return to acoustic consonance, the second of our ﬁve basic components of
tonality. Recall that Western listeners tend to agree that certain chords sound stable
and restful, or consonant, while others sound unstable and harsh, or dissonant. Many,
though not all, Western styles exploit this difference: consonant sonorities tend to
appear as musical destinations or at points of rest, while dissonant sonorities tend to
be more active and unstable. To be sure, the distinction between consonance and dissonance is extremely complex, and it maps only indirectly onto the concept of musical stability. (There are situations when an acoustically consonant sonority behaves as
if it were musically unstable.) But to a ﬁrst approximation, it is reasonable to say that
in many musical styles, dissonant sonorities tend to resolve to consonant sonorities.
Acoustic consonance is somewhat imperfectly understood, and there are a number of theories about what produces it.36 Nevertheless, there is broad agreement on
some basic principles. The eighteenth-century mathematician Jean-Baptiste Fourier
showed that any periodic mathematical function can be represented as the sum of
sine and cosine waves whose frequencies are integer multiples of a single frequency
f (Figure 2.10.1). In the case of a musical sound, these sine waves are called partials.

35 There are some subtleties here that I am glossing over. More precisely, the cases of musical interest
are those where F is either an inversion or nontrivial transposition, or where F is the identity operation
and the voice leading F(A)®B involves some nontrivial permutation. When these conditions are not met,
then our argument simply records the boring fact that any chord can be transformed into some other
chords by moving its notes by small distances: for example, that a major triad can be transformed into a
minor triad by lowering its third. The musically interesting cases are those in which small voice leadings
lead to an interesting reshufﬂing of the resulting notes. For instance, if we think of a minor triad as a major
triad with lowered third, then the voice leading (C, E, G)®(B, E, G) is interesting because it does not simply
lower the third; instead, it is an efﬁcient voice leading in which the root of the major triad becomes the ﬁfth
of the minor triad. Here, we are exploiting the near symmetries of the underlying chords.
36 Helmholtz (1863/1954), Terhardt 1974, Burns 1999, Sethares 1999, Cariani 2001, Tramo et al. 2005.

61

62

theory
Figure 2.10.1 The periodic sound on the left has frequency f. (Two repetitions of the
waveform are shown.) This sound can be analyzed as the sum of the sine waves on the right,
with periods f, 2f, and 6f.

The nineteenth-century German psychologist Hermann von Helmholtz proposed
that two pitches are consonant if their partials are aligned, or else are sufﬁciently far
apart so as not to interfere. Dissonance is caused when partials are close together, but
not perfectly aligned; this creates a sense of “roughness” or harshness. (Twentiethcentury auditory physiologists have shown that the ear’s basilar membrane decomposes incoming sound waves into sine waves, more or less as Fourier described.)
Although there is much disagreement about just how complete this story is, most
contemporary psychologists believe that it is at least partly right.37
Western instruments typically produce periodic sounds that, when analyzed as
Fourier described, have relatively strong lower partials ( f, 2f, 3f, 4f, etc.). The partials
of several such “harmonic” sounds will match when their fundamental frequencies
are related by simple whole-number ratios.38 Consequently, as Pythagoras discovered
roughly 2700 years ago, the most consonant intervals have fundamental frequencies
in simple ratios: 2:1 (octave), 3:2 (perfect ﬁfth), 4:3 (perfect fourth), 5:4 (major third),
and 6:5 (minor third). A larger chord will be consonant when it contains a preponderance of consonant intervals, and this in turn requires that its notes be relatively
evenly distributed in pitch-class space.
For small chords there is a particularly elegant connection between near evenness
and acoustic consonance. The most consonant three-note chord, the major triad,
contains the ﬁrst three distinct pitch classes in the harmonic series, with fundamental
frequencies in a 3:4:5 ratio. Figure 2.10.2 shows that the triad divides the frequencyspace octave into three exactly equal pieces. When we take the logarithm of these
frequencies, passing from frequency space into pitch space (§2.1), we move from
an equal division of the (frequency-space) octave into a nearly even division of the

37 In particular, writers such as Tramo et al. (2005) have suggested that the relevant neural circuitry
may involve timing information rather than spatial information.
38 The consonance of an interval therefore depends on the timbre (or overtones) of the sound. Sethares
(1999) provides compelling examples of this phenomenon.

Harmony and Voice Leading
Figure 2.10.2 The frequencies {330, 440, 550} divide a frequency-space octave (between
330 and 660) perfectly evenly. In pitch space, the chord divides the octave nearly evenly, into
pieces that are approximately 5, 4, and 3 semitones large. Note that the acoustically pure Cs
(72.9) is not quite the same as the equal-tempered Cs (73).

Figure 2.10.3 Highly consonant chords divide the octave nearly evenly.

(log-frequency, pitch-space) octave. (A similar point holds for the perfect ﬁfth, which
contains the ﬁrst two distinct pitch classes in the harmonic series and evenly divides
the frequency-space octave.) Thus, for small chords, maximal consonance directly
implies near evenness. And though the situation is somewhat more complicated in
the case of larger chords, it remains true that highly consonant chords always divide
the octave relatively evenly (Figure 2.10.3).39
In other words—and this being one of the most important ideas in the entire
book, it is worth a little interjective buildup—the basic sonorities of Western tonal
music are optimal for two distinct reasons: considered as individual sonic objects,

39 With four notes, the dominant seventh chord divides the frequency-space octave precisely evenly,
but is not maximally consonant. However, it is fairly consonant, and the more consonant chords (such as
the major triad with added sixth) are also quite even. Huron (1994) estimates the most common twelvetone equal-tempered chords of various sizes; his maximally consonant chords are always nearly even.

63

64

theory

they are acoustically consonant and hence sound pleasing in their own right; but
since they divide the pitch-class circle nearly evenly, they can also be connected to
their transpositions by efﬁcient voice leading. Any composer who cares about harmonic consistency would therefore have reason to choose these chords, even if he or
she did not care a whit about acoustic consonance. Or to put the point in the form
of a parable: suppose God asked you, at the dawn of time, to choose the chords that
humanity would use in its music. There are two different choices you might make.
You might say, “Well, God, I’m a somewhat cerebral type and I’d like to combine efﬁcient voice leading and harmonic consistency, since this will allow me to praise You
with glorious polyphony.” And God would hand you a suitcase containing nearly even
chords, including the perfect ﬁfth, the major triad, and dominant seventh chord.40 On
the other hand, you might say, “You know, God, I’m kind of a hedonist, and at the
end of a hard day of hunting and gathering I’d really like to hear chords that sound
good—chords whose intrinsic consonance will put a smile on my face.” And in this
case, God would hand you a suitcase containing . . . the perfect ﬁfth, the major triad,
the dominant seventh chord. In other words, he would hand you the very same chords,
no matter which choice you made.
It follows that the development of Western counterpoint is something of an amazing accident. No doubt musicians originally chose consonant chords because they
“sounded good” in some primary sense—they were acoustically consonant and hence
felt restful and harmonious. But during the early history of Western music it gradually
became apparent that these chords were special in another way as well: they could be
used to write contrapuntal music that was also harmonically consistent. This realization led to the marvelous efﬂorescence of Western contrapuntal technique, as composers over the centuries explored an ever-increasing range of voice-leading possibilities
between an ever-increasing range of consonant chords. (This efﬂorescence, and its
numerous variations and ramiﬁcations, is the subject of Part II.) Ultimately, this was
possible because of the nonobvious connection between efﬁcient voice leading, harmonic consistency, and acoustic consonance—a connection that we now understand
as a simple consequence of the hidden symmetries of circular pitch-class space.41

40 This suitcase might contain some other chords as well: consonance implies near evenness, but not
the reverse. However, in the twelve-tone equal-tempered system, the most nearly even chords are reasonably consonant.
41 It bears repeating that I am generalizing claims made by Eytan Agmon and Richard Cohn. Agmon
(1991) notes that the diatonic triad is special because it can be connected to each of its diatonic transpositions by particularly efﬁcient voice leadings; Cohn (1996, 1997) notes that the chromatic major triad is capable of participating in “parsimonious” voice leadings to three separate minor triads. (“Parsimonious” voice
leadings, in Cohn’s parlance, are voice leadings in which just one voice moves and it moves by just one or
two semitones.) Here I extend these points in several ways. First, rather than limiting myself to Cohn’s parsimonious voice leadings, I consider efﬁcient voice leading more generally. Second, while Agmon and Cohn
focus on the triad as an object in some particular scale, my point is true of chords in any scale whatsoever—
diatonic, chromatic, or even in continuous unquantized space. Third, I point out that analogous facts hold
for acoustically consonant sonorities more generally: while Agmon and Cohn seem to privilege the triad
even in comparison to the perfect ﬁfth, dominant seventh chord, and diatonic scale, I suggest that the consonant sonorities are all essentially in the same boat. Finally, I show that acoustic consonance implies near
evenness, which in turn implies the ability to move by efﬁcient voice leading to all of a chord’s transpositions
or inversions; for Agmon and Cohn, these are separate properties that sometimes happen to coincide.

chapter 3

A Geometry of Chords
We now turn to geometrical models in which chords are represented as points in
higher dimensional spaces. As we will see, these “chord spaces” are a good deal more
interesting than the plain-vanilla space of ordinary Euclidean experience, containing
twists, mirrors, Möbius strips, and their higher dimensional analogues. Besides being
extraordinarily beautiful, these geometrical models clearly illustrate musical principles that can otherwise be quite difﬁcult to grasp.1 In particular, we can use them to
construct “voice-leading graphs” that depict the basic contrapuntal relations between
the familiar chords and scales of Western music, graphs that will serve as the principal
analytical tools of the second half of this book.

3.1

ordered pitch space

Chapter 2 introduced the basic musical object, or ordered sequence of pitches. Figure 3.1.1 shows that there are two ways to represent these objects geometrically. In Figure 3.1.1a we represent ordered pairs of notes using a gray circle for the ﬁrst note and a
black circle for the second. (We need different colors because the pairs are ordered, and
we need to differentiate the ﬁrst note from the second.) In Figure 3.1.1b, the horizontal
axis represents the ﬁrst pitch while the vertical axis indicates the second. Each model
therefore has two degrees of freedom: in the ﬁrst, we can move either circle independently of the other; in the second, we can move along one axis while holding ﬁxed our
position on the other. It is more or less a matter of convenience whether we wish to
represent two-note objects using two points in a one-dimensional space, as we did in
Chapter 2, or one point in a two-dimensional space. However, the models are different
in at least one important respect. It is easy to see how to ignore octave and order in
the ﬁrst, linear model: we simply represent all notes using same color (thereby ignoring order) and wrap the line into a circle (thereby ignoring octaves and reproducing
pitch-class space). But it is not at all clear how we should modify the two-dimensional
representation in those situations where we wish to ignore these musical parameters.

1 The ideas in this chapter are based on Tymoczko 2006 and 2008b, which are in turn inspired by
earlier geometrical work on “chord-type spaces,” including Roeder 1984, 1987, 1994, Cohn 2003, and Callender 2004. For a comprehensive account of a wide range of geometrical spaces, see Callender, Quinn,
and Tymoczko 2008.

66

theory
Figure 3.1.1 Two ways to represent the ordered pair (C4, E4). The ﬁrst uses two points in a
one-dimensional space—here, the gray circle represents the ﬁrst note, and the black ball the
second. The second uses a single point in a two-dimensional space.

Figure 3.1.2
A voice
leading can be
represented as a
line segment in
the plane. Here,
the voice leading
(C4, E4)®(E4,
C4), in which the
ﬁrst and second
voices trade
notes.

In the one-dimensional space, progressions between objects are represented by
collections of paths (cf. Figure 2.5.4). In
the two-dimensional space, progressions
can be represented by line segments such as
that in Figure 3.1.2, which depicts a situation in which the voices trade notes. Figure
3.1.3 uses line segments to model a twovoice passage from Josquin’s Missa l’homme
armé. With a little practice, it becomes easy
to translate two-voice music into a series of
line segments in the space. Any two-voice
passage of music, in any style whatsoever,
can be depicted in this way.
Horizontal and vertical line segments represent motion in a single voice (Figure
3.1.4). Parallel motion, in which the two voices move in the same direction by the same
amount, is represented by lines parallel to the 45° NE/SW diagonal, while perfect contrary motion—in which the voices move the same distance in opposite directions—is
represented by lines parallel to the 45° NW/SE diagonal. It turns out to be somewhat
more convenient to rotate the space clockwise by 45°, so that parallel motion is horizontal and perfect contrary motion is vertical. Chords on the same horizontal line
now relate by transposition; chords on the same vertical line sum to the same value
when pitches are represented numerically. (This follows from the fact that perfect contrary motion subtracts from one voice what it adds to the other.) Oblique motion
now moves along the 45° diagonals: motion in the ﬁrst voice occurs along the NW/SE
diagonal, while motion in the second occurs along the NE/SW diagonal. This rotation
does not change the space in any way; we are simply changing our perspective on it.

A Geometry of Chords
Figure 3.1.3
A passage from Josquin
represented in twodimensional space.

Figure 3.1.4 Rotating two-note ordered pitch space.

Figure 3.1.5 depicts an extended portion of two-dimensional ordered pitch space,
with the axes rotated as just described. The most striking feature of this graph is its
periodicity: like a piece of wallpaper, it consists of a single pattern (or “tile”) that is
repeated to cover the larger plane. The ﬁgure contains four complete tiles. The points
in the lower left quadrant are related by octave transposition to the corresponding
points in the upper right: the ﬁrst element in each pair is the same, while the second
element in the lower left pair is one octave below the second element in the upper
right pair. Moving from the lower left quadrant to the corresponding point in the
upper right will therefore transpose the second note up by an octave. Similarly, moving from the upper left to the corresponding point in the lower right shifts the ﬁrst
element up by an octave. Since any quadrant can be connected by a series of diagonal
motions to one of the quadrants in Figure 3.1.5, and since diagonal motion between
quadrants always corresponds to octave transposition in one voice, the rest of the
inﬁnite space can be generated from this ﬁgure.

67

68

theory

Figure 3.1.5
A portion of
inﬁnite, twodimensional
ordered pitch
space.

Figure 3.1.6
Ordered pitch
space is like
a piece of
wallpaper.

What about the lower left and upper left quadrants? Here, the relationship is
somewhat harder to grasp. Imagine that there were a hinge connecting them, so
that the bottom-left quadrant could be lifted out of the paper and ﬂipped onto the
upper left. This transformation maps each pair in the lower quadrant onto a pair
with the same pitch content, but in the reverse order. Geometrically, the transformation is a reﬂection: a pair in the lower left quadrant gets sent to the spot where
its reﬂection would appear if the common border were a mirror. When we move
a dyad from the lower left quadrant to its reﬂected image in the upper left, we
therefore switch the order of its notes. The two rightmost quadrants are related in
exactly the same way.
Figure 3.1.6 depicts symbolically the
relationship between the four tiles, using a
right-side-up human face to represent the
lower left tile. The upper left quadrant is
upside down relative to the lower left: if they
were connected by a hinge along their common border, then either could be ﬂipped
over so as to coincide with the other. Similarly, the lower right tile is upside-down relative to the upper right. The lower right tile
is also upside-down relative to the lower left
tile, but in this case they cannot be related by

A Geometry of Chords

69

reﬂection along their common border—that process would exchange left and right,
but not up and down.

3.2

the parable of the ant

Imagine now that an ant is walking along the wallpaper in Figure 3.1.6. Suppose that
you and I are gambling types and decide to bet on whether the ant will touch a pipe
in the next 30 seconds. For the purpose of settling the bet, it does not matter which
tile the ant is on; what matters is whether it touches any pipe in any tile. We could
therefore represent the ant’s trajectory on a single tile, as in Figure 3.2.1. (Perhaps
we use a single tile because we want to record our game for posterity while being
environmentally conscious and using the minimum amount of paper.) That is, we
arbitrarily select one tile from Figure 3.1.6 and take the ant’s position to be the point
on this tile corresponding to its position on the tile it actually occupies.
Figure 3.2.1
An ant’s path can
be represented
on a single tile.

Although the underlying idea is simple, the structure of the resulting single-tile
space is complex. For example, at the point marked a, the ant disappears off the lower
left edge, only to reappear on the upper right. This is reminiscent of early video games
such as Asteroids or Pac-Man, in which objects could move off one side of the screen
to reappear on the other. Unlike those games, however, the ant leaves the lower half
of the ﬁgure only to reappear on the upper half and vice versa, as if the left edge were
attached to the right in a twisted fashion. The mathematical name for such a space is
a Möbius strip.
Now consider point b in the ant’s trajectory. In the single-tile representation the
ant appears to “bounce off ” the ﬁgure’s upper edge, as if it were a mirror, or the
bumper of a pool table. But we can see from Figure 3.2.1a that the ant’s actual trajectory is straight. Nothing intrinsic to the ant’s motion produces the change in direction—rather, it is the structure of the wallpaper on which it walks. The ant, being
unaware of the wallpaper pattern, would have no knowledge that anything unusual
was occurring.
Note that the placement of the left and right boundaries is essentially arbitrary.
For the purpose of settling the bet, one could equally depict the ant’s trajectory on

70

theory
Figure 3.2.2 (a) The choice of left and right boundaries is arbitrary. (b) We could even
represent the wallpaper without any left and right boundaries at all, if we stretched it
horizontally and used the third dimension to attach the two edges. (c) The choice of upper
and lower boundaries is not arbitrary, since this ﬁgure has no pipe.

Figure 3.2.2a, which contains two half faces, one upside down and the other right
side up. Though bizarre from an artistic point of view, it is perfectly adequate for
gambling, since all parts of the ﬁgure are represented. If we were to stretch the ﬁgure horizontally, forming a rectangle rather than a square, we could even represent
the tile in three dimensions without any left or right boundaries whatsoever—as in
Figure 3.2.2b.2 By contrast, the location of the upper and lower boundaries is not
arbitrary. Figure 3.2.2c shows that we cannot settle our bet using the space consisting
of two halves of two vertically adjacent tiles, since that space contains two copies of
the top half of the ﬁgure but none of the lower half.
All this talk about ants, wallpaper, and gambling may seem like a distraction from
the serious goal of understanding music. But in fact, the Parable of the Ant has introduced the fundamental concepts needed in the rest of this chapter. The key idea is
that we can form a similar structure by “folding up” the two-dimensional musical
space in Figure 3.1.5. In this case, ignoring what tile we are on corresponds to ignoring the order and octave of a pair of notes. In other words, the resulting space represents two-note chords as musicians are accustomed to thinking of them. Thus the
Parable of the Ant, rather than being a frivolous digression, has actually marked the
beginning of our investigation into a remarkable convergence between music theory
and contemporary geometry.

3.3

two-note chord space

Our goal is to “fold” the inﬁnite space of Figure 3.1.5 so as to glue together all the
different points representing the same chord: (C4, E4), (E4, C4), (E5, C2), and so on.
The result will be a new geometrical space, analogous to our single tile of wallpaper,

2 By using the third dimension, we can attach the ﬁgure’s boundaries in the appropriate, twisted way.
However, the ﬁgure remains intrinsically two-dimensional, since the ant can move in just two perpendicular
directions at any point. The fact that we represent it using three dimensions simply reﬂects the difﬁculty
of embedding the two-dimensional space in a Euclidean world. For a good nontechnical introduction to
these issues, see Weeks 2002.

A Geometry of Chords
Figure 3.3.1 Two-note chord space. The left edge is “glued” to the right, with a twist.

in which points represent two-note chords—or unordered pairs of pitch classes—
rather than ordered pairs of pitches.
Happily, the detailed work has already been done. The “wallpaper space” described
in the preceding section was modeled on Figure 3.1.5, and we can immediately adapt
our earlier results.3 Since each of the quadrants in Figure 3.1.5 contains precisely one
point for every unordered set of pitch classes, any of them can be used to represent
two-voice music. The two-note chord space shown in Figure 3.3.1 consists in a single
quadrant of Figure 3.1.5, with octave designations removed to reﬂect the fact that we
have discarded octave information. Although the points are labeled using ordered
pairs, this ordering is not signiﬁcant: the point CDf represents the ordering (Df, C)
just as much as it represents the ordering (C, Df). Accordingly, I will sometimes refer
to this point as {C, Df} or {Df, C}.
In §3.1, we rotated the coordinate axes so that parallel musical motion is represented by horizontal geometrical motion. This is again true in our new, “folded”
space: horizontal motion represents parallel motion in both voices, while vertical
motion represents contrary motion in which the two voices move in opposite directions by the same distance. (Oblique motion, in which one voice stays ﬁxed, is again
represented by the 45° diagonals.) It follows that chords on the same horizontal line
of Figure 3.3.1 are related by transposition: the top edge of the ﬁgure, for example,
contains unisons—two-note chords in which both voices sound the same pitch

3 People sometimes wonder why two-note chord space is a Möbius strip rather than the surface of a
doughnut (or “torus”). The answer is that a torus models the space you get when you ignore octave but not
order. On a torus, the point (C, E) is different from the point (E, C). While there are some musical purposes
in which it is useful to distinguish these two orderings, there are many more in which it is not.

71

72

theory
Figure 3.3.2 The boundary of two-note
chord space is an (abstract) circle, since you
can move in one direction to return to your
starting point. The circle is very similar to
pitch-class space.

class.4 Unisons can also be found on the bottom edge of the ﬁgure, with two of
them—{C, C} and {Fs, Fs}—appearing on both edges. (Chords on the right side of
the ﬁgure are enclosed in brackets, indicating that they also appear on the left side.)
These duplications are different representations of the same chord, artifacts of the
doomed attempt to depict a Möbius strip in two Euclidean dimensions. Intrinsically,
the Möbius strip has only one edge: what appear as distinct line segments containing
unisons are actually two halves of an abstract “circle,” since horizontal motion along
the edge eventually returns to its starting point (§2.2). Figure 3.3.2 shows that this
abstract circle is very similar to pitch-class space, with the only difference being that
its points represent not single pitch classes but musical states in which two voices
articulate the same pitch class.
The other intervals are also found on horizontal line segments, one in the top half
of the ﬁgure and one in the bottom. The horizontal line segment just below the top
edge, and just above the bottom edge, contains minor seconds. (Again, these apparently different line segments are attached at their endpoints, forming two halves of an
abstract circle.) Major seconds are just below the minor seconds on the top half and
just above the minor seconds on the bottom. As the interval between the two notes
gets larger, dividing the octave more evenly, the lines representing them move toward
the center. Consequently, the horizontal line at the midpoint of the ﬁgure contains
tritones, which divide the pitch-class circle into two halves.5
Chords on the same vertical line can be linked by exact contrary motion: for
instance, the voice leading (C, Fs)®(Df, F) moves C up by semitone and Fs down
by semitone, and joins two chords on the same vertical line. It follows that every
dyad lies on the same vertical line as its tritone transposition.6 Since exact contrary

4 In these geometrical spaces, it is convenient to represent chords as multisets that can have multiple
copies of particular pitch classes (§2.4). From this standpoint {C, E, E} is different from both {C, C, E} and
{C, E}. We will return to this point shortly.
5 The (abstract) circle containing tritones is therefore half as long as the (abstract) circles containing
the other intervals. This is the analogue, in continuous musical space, of the statement that there are half
as many (twelve-tone equal-tempered) tritones as there are instances of the other (twelve-tone equaltempered) intervals.
6 One can always connect tritone-related dyads by contrary motion: given the dyad {C, E}, one can
move C up by tritone to Fs, and E down by tritone to As.

A Geometry of Chords

motion preserves the sum of a chord’s pitch classes, chords on the same vertical line
always sum to the same value. Thus {C, Fs}, {G, B}, and {Af, Bf}, which lie on the
vertical line at the center of Figure 3.3.1, all sum to six using pitch-class arithmetic.7 (Note: this fact will be important later on, so make sure you understand it.) The
pitch classes on the left edge of Figure 3.3.1 sum to zero. The sum of the chords in
the vertical cross section increases as one moves rightward until we reach the right
edge, whose chords again sum to zero (equivalent to twelve in pitch-class arithmetic).
Finally, motion along the 45° diagonals alters just one note, so that (Cs, E) lies 45°
northeast of (C, E). (Note, however, that diagonal motion can no longer be thought of
as moving the “ﬁrst note” rather than the “second note” because we are now neglecting order.8) It is worth emphasizing that two-note chord space is continuous, containing every conceivable chord in every conceivable tuning system. A chord like (Cμ, E)
(C quarter-tone sharp, E), though not labeled on the example, lies 45° northeast of
(C, E), halfway to (Cs, E).

3.4

chord progressions and voice
leadings in two-note chord space

Our Möbius strip can be used to represent any chord progression and any voice leading between two-note chords. To represent a progression like {C, E}Þ{F, A} simply identify the initial point, {C, E}, and the ﬁnal point, {F, A}. It is not necessary
to choose any particular path between them, because a chord progression does not
specify exactly how the individual notes move (§2.5). It is as if the music magically
teleports, disappearing at {C, E} and instantaneously reappearing at {F, A}, without
occupying any of the places in between.
A voice leading, by contrast, is represented by a particular path between chords,
with the size of the voice leading corresponding to the length of the path. The simplest
way to ﬁnd this path is to imagine each voice making a continuous glissando, beginning and ending at the same time. For example, (C, E)®(Ef, G) moves each voice
up by three semitones. If each voice made a continuous glissando, the music would
pass through a series of major thirds: (Df, F), (D, Fs), and countless others not accessible with an ordinary piano. These all lie on the horizontal line segment shown on
Figure 3.4.1. Similarly, the voice leading (B, D)®(Af, F) moves each voice by three
semitones in contrary motion. This voice leading passes through the chords {Bf, Ef},
{A, E}, and a variety of other non-equal-tempered chords. It is therefore represented
by the vertical line segment on the ﬁgure.
A little experimentation will show that the boundaries of the ﬁgure behave
exactly like the boundaries of our earlier wallpaper space. To see this, imagine making a smooth glissando from (Ef4, G4) to (F4, A4). Figure 3.4.2 indicates that the
7 The sum of the pitch classes {B, G}, or {11, 7}, is 6, because we add or subtract 12 from our result until
we obtain a number in the range 0 £ x < 12; 11 + 7 = 18, and 18 − 12 = 6 (§2.3).
8 Instead, we should think of it as moving particular notes: when we move northeast from {C, E}, we
raise C to Cs. In actual musical contexts the C might belong to either voice, and might appear above or
below the E.

73

74

theory
Figure 3.4.1
Voice leadings are
represented by line
segments. Parallel
motion is horizontal,
while perfect contrary
motion is vertical.
The voice leadings
(C, E)®(Ef, G) and
(B, D) ® (Af, F) are
shown.

glissando is initially represented by rightward motion on the top half of the strip,
from {Ef, G} to {E, Gs}. However, the point {E, Gs} is represented both on the top
half of the right edge and on the bottom half of the left edge. As we move from
(E4, Gs4) to (F4, A4), the glissando now appears on the bottom half of the ﬁgure,
moving from the lower-left {E, Gs} to {F, A}. Thus, as in the Parable of the Ant, the
music disappears off the upper right edge only to reappear on the lower left. Alternatively, consider the smooth glissando from (C4, D4) to (E4, D4)—in which the

Figure 3.4.2
The horizontal
boundaries act like
mirrors, whereas the
vertical boundaries are
glued together with a
“twist.” Voice leadings
thus disappear off the
left edge to reappear on
the right, and vice versa.
Here, the voice leadings
(Ef, G) ® (F, A) and
(C, D) ® (E, D) are
shown.

A Geometry of Chords

ﬁrst voice moves from C4 to E4 while the second voice remains ﬁxed. The resulting
path, illustrated in Figure 3.4.2, is represented by a line segment that begins at {C, D}
and moves diagonally northeast to {D, D}. (Recall that motion in just a single voice
always lies along a 45° diagonal.) However, the second half of the path is represented
by a line segment moving diagonally southeast from {D, D} to {E, D}. As in the Parable of the Ant, what causes the apparent “change in direction” is the structure of the
underlying space: musically, the ﬁrst voice moves smoothly upward from C4 to E4,
and does not do anything strange at D4.
Voice leadings are therefore represented by what might be called “generalized line
segments” that can bounce off a mirror boundary, or disappear off one side of the
ﬁgure only to reappear on the other. There is, in fact, a one-to-one correspondence
between these “generalized line segments” and voice leadings: for every generalized
line segment there is a voice leading in pitch-class space, and for every voice leading
in pitch-class space there is a generalized line segment. In principle, there can be inﬁnitely many generalized line segments linking any two chords, each represented by a
different pattern of reﬂections off the horizontal boundaries and “disappearances”
off the left and right edges.
The total amount of horizontal motion in a voice leading can be calculated
algebraically by adding the pitch-class paths in the two voices. A voice leading like
2, 1
(C, E) ⎯⎯→(D,
F) moves its two voices by a total of 2 + 1 = 3 semitones, and is therefore represented by a generalized line segment whose horizontal component moves
−7, − 2
→(F, D) moves its voices by −7 + −2 = −9 semi3 units to the right.9 (C, E) ⎯⎯⎯
tones, and therefore moves 9 units to the left (Figure 3.4.3). Similarly, if one writes
the voice leading so that the ﬁrst two notes are in the same order as they are on Figure
3.3.1, then the total amount of vertical motion can be determined by subtracting the
2, 1
second path from the ﬁrst. For example, (C, E) ⎯⎯→(D, F) moves by a total of 2 −
−3, 3
→(Af, F) moves its voices by −3 − 3 = −6 units
1 = 1 unit upward, while (B, D) ⎯⎯⎯
upward, or 6 units downward.10 (The ﬁrst of these voice leadings is shown in Figure
3.4.3, the second in Figure 3.4.1.) However, contact with any of the four “edges” of the
5, − 2
→(F, D) moves its voices by
strip exchanges “downward” and “upward”: (C, E) ⎯⎯⎯
5 − (−2) = 7 upward units, but it reaches the upper mirror boundary after just four of
these; the remaining three steps are therefore taken in a descending direction (Figure
−7, − 2
→(F, D) moves its voices by −7 − (−2)
3.4.3). Similarly, the voice leading (C, E) ⎯⎯⎯
= −5 units, but when the path disappears off the left edge to reappear on the right, the
direction turns upward. These algebraic principles provide a more systematic alternative to the method of imagining each voice making a continuous glissando. For an
even simpler method readers can download a free computer program that plots voice
leadings on the Möbius strip automatically.11
9 A “unit” is the distance between adjacent vertical cross sections containing equal-tempered chords.
Since there are twelve of these, the Möbius strip has a width of 12 units.
10 A “unit” is the distance between adjacent horizontal lines containing equal-tempered chords; again,
the Möbius strip is twelve units high.
11 See the companion website for links to the “ChordGeometries” program.

75

76

theory

Figure 3.4.3
Four voice
leadings between
{C, E} and {D, F},
as represented on
the Möbius strip.
The amount
of rightward
motion can be
calculated by
adding the paths
in the two voices;
the amount of
upward motion
can be calculated
by subtracting
the second path
from the ﬁrst.

3.5

geometry in analysis

Figure 3.5.1 uses the Möbius strip to graph the eighth phrase of the Allelujia Justus
et Palma, one of the earliest examples of Western counterpoint. The music begins by
tracing out a pair of triangles, each of which represents a four-chord unit that returns
to its starting point. (The triangles share a side because the last two chords of the
ﬁrst unit are also the ﬁrst two chords of the second.) Having completed the second
triangle, the music moves back to the initial {G, D} dyad, disappearing off the left
edge and reappearing on the right. The ﬁnal voice leading retraces the (G, D)®(E, E)
motion that begins the phrase.
All of this, I believe, is considerably easier to see in Figure 3.5.1b than in traditional musical notation. The geometrical patterns virtually jump off the page, without
any effort or concentration on the analyst’s part, whereas the corresponding musical patterns are much harder to identify. This is largely because our visual system is
optimized for perceiving geometrical shapes such as triangles, but not for perceiving
musical structures as expressed in standard musical notation. Translating the music
into geometry thus allows us to bring our formidable visual pattern-matching skills
to bear on musical analysis.

A Geometry of Chords

77
Figure 3.5.1
Plotting a phrase
from the Allelujia
Justus et Palma
(a) on the
Möbius strip (b)
reveals interesting
musical structure
(c).

Figure 3.5.2 provides a more sophisticated example.12 We begin with four voice
leadings from the opening of Brahms’ Intermezzo, Op. 116 No. 5. Figure 3.5.2b graphs
the voice leadings in two-note chord space, representing each measure as a pair of line
segments forming an open angle. We can imagine sliding the pair {X1, X2} so that X1
nearly coincides with Y1, and X2 nearly coincides with Y2. This represents the most
obvious analysis of the passage, according to which voice leading Y1 is a slight variation
of X1, and Y2 is a slight variation of X2. (That is, X1 moves its two voices by semitonal
contrary motion, whereas Y1 moves by slightly skewed contrary motion; X2 moves in
a skewed fashion, while Y2 moves in pure contrary motion.) Geometrically, however,
it is clear that (Y1, Y2) is also the mirror image of (X1, X2). Hence we can move the
pair (X1, X2) off the left edge so that it exactly coincides with (Y1, Y2), as in Figure
3.5.2c. (Remember that an upward-pointing arrow becomes a downward-pointing
arrow when it moves off one side of the ﬁgure to reappear along the other.) On this
interpretation, Y2 is exactly equivalent to X1, and Y1 is exactly equivalent to X2. Figure
3.5.2d represents this musically, heightening the comparison by switching hands and
reordering dyads. Now both pairs begin with perfect contrary motion and move to less
perfectly balanced motion, with melodies in each staff being transpositionally related.

12 This example ﬁrst appeared in Callender, Quinn, and Tymoczko 2008.

78
Figure 3.5.2
(a) Two passages
from Brahms’
Op. 116 No. 5,
as plotted on
the Möbius strip
(b). It is natural
to view Y1 and
Y2 as variants
of X1 and X2,
respectively.
However, it is
clear from the
graph that Y2
and Y1 are also
mirror images
of X1 and X2.
This means we
can move the
pair {X1, X2}
off the left edge
of the ﬁgure so
that it coincides
with {Y1, Y2} (c).
On this reading,
Y2 is related to
X1, and Y1 is
related to X2 (d).
Here, “P” and
“N” stand for
“perfect” and
“near perfect”
contrary motion.

theory

A Geometry of Chords

Playing through Brahms’ piece, I have always been
dimly aware of these relationships—you feel in your
ﬁngers the difference between the precisely contrary
motion and the less balanced motion, and you feel
the purely semitonal motion in the right hand of
measures 1–2 moving to the left hand of mm. 3–4.
However, it is quite difﬁcult to see the relationship in
the musical notation, and rather hard to describe it using traditional terminology. By
contrast, Figure 3.5.2b makes it obvious that the passages are mirror images—a fact
that Brahms, with all his love for invertible counterpoint and other forms of compositional trickery, would no doubt have enjoyed.
In these sorts of cases, geometry can help to sensitize us to relationships that
might not be immediately apparent in the musical score. Ultimately, this is because
conventional musical notation evolved to satisfy the needs of the performer rather
than the musical thinker: it is designed to facilitate the translation of musical symbols
into physical action, rather than to foment conceptual clarity. This is precisely why
one and the same chord can be notated in such a bewildering variety of different
ways (Figure 3.5.3). Learning the art of musical analysis is largely a matter of learning
to overlook the redundancies and inefﬁciencies of ordinary musical notation. Our
geometrical space simpliﬁes this process, stripping away musical details and allowing
us to gaze directly upon the harmonic and contrapuntal relationships that underlie
much of Western contrapuntal practice.

3.6

harmonic consistency and
efficient voice leading

Let’s pursue this further by returning to a more abstract question. Suppose you are
a composer who wants to write two-part note-against-note counterpoint, in which
transpositionally related dyads are linked by “stepwise” voice leading (or voice leading
in which no voice moves by more than two semitones). Under what circumstances
is this possible? In other words, how can we combine harmonic consistency and efﬁcient voice leading with just two voices?
The question can be answered simply by inspecting two-note chord space.
Transpositionally related dyads can be found on two horizontal line segments, one
in the lower half of the strip and one in the upper half, equidistant from the central
line of tritones; we are therefore looking for short line segments connecting points
on these line segments. One solution is immediately clear, since we can move any
chord horizontally to its transpositions. Unfortunately, these voice leadings involve
parallel motion in the two voices, and are therefore somewhat unsatisfactory. If the
goal is to write contrapuntal music that suggests independent melodies, then it will
not do to move the voices in the same direction all the time; this would sound like
a single melody being doubled at two pitch levels, rather than two distinct melodic
voices.

79
Figure 3.5.3
There are many
ways to notate a
C major chord.

80

theory
Figure 3.6.1 Even dyads
and uneven dyads can
both be connected to
their transpositions by
stepwise voice leading.

A second solution involves nearly even chords, which occupy horizontal line
segments near the center of the space. Thus tritone-related perfect ﬁfths can be
linked by semitonal voice leading, represented geometrically by a vertical arrow
(Figure 3.6.1, second line of music). In addition, they can be linked to their ﬁfth
transpositions by oblique voice leading in which one voice moves by two semitones.
Major thirds, since they lie farther away from the center of the ﬁgure, can be linked
only to their tritone transpositions by stepwise voice leading. Analogous voice leadings are available for the non-twelve-tone-equal-tempered intervals larger than a
major third: in each case, the voice leading between tritone-related chords is the
shortest, and is represented by a vertical line, with the other acceptable transpositions represented by slightly diagonal lines.
There is also a third and even less obvious possibility: chords that divide the
octave very unevenly—such as minor and major seconds—can be linked to themselves by short line segments reﬂecting off the nearby mirror boundary. For instance,
the voice leading (D, Ef)®(Ef, D) connects a minor second to itself by stepwise contrary motion, and is represented by a vertical arrow. (Analogous voice leadings again
exist for any of the non-twelve-tone-equal-tempered intervals smaller than the major
second.) Given any such voice leading, we can always transpose the second chord
by a small amount without much increasing the voice leading’s size. Consequently,
small dyads can also be connected by stepwise voice leading to their one-semitone (or

A Geometry of Chords

smaller) transpositions. For these chords the short vertical arrows connect a chord to
itself, while for nearly even dyads the vertical arrows connect a chord to its tritone transposition (Figure 3.6.1). Geometrically, the clustered chords reach their nearby transpositions by bouncing off the mirror, while nearly even chords cross the center of the
Möbius strip, thereby taking advantage of its “twist.”13 Thus we see that our earlier conclusions about symmetry are manifest in the structure of the two-dimesional space.

3.7

pure parallel and pure contrary
motion

Are we completely certain that these three possibilities are the only ones? Some
readers might think this is obvious, while others may (justiﬁably) wonder whether
there might be additional features of Möbius-strip geometry that we have overlooked.
How do we know we have accounted for all the relevant musical alternatives?
Let me address this worry by noting that any two-voice voice leading can be
decomposed into two components, one involving pure contrary motion and the
other involving pure parallel motion (Figure 3.7.1). The “pure contrary” component
moves the notes by the same amount in opposite directions, while the “pure parallel” component moves the notes by the same amount in the same direction. Geometrically, the “contrary” component will be conﬁned to a vertical slice of the Möbius
strip, such as that in Figure 3.7.1b, while the transpositional component will move
horizontally. This decomposition into parallel and contrary is nothing other than
high school vector analysis, which dissects arbitrary vectors into their x and y components.14 Musically, the goal of the decomposition is to focus on the relative motion
among the voices, ignoring the parallel motion they all share.
Now consider any efﬁcient voice leading between transpositionally related dyads.
The purely contrary component of this voice leading will connect transpositionally
related dyads lying in the same vertical slice of the Möbius strip. It is visually obvious
that the contrary component must either bounce off the mirror or cross the midpoint
of the line. In the former case, it will be smaller when the chord is uneven; in the latter
case, it will be smaller when the chord is even. Simple examination of the cross section shows that there are no other possibilities: if a dyad is neither particularly even
nor particularly uneven, then it simply cannot participate in purely contrary voice
leadings of the sort we are interested in.
We will periodically ﬁnd it useful to abstract away from a voice leading’s parallel component in this way. Geometrically, this involves restricting our attention to a
cross section of chord space—the vertical line in Figure 3.7.1b rather than the entire
13 Note that Western composers typically conceive of two-note chords as subsets of larger triadic collections, and hence are not concerned with (two-voice) “harmonic consistency” as described in this section. My goal is simply to illustrate general principles in the simplest geometrical setting; as we will shortly
see, the same basic principles hold in higher dimensions as well.
d1 , d2
→(y1, y2) we can transpose the ﬁrst chord by (d1 + d2)/2 semitones
14 Given the voice leading (x1, x2) ⎯⎯⎯
so that the two voices move by the same amount in opposite directions. This is the “pure contrary” component
of the voice leading. The purely transpositional voice leading moves both voices by (d1 + d2)/2 semitones.

81

82

theory
Figure 3.7.1 Any voice leading can be decomposed into parallel and contrary components.
Here, the voice leading (E, B)®(Fs, B) (a) combines the parallel (E, B)®(F, C) (b), which
moves both voices up by semitone, with the contrary (F, C)®(Fs, B) (g), which moves the
voices semitonally in opposite directions. Pure parallel motion is represented geometrically
by horizontal lines, while pure contrary motion is vertical. This means that the pure
contrary component of any voice leading will remain within a cross section of the space (b),
containing dyads whose pitch classes sum to the same value.

Möbius strip. However, although every cross section of the space contains precisely
the same chord types, not all of these appear in twelve-tone equal-tempered forms.
Consider the chord {Cμ, Eμ} (C quarter-tone sharp, E quarter-tone sharp), which lies
halfway between {Cs, E} and {C, F}.15 Although this chord cannot be played on an
ordinary piano, it is a major third, transpositionally related to familiar chords like
(C, E). (Geometrically, {Cμ, Eμ} lies on the same horizontal line as {C, E} and {Df,
F}, halfway between them.) Clearly, no vertical cross section of the Möbius strip will
contain twelve-tone equal-tempered major and minor thirds, even though every such
cross section contains some representative of every chord type.

15 This is because Cμ is a quarter tone above C, halfway between C and Cs, while Eμ is a quarter tone
below F, halfway between F and E. The voice leading (C, F)®(Cμ, Eμ) therefore involves pure contrary
motion.

A Geometry of Chords

When restricting our attention to a single cross section, it is therefore convenient to
relabel its points so that all twelve-tone equal-tempered intervals are on equal footing.
Figure 3.7.2a identiﬁes points according to the interval they represent: 01 for minor
second, 02 for major second, and so on, with the symbols “T” and “E” referring to ten
and eleven, respectively. These new labels can be understood as referring to chord types,
rather than particular chords: the label 04, for instance, refers to any major third, rather
than the particular pitches C and E.16 Note that the cross section is redundant: major
thirds can be represented both by 04 or 08, just as perfect ﬁfths are represented both by
05 and 07. (Remember that our chords are unordered.) This means that the contrary
component of any voice leading can be represented in this abstract space in two different ways (Figure 3.7.3). Removing this redundancy produces a true “set class” space in
which each point corresponds to a chord type; however, this involves some unpleasant
mathematical complexities, so we will need to learn to live with the redundancy.
It turns out that line segments in the cross section represent collections of voice
leadings, all “individually T-related” to one another (§2.6). This is because the operation of “individual transposition” alters the horizontal component of a voice leading
while leaving the vertical component unchanged. Figure 3.7.4 shows that the voice
leading (E, B)®(F, Bf) is represented by a purely vertical line segment, with no horizontal component whatsoever. The voice leading (G, D)®(Fs, B) is related to it by
individual transposition: we transpose the ﬁrst chord up by minor third, which corresponds to sliding it rightward by three places, while we transpose the second chord
up by one semitone, which amounts to sliding it rightward by one place. This introduces a purely horizontal component into the voice leading while simply shifting the

Figure 3.7.2 (a) It is
useful to label the cross
sections such that every
equal-tempered interval is
represented. (b) To translate
these abstract labels into
labels for particular chords
in a cross section, subtract a
constant from each number
in the label so that its
elements sum to the same
value. Here, for example
we recover the sum-0 cross
section from the more
abstract labels.

16 Geometrically, we are investigating the projection of chords onto the cross section, rather than some
particular slice of the space. This is because we are using the cross section to represent the larger space.

83

84
Figure 3.7.3
There are always
two equally good
ways to move
the contrary
component of a
voice leading into
a particular cross
section. Either
of the arrows in
(b) can represent
the voice leadings
in (c).

Figure 3.7.4
Individually
T-related voice
leadings can
be moved
into the same
cross section
so that their
purely contrary
components
coincide.
Here, the voice
leadings in (c)
share the same
pure contrary
component (b).

theory

A Geometry of Chords

85

contrary component rightward. Consequently both (G, D)®(Fs, B) and (E, B)®
(F, Bf) are represented in the cross section by the line segment (0, 7)®(0, 5). Thus we
see that limiting our attention to the cross section of the Möbius strip is equivalent to
focusing on the qualities shared by individually T-related voice leadings. This is just
one of many cases where we ﬁnd unexpected connections between purely musical
ideas and relatively straightforward geometrical operations.

3.8

three-dimensional chord space

tro

m

bo
ne

sax

Having considered two-note chords, the next task is to describe the analogous spaces
containing three-note chords, four-note chords, and so on. These higher-dimensional
spaces are fundamentally similar to our two-dimensional Möbius strip, and it is usually possible to reason about them by extrapolating from the simpler space we have
just explored. Readers might therefore want to make sure they are comfortable with
the Möbius strip before proceeding onward.
Suppose you wanted to model music consisting of three distinct voices—say
trumpet, saxophone, and trombone. Figure 3.8.1 shows that it takes three dimensions to record the possible musical states of the trio, with the x-axis representing the
trumpet, the y-axis the saxophone, and the z-axis the trombone. If you were to examine
a large volume of this three-note ordered pitch space, you would ﬁnd that it again has a
repeating, periodic structure—being divisible into three-dimensional “tiles” containing one representative of every three-note chord, exactly like Figure 3.1.5. Once again,
focusing on a tile of the space is the geometrical analogue to ignoring octave and order
information. But since the “tile” has three dimensions, our musical space is now a three-dimensional
piece of wallpaper—perfect for covering the walls of
your four-dimensional bedroom.17
trumpet
Figure 3.8.2 depicts one of these tiles. The space
is a triangular prism. Augmented triads, dividing
the octave into three equal parts, lie on the vertical
line at its center, and are represented as dark cubes.
(For clarity, only twelve-tone equal-tempered triads
are shown.) Chords that divide the octave nearly evenly are found near the center,
with the equal-tempered major and minor triads depicted as dark and light spheres,
respectively.18 More and more uneven chords are found farther and farther from the
center. At the boundary are chords with multiple copies of some note: chords with

17 In general, the boundary of a space has one less dimension than the space itself: thus twodimensional walls enclose three-dimensional rooms, and three-dimensional walls enclose four-dimensional rooms.
18 The cubic lattice at the center of the strip was ﬁrst discovered, in a somewhat more abstract representation, by Douthett and Steinbach (1998). (See Appendix C.) The nineteenth-century theorist Carl
Friedrich Weitzmann (1853) came very close to describing the ﬁgure, as Cohn (2000) discusses.

Figure 3.8.1
It takes three
dimensions to
model three
instruments.

86

theory
Figure 3.8.2 A single “tile” of three-note chord space is a triangular prism. Minor triads
are light spheres, major triads are dark spheres, and augmented triads are cubes. The dark
spheres on the edges of the prism are triple unisons. The lines in the center of the space
connect chords that can be linked by voice leading in which only a single voice moves, and it
moves by only a single semitone.

two copies of some pitch class are found on the sides of the prism, while triple unisons are found on its edges. (Triple unisons are maximally uneven, containing three
copies of a single pitch class.) And although the illustration depicts only a few familiar
equal-tempered chords, the space itself is again continuous: any possible unordered
set of pitch classes corresponds to some point in the prism, including microtonal
chords such as {0.17, 2.5, 8.999}.
As before, voice leadings are “generalized line segments” that stretch from one
point to another. Ascending parallel motion in all three voices corresponds to ascending vertical motion on the prism.19 Here, however, line segments disappear off the top
face and reappear on the bottom, rotated by one third of a turn. Thus as the three
voices ascend in parallel from {C, C, C} to {E, E, E}, the associated line segment in Figure 3.8.2 ascends along the left edge of the ﬁgure. When the line segment reaches {E,
E, E}, it reappears on the bottom face of the ﬁgure, on the right corner. It then climbs
up the front right edge to {Gs, Gs, Gs}. When it reaches the top of this edge, it moves
up the rear edge of the ﬁgure and begins to climb again until reaching {C, C, C}. This
means that we should imagine the triangular faces to be “glued together” with a 120°
twist. Since the line containing triple unisons returns eventually to its starting point,
it can be considered an (abstract) circle. The same is true for the three line segments
containing all the transpositions of any other chord.

19 On the Möbius strip, parallel motion is represented by horizontal rather than vertical motion, but
this difference is merely orthographical.

A Geometry of Chords

Once again, three-dimensional chord space can help clarify musical relationships that would otherwise be very hard to describe. Figure 3.8.3a presents four
chromatic sequences from the ﬁrst movement of Brahms’ C minor Piano Quartet,
each of which uses descending semitonal voice leading to connect major and minor
triads. In the ﬁrst two sequences, Brahms lowers the major triad’s root to form a
minor triad (as indicated by “r−1”) while in the last two sequences, he lowers the
major triad’s third (“t−1”). Note that the sequences repeat at three different transpositional levels, as can be seen by comparing successive major or minor triads: the
ﬁrst and last sequences descend by semitone, the second ascends by minor third,
and the third ascends by perfect ﬁfth. At ﬁrst glance, there does not seem to be
any clear structure here; the impression is of a kind of intuitive play, as if Brahms
had arbitrarily chosen four unrelated sequences from among countless essentially
similar possibilities.
When we consider the music geometrically, however, we see that Brahms is
actually moving quite systematically along the lattice at the center of three-note
chord space (Figure 3.8.3b). Starting from any major triad, there are only two semitonal descents that will produce a minor triad (labeled “a” and “b” on the lattice);
the two available paths correspond to the possibility of lowering the major triad’s
root or third. From here, one must move the root downward by semitone to form
an augmented triad. (Brahms typically skips this triad, though it does appear in the
second sequence.) There are then three geometrical paths to choose from (labeled
“1,” “2,” and “3” on the lattice), corresponding to the three major triads that can be
reached by lowering a note of the augmented triad, and producing three different
root relationships to the starting chord. (The possible relationships are descending
semitone, ascending minor third, and ascending perfect ﬁfth, precisely as in Brahms’
piece.) Clearly, there are six sequences that can be formed in this way, since there are
two possibilities for the initial move and three possibilities for the second (Figure
3.8.3c). What is interesting is that Brahms uses four of these six options, composing
a group of sequences that are contrapuntally similar (by virtue of using descending stepwise voice leading) while harmonically distinct (by virtue of using a variety
of different root progressions). The result is a sort of developing or continuous
variation, in which the same basic procedure (descending semitonal voice leading
among major and minor triads) produces subtly different results. And even though
this process of developing variation might at some level be intuitive or improvisational, it nevertheless exhibits very clear structure. By showing us the ﬁeld in
which Brahms’ intuition necessarily operates, geometry helps us understand this
structure, while also leading us to expect that we will ﬁnd these same sequences in
other pieces as well. Chapter 8 will return to this thought, using the very same lattice to interpret chromatic procedures in music as diverse as that of Schubert and
Jimi Hendrix.
Once again, it is sometimes useful to consider just the horizontal cross section
of our three-note chord space—which, being two-dimensional, is much easier to
draw. As before, these horizontal cross sections contain chords whose pitch classes

87

88

theory
Figure 3.8.3 (a) Descending sequences from the ﬁrst movement of Brahms’ C minor
Piano Quartet, Op. 60. (b) These result from moving downward along the equal-tempered
lattice at the center of chord space. (Major chords are dark spheres, minor chords light
spheres.) (c) There are six basic sequences that can be formed in this way, depending
on whether one lowers the root or the third of the initial major triad, and whether the
sequence descends by semitone (D1), ascends by seven semitones (A7), or ascends by
three semitones (A3).

A Geometry of Chords

sum to the same value (Figure 3.8.4).20 If a chord appears on the triangular cross
section, then so do its transpositions by ascending and descending major third.
This is because transposing a three-note chord by four semitones does not change
the sum of its pitch classes: 4 + 4 + 4 = 0 in pitch-class arithmetic. The three transpositions of each chord are arranged symmetrically around the triangle, so that
120° rotation transposes each by major third. Chords in the same triangular cross
section can be linked by “pure contrary” voice leadings in which the amount of
ascending motion exactly balances the amount of descending motion. For example,
Figure 3.8.5 shows that {E, A, B} and {F, Gf, Df} can be linked by the voice leading (E, A, B)®(F, Gf, Df), which is represented by a line segment lying entirely
within the triangle. Here, one voice ascends by semitone, one voice ascends by two
semitones, and one voice descends by three semitones, so that the total amount of
ascending motion is 1 + 2 − 3 = 0.

Figure 3.8.4 (a) A horizontal slice of three-note chord space is a triangle containing chords
summing to the same value; here the chords sum to 0. (Only equal-tempered chords are
shown.) (b) These triangular cross sections are analogous to the vertical “slices” of two-note
chord space, which also contain chords summing to the same value.

20 Roeder 1984 and Callender 2004 explore these cross sections, using them to represent set classes.
Cohn 1998b also notes that major-third-related triads sum to the same value and can be connected by
pure contrary motion.

89

90

theory
Figure 3.8.5
(a) Two voice leadings in
which the total amount
of ascending motion
perfectly balances the total
amount of descending
motion. (b) These voice
leadings are contained in a
cross section of three-note
chord space. The second
voice leading, which has
voice crossings, bounces
off the triangle’s mirror
boundary; the ﬁrst
does not.

Since Figure 3.8.4 shows only equal-tempered chords summing to zero, certain
chord types do not appear. (In particular, there are no major triads.) Again, though,
every chord type appears in every cross section: if we were to transpose {C, E, G} up
by one third of a semitone, we would obtain a major triad whose pitch classes sum to
zero.21 (This chord would appear on Figure 3.8.4a precisely in the same place that the
C major triad appears on its cross section.) As in §3.7, we can therefore construct an
abstract representation of the cross section in which all equal-tempered chord types
appear (Figure 3.8.6). The arrows to the left of the triangle show how to interpret
motion in the space: horizontal motion raises or lowers the last note in the chord;
motion along the up-and-left diagonal raises or lowers the middle note in the chord;
and motion along the other diagonal raises and lowers the last two notes in the chord.
(Of course, raising two notes is equivalent to lowering the other when we factor out
pure parallel motion, which is what we are doing when we consider only the cross
section.22) Figure 3.8.7 explains how to plot the pure contrary component of a voice
leading in this space.

21 The pitch classes in an equal-tempered major triad must sum to either eleven, two, ﬁve, or eight; by
transposing up by a third of a semitone, we add one to these sums. This is analogous to the fact that perfect
fourths do not appear in Figure 3.8.4b, since equal-tempered fourths sum to an odd number, and Figure
3.8.4b contains pitch classes that sum to four.
22 Mathematically, (0, 1, 1) + (−1, −1, −1) = (−1, 0, 0), which says that (0, 1, 1) and (−1, 0, 0) are related
by pure parallel motion (−1, −1, −1).

A Geometry of Chords
Figure 3.8.6 An abstract representation of the cross sections of three-dimensional chord
space. In this abstract representation, the labels do not sum to the same value. (Compare
Figure 3.7.2.)

rst
)

0[12][12]

(lo
w

er
fi

0EE

0E[12]
0TE

0T[12]

099

le

idd
em

rai
se
la

s
rai

st t

wo

0TT

raise last
077

055

012

000

001

036

014
003

015
004

027

005

05E

018
007

01T
009

03[12]
02E

02T

019
008

04[12]
03E

03T
029

028

05[12]

04E

04T
039

017
006

06[12]

05T

038

016

06E

049

048

026

07[12]

06T
059

037

08[12]

07E

07T

058
047

025

024
013

002

046

08E

069

068
057

035

034
023

022

056
045

044
033

067

09[12]

08T
079

078

066

011

089

088

09E

09T

02[12]

01E
00T

01[12]
00E

00[12]

Finally, observe that the structure of the space again demonstrates the relation
between evenness and efﬁcient voice leading. Suppose you want to ﬁnd an efﬁcient
(three-voice) voice leading between transpositionally related three-note chords. As
in §3.7, we decompose our voice leading into pure parallel and pure contrary components. Since the original voice leading is small, then both the pure parallel and
pure contrary components will also be small. It is clear from Figure 3.8.8 that there
are just two basic possibilities: either the chord is near the center and the pure contrary component links it to its four- or eight-semitone transposition, or it is near the
edge and the line segment links it to itself.23 The situation is precisely analogous to
the two-dimensional case, except that here the contrary component connects majorthird-related (rather than tritone-related) chords. This fact has important musical
consequences, as we will shortly see.

23 Of course, it is trivially possible that the voice leading has no contrary component, and moves all
voices in parallel by the same amount.

91

theory

r fi

rst
)

Figure 3.8.7 To plot the purely contrary component of a voice leading in the triangular
cross section, reorder it (uniformly) so that the ﬁrst chord is in ascending order spanning
less than an octave, then transpose the chords (individually) so that they both start on C,
with the ﬁrst voice moving by zero semitones. One can then use the arrows to the left of
the ﬁgure to determine the path representing the voice leading. For example, to represent
(C, E, G)®(C, F, A) we need to raise the middle voice by one semitone, represented by
one-step diagonal NW motion; we then raise the third voice by two semitones, which
requires moving two units to the right. Combining these vectors gives us the path
representing the voice leading’s pure contrary component (center of ﬁgure). Contact with
a boundary exchanges the position of two voices: for example, (C, F, Fs)®(C, G, Fs) can
be represented by two diagonal steps to the NW from 056 (left side of ﬁgure). However, the
ﬁrst of these steps brings us to the boundary, which exchanges the position of the second
and third voices. Thus, instead of moving the middle voice up by semitone, we now have to
move the third voice up by semitone; this is represented by a one-step rightward motion.
Geometrically, it looks as if our arrow has reﬂected off the mirror boundary. Note that
we cannot represent this voice leading with a direct line from 056 to 067, since the voice
crossing requires that the line reﬂect off the mirror boundary: thus where the two arrows
047®057 and 057®059 can be combined into a single arrow, the two arrows 056®066
and 066®067 cannot.

wo

(lo

we

0[12][12]

008

009

es.
oic

e la

t tw

ov

rai
s

las
the

This boundary swaps the first two voices.

s.

01T

e
oic

007

ps
wa
ys
dar
oun

v
rd

006

03[12]
02E

02T

019

thi

005

018

017

nd

004

016

04[12]
03E

03T
029

028

05[12]

04E

04T

ta
firs

003

015

027

05E

039

038

the

014

026

06[12]

05T

049

048
037

06E

ps

002

036
025

024
013

047

07[12]

06T
059

wa

001

046

07E

07T

058

08[12]

ys

000

057

035

034

012

011

045

dar

023

056

08E

069

068

oun

le

idd
022

033

055

067

is b

em

044

066

09[12]

08T
079

078

0T[12]

09E

09T
089

088

077

0TE

0TT

099

0E[12]

Th

s
rai

st t

0EE

raise last

Th
is b

92

02[12]

01E
00T

01[12]
00E

00[12]

A Geometry of Chords
Figure 3.8.8 Efﬁcient pure contrary voice
leading between transpositionally related threenote chords. Chord A divides the octave nearly
evenly; it and its transpositions are near the
center of the space. Chords B and C have notes
that are clustered together, and are near the
boundary.

T8(A)
T4(A)

A
B

3.9

C

higher dimensional chord spaces

Attempting to visualize higher dimensional spaces is an exercise in diminishing
returns: while one might barely manage four dimensions, it becomes increasingly
difﬁcult to picture ﬁve, six, or more. Nevertheless, it will be useful in what follows to
have a rough understanding of the geometry of the higher dimensional chord spaces.
Accordingly, I will ask the reader’s indulgence as I try to describe the spaces representing four-note, ﬁve-note, and even larger chords.
We have seen that it takes a separate dimension to model each individual musical voice. Thus, it takes four dimensions to represent the state of a four-instrument
ensemble, ﬁve dimensions to represent the state of a ﬁve-instrument ensemble, and
so on. When we abstract away from order and octave, we ﬁnd that each of these spaces
is periodic, a higher dimensional piece of wallpaper consisting of many equivalent
copies of the same pattern or tile.
Figure 3.9.1 displays the tiles in the two-, three-, and four-dimensional cases.
The two-dimensional tile is our familiar Möbius strip, a rectangle whose left edge
is glued to its right with a half twist. For the sake of generality, however, it is useful to forget the term “rectangle,” and to imagine the space as a two-dimensional
prism—the shape that results when we drag the (one-dimensional) left edge horizontally rightward to form a two-dimensional ﬁgure. The resulting structure has
two “faces” (here, the left and right edges), which are one-dimensional line segments. Chords on the same vertical line sum to the same value; hence every chord
is on the same vertical line segment as its tritone transposition. As we drag the
left face horizontally rightward, we transpose each chord upward. We can obtain
new chords in this way until we have transposed by six semitones, at which point
the left and right faces contain the same chords. These two faces need to be glued
together with a “twist” that gives the space a circular structure: because of this
twist, we can eventually return to our starting point by moving perpendicular to
the face (§3.3).

93

94

theory
Figure 3.9.1
Chord space in
two, three, and
four dimensions.

The three-dimensional tile is also a prism, the shape that results from dragging the
bottom face, a triangle, vertically upward. The resulting structure again has two faces,
which are now two-dimensional triangles rather than one-dimensional line segments.
Each triangular face contains three-note chords summing to the same value, so that
every chord is on the same face as its major-third transposition. Dragging the bottom
triangle upward transposes each chord upward; we drag it until the chords have been
transposed by four semitones, at which point the top face contains the same chords as
the bottom. These two faces must then be glued together with a “twist” that matches
the appropriate chords—here, a 120° rotation. This “gluing” produces a triangular
doughnut and introduces a circular structure in to the space: once again, if we move
perpendicular to the triangle, we eventually return to where we started.
Figure 3.9.1c illustrates the four-dimensional shape that tiles the space of fournote chords. Readers will not be surprised to ﬁnd that it, too, is a prism. Here the
faces are tetrahedra, the three-dimensional analogues of triangles. Each tetrahedral
cross section contains pitch classes that sum to the same value. Consequently, if a

A Geometry of Chords

chord is on the cross section, then so is its minor third transposition.24 The four vertices of the tetrahedron contain quadruple unisons related by minor third—here, {C,
C, C, C}, {Ef, Ef, Ef, Ef}, {Fs, Fs, Fs, Fs} and {A, A, A, A}—while the chord at the
center divides the octave perfectly evenly and contains the pitch classes {C, Ef, Fs, A}.
To form the prism, drag the tetrahedron into the fourth dimension, represented by
dotted lines on Figure 3.9.1c, thereby transposing every chord upward. We can drag
it until its chords have been transposed by minor third, at which point the transposed tetrahedron contains the same chords as the initial one. These again need to be
attached by a “twist” that connects the appropriate chords and transforms the prism
into a kind of four-dimensional doughnut.
The general pattern should now be clear. In each dimension, chord space is an
n-dimensional prism, formed by dragging a “generalized triangle” through an additional dimension (Figure 3.9.2).25 The generalized triangle is the face of the prism,
containing chords summing to the same value. Consequently, each n-element chord
is on the same face as its transposition by 12/n semitones. (This is because transposing n notes by 12/n adds 12n/n = 12 to their sum, and in pitch-class arithmetic we
discard multiples of 12.) Dragging the face into the additional dimension transposes
each chord upward; it can be dragged until the chords have been transposed by 12/n
semitones, at which point it contains the same chords as those on the initial face. The
two duplicate faces are glued together with a “twist” that matches the appropriate
chords, introducing a circular structure and creating the higher dimensional analogue of a twisted doughnut.
Nonmathematical readers should not wrack their brains trying to picture these
spaces in too much detail. Instead, focus on the important structural features they
all share:
Figure 3.9.2 A simplex (or “generalized triangle”) is bounded
by n points, all connected by line segments. One-, two-, and
three-dimensional simplexes are line segments, triangles, and
tetrahedra, respectively.

24 Transposing a four-note chord by three semitones adds 3 + 3 + 3 + 3 = 0 to their sum, in pitch-class
arithmetic.
25 A generalized triangle, or “simplex,” is an n-dimensional ﬁgure enclosed by n + 1 points, all connected by lines. Thus, in one dimension, it is a line segment (two points connected by a line segment);
in two dimensions, it is a triangle (three points connected by line segments); in three dimensions, it is a
tetrahedron (four points connected by line segments); and so on. One can form an (n + 1)-dimensional
simplex by adding a single point to an n-dimensional simplex.

95

96

theory

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

In each space, points correspond to chords and line segments correspond
to voice leadings, with the length of the line segment representing the size
of the voice leading. Consequently, nearby chords can be linked by efﬁcient
voice leading, while distant chords cannot.
A chord’s “evenness” determines its distance from the center. Chords that
divide the octave precisely evenly are found at the very center of the space,
while nearly even chords are nearby. Chords whose notes are clustered
together are found near the boundary of the space, as far from the center as
possible.
Chord space is made up of “layers,” or cross sections, each containing chords
summing to the same value. There are n instances of every n-note chord
type in each layer. These can be obtained by repeatedly transposing by 12/n
semitones. The transpositions are arranged symmetrically around the center
of the cross section, with their distance from the center determined by the
chord’s evenness. The geometrical symmetries of the cross section relate the
different forms of each chord type.
Each cross section of the space is a generalized triangle. The boundaries
of the generalized triangle contain chords like {C, C, E, G}, which have
multiple copies of some pitch class.26
Nearly even chords can be linked to their transpositions by very efﬁcient voice
leading. An n-note chord is particularly close to its transposition by 12/n
semitones, since they are near the center of the same horizontal cross section.
Voice leading that remains within the layers represents pure contrary
motion in which the amount of ascending motion perfectly balances the
amount of descending motion. Moving perpendicular to these layers
corresponds to pure parallel motion, in which every note moves in the same
direction by the same amount. Any voice leading can be decomposed into
parallel and contrary components, as in high school vector analysis (§3.7).
The top and bottom “layers” of the prism are glued together in a twisted
fashion, endowing the space with a circular, doughnut-like structure. For
this reason, a voice leading in which every voice ascends by octave will be
represented by a line segment that passes through each cross section n
different times, moving through each of its transpositions before returning to
its starting point. The trajectory it follows will be a circle in the abstract sense.
The remaining boundaries of the ﬁgure—the ones that are not glued
together—act like mirrors. Voice leadings bounce off these mirrors, like
balls off of the bumpers of a pool table. “Clustered” chords near the edges
of the space can be linked to their untransposed forms by efﬁcient voice
leading, bouncing off nearby mirrors to return to their starting point.

26 The number of pitch classes in the chord determines which part of the boundary it inhabits: vertices
contain chords like {C, C, C}, with only one pitch class; edges contain chords like {C, C, G}, with two pitch
classes; faces contain chords like {C, C, E, G}, with three pitch classes; and so on (see Figure 3.8.5 for the
three-dimensional case).

A Geometry of Chords

Appendix B provides a more detailed mathematical description of the spaces, for
readers who are so inclined.

3.10

triads are from mars; seventh
chords are from venus

Musically, the most important consequence of all this geometry is the following:
since a nearly even n-note chord occupies the same cross section of the space as its
transposition by 12/n semitones, such chords can be linked by particularly efﬁcient
voice leading.27 Thus, nearly even two-note chords
Figure 3.10.1 Two-note chords
are very close to their six-semitone transpositions, are particularly close to their
nearly even three-note chords are very close their tritone transpositions; three-note
four- and eight- semitone transpositions, nearly chords are particularly close to
even four-note chords are very close to their three-, their major-third transpositions;
six-, and nine-semitone transpositions, and so on. and four-note chords are
particularly close to their minorThis is illustrated in Figures 3.10.1 and 3.10.2.
third and tritone transpositions.
Suppose, then, that a composer is interested
in exploiting efﬁcient voice leadings between two
major triads or two dominant seventh chords. Theoretically, we should expect an abundance of majorthird relations between the triads and minor-third
relations between the dominant sevenths. And
when we look at actual music, we see that this is indeed the case. Direct juxtapositions
of minor-third-related dominant seventh chords already occur in baroque and classical music, while direct juxtapositions of major-third-related seventh chords are very
rare; similarly, major-third-related triads sometimes occur across phrase boundaries,
as when V/vi moves directly to I, while there is no analogous convention associating
minor-third-related triads.28 Figure 3.10.3 indicates that this asymmetry also characterizes the more chromatic music of the nineteenth century. In Schubert, majorthird-related triads occur about 1.5 times more often than minor-third-related triads,
while minor-third-related dominant seventh chords occur about 14 times more often
than major-third-related dominant seventh chords.29 (In Chopin, major-third-related

27 Mathematically inclined readers will note that I am presupposing the Euclidean metric for simplicity. However, at least some of the statements made in this section are metric independent; furthermore,
reasonable voice-leading measures are all approximately consistent with each other. For more information,
see Hall and Tymoczko 2007.
28 Bach’s chorales contain a number of cross-phrase triadic juxtapositions, with major-third rootrelationships outnumbering minor-third relationships by almost 2:1. In Mozart’s piano sonatas, there are
several juxtapositions of minor-third-related dominant sevenths, but no major-third-related dominant
sevenths. Major-third-related major triads also occur several times, whereas minor-third-related major
triads are more rare and typically occur only in sequences with stepwise descending voice leading (§8.4).
29 The methodology here was crude but, hopefully, unbiased: I programmed a computer to look through
MIDI ﬁles for simultaneously sounding chords that were either triads or seventh chords. I then tallied up the
root progressions of each type. Note that since minor-third-related triads can be connected by reasonably
efﬁcient voice leading, we would still expect these progressions to appear periodically.

97

98

theory
Figure 3.10.2 A geometrical representation of the closeness between (a) tritone-related
perfect ﬁfths and (b) major-third-related triads. These ﬁgures show just a portion of the
relevant geometrical spaces, and connect chords by lines if they can be linked by singlesemitone voice leading.

major triads occur about 1.6 times more often than minor-third-related triads, and
minor-third-related dominant-seventh chords occur about 2.2 times more often than
major-third-related dominant sevenths.) This suggests that composers’ harmonic
choices are indeed guided by the voice-leading relationships we have been exploring.
To be sure, composers are not guided exclusively by voice-leading considerations, and
individual artistic preference no doubt plays a signiﬁcant role. Nevertheless, there is
clear evidence that Western musicians are sensitive to the relationships that are modeled by our geometrical spaces.
Figure 3.10.4 turns to a very different sort of music, analyzing the basic threechord progression of Nirvana’s “Heart-Shaped Box.” The ﬁrst two chords, A and F,

A Geometry of Chords
Figure 3.10.3 Nondiatonic chord progressions in a large number of pieces by Schubert
and Chopin. The leftmost column indicates root motion: thus “+1” indicates a progression
where the root moves upward by semitone, while “−3” refers to one where the root moves
downward by three semitones. The next two pairs of columns distinguish progressions
between two major triads and two dominant seventh chords. The boldface numbers show
that major triads are more likely to be connected by major third than by minor third, while
the reverse is true for dominant sevenths.

are pure triads related by major third.30 The ﬁnal D7 chord has four notes, retaining
the ﬁfth of the F major triad as the seventh of D. (Note that every chord contains
the note A, which appears as root, third, and ﬁfth in turn.) We can understand this
last voice leading as an incomplete manifestation of the efﬁcient voice leading
between F7 and D7 chords. This is not to say that Kurt Cobain necessarily conceived
it as such; rather, it is to say that the voice leading between the last two chords
is contained within a very familiar seventh-chord schema and exploits the same
musical facts that make the more familiar schema possible. From our point of view,
the interesting fact is that Cobain’s switch from triads to seventh chords goes hand
in hand with the switch from major-third motion to minor-third motion. There
are countless other examples of this phenomenon: for instance, the Beatles’ “Glass
Onion” juxtaposes major-third-related triads in the verse and minor-third-related
dominant sevenths in the chorus. Figure 3.10.5 presents a similar progression from
Schumann, which alternates between the “major-third system” of closely related
triads (represented geometrically by the cubic lattice of Figure 3.10.2b) and the
“minor-third system” of closely related seventh chords (to be discussed shortly).31
As we will see, a large amount of chromatic music can be understood in this way
(Figure 3.10.6).

30 Though not articulated by independent instruments, the voice leading is relatively clear.
31 Note that this progression is slightly more complicated insofar as it connects an F minor chord to the
following A7; nevertheless, this major-third root motion still permits efﬁcient voice leading.

99

100

theory

Of course, it is always possible to add a small
purely parallel component without drastically
increasing the size of a voice leading. So, for
example, starting with the pure contrary voice
leading (C, G)®(Cs, Fs), one can transpose the
second chord up by semitone to produce (C,
G)®(D, G), a relatively efﬁcient voice leading
between ﬁfth-related perfect ﬁfths. Applying the
same procedure to (E, Gs, B)®(Ef, Af, C) yields
(E, Gs, B)®(E, A, Cs) (Figure 3.10.7). Figure
3.10.8 identiﬁes, for chords with two to ﬁve
notes, the transpositions that can be obtained
by combining pure contrary motion with a
small parallel component. The perfect fourth
(or equivalently, the ﬁfth) is the only interval
appearing in every row of the table, which means that nearly even chords of any
size can be linked to their perfect-fourth transpositions by relatively efﬁcient voice
leading. (Here again we have an example of a familiar musical object being optimal
for multiple reasons: the perfect fourth is both extremely consonant while also being
a uniquely useful interval of transposition, allowing for efﬁcient voice leading in a
broad range of circumstances.32) This fact is of obvious relevance to tonal music,

Figure 3.10.4 Nirvana’s “HeartShaped Box” switches from majorthird root motion to minor-third
root motion when it switches from
triads to a seventh chord. The
upper three voices in the last voice
leading of (a) are contained within
the common four-voice voice
leading in (b).

Figure 3.10.5 (a) A voice leading from the “Chopin” movement in Schumann’s Carnaval.
Here, an F minor triad moves by major third to an A dominant seventh. (The bass, tenor,
and soprano give us a pair of major-third-related triads, with the alto moving semitonally
from the doubled third to the seventh.) The next progression moves the A7 chord to
an Ef7. Once again the shift from triads to seventh chords accompanies a shift in root
motion. (b) A comparison of Schumann’s “Chopin” and Nirvana’s “Heart-Shaped Box.” In
Schumann’s progression, the switch to seventh chords occurs at the second chord in the
passage: doubling the third of the F minor triad, he uses the semitonal motion Af®G to
create an A7 chord. In the Nirvana progression, the switch does not occur until the ﬁnal
chord, where the C of F major is held over to become the seventh of D7.

32 More precisely, the perfect fourth is very close to some interval contained within the interval cycle
that results when we divide the octave precisely evenly, no matter how many parts we divide it into.

A Geometry of Chords
Figure 3.10.6 Triads and
seventh chords in mm. 18–20 of
the ﬁrst movement of Schubert’s
Bf major Piano Sonata (a), mm.
14–15 of the third-movement
trio (b), the “Tarnhelm” motive
from mm. 37–39 of Scene III
of Wagner’s Das Rheingold
(c), mm. 11–12 of Mozart’s C
minor Fantasy, K. 475 (d), the
eighteenth-century “omnibus”
progression (e), and mm. 44–45
of Chopin’s Nocturne, Op. 27
No. 2 ( f ).

Figure 3.10.7 Adding a small parallel component (p) to a small purely contrary voice leading
(c) still produces an efﬁcient voice leading.

which exploits fourth-progressions between triads, seventh chords, ninth chords,
and diatonic scales.
One feature of Figure 3.10.8 deserves further comment. A ﬁve-note chord can be
linked by pure contrary motion to its 2.4, 4.8, 7.2, and 9.6 semitone transpositions.
Since none of these transpositions lie in twelve-tone equal temperament, any voice
leading between familiar transpositionally related ﬁve-note chords must have at least
some parallel component. If the purely contrary voice leading involves transposition

101

102

theory
Figure 3.10.8 The transpositions that permit pure contrary motion for chords of various
cardinalities. Nearby equal-tempered transpositions are also shown.

Cardinality

Pure Contrary
Motion

Nearby Equal-Tempered
Transpositions

2-note chords

6 semitones

perfect fourth

3-note chords

±4 semitones

minor third, perfect fourth

4-note chords

±3, 6 semitones

major second, major third, perfect
fourth

5-note chords

±2.4, ±4.8 semitones

perfect fourth

by 2.4 semitones, then the purely parallel component must be at least 0.4 semitones
large. However, if the purely contrary voice leading involves transposition by 4.8
semitones, then it is necessary to add only 0.2 semitones of pure parallel motion.
It follows that from a twelve-tone equal-tempered perspective, very even ﬁve-note
chords will seem to be closest to their ﬁve-semitone transpositions. (And indeed, the
pentatonic scale can be linked to its ﬁve-semitone transposition by single-semitone
voice leading.) In continuous pitch-class space, we would see that the pentatonic scale
is also quite close to its 2.4-semitone transposition, but this symmetry disappears
when we view music through a twelve-tone equal-tempered grid. Here again we see
that it is sometimes useful to adopt the continuous perspective, even when we are
primarily interested in equal-tempered music.
In later chapters, we will ﬁnd that these sorts of voice-leading relationships underwrite three major compositional practices. First, as discussed above, composers often
use maximally efﬁcient voice leading to move from one chord to another, creating an
abundance of major-third relations among triads and an abundance of minor-third
relationships among seventh chords. Second, composers often use maximally efﬁcient
voice leading to replace one chord with another, as when a jazz musician replaces a
dominant seventh chord with its tritone transposition (e.g. B7 replacing F7). Here, rather
than connecting two actually existing chords, efﬁcient voice leading is used to substitute
a surprising chord for one that we would otherwise expect; the jazz “tritone substitution” is the most familiar example of this practice, though Chapter 7 will uncover a
similar procedure (“third substitution”) in classical harmony. Finally, composers often
combine efﬁcient voice leading with small amounts of descending parallel motion, producing harmonic sequences where all voices slowly sink downward. In the triadic case,
this leads to sequences such as those in Figure 3.8.3, with roots moving by descending
minor second, ascending minor third, or ascending ﬁfth.33 In Chapter 8 we will study
their seventh-chord analogues in the music of Chopin and Wagner, and in Chapter 9 we
will observe Shostakovich and Reich applying the same procedure to seven-note scales.
The value of geometry lies in the way it provides a uniﬁed perspective on all of these

33 It is notable that the descending versions of these patterns are so much more common than their
ascending analogues; the asymmetry likely reﬂects a more general tendency for small intervals to descend
(Vos and Troost 1989).

A Geometry of Chords

seemingly disparate musical activities, helping us to see that they involve different ways
of exploiting the fundamental geometry of musical space.

3.11

voice-leading lattices

Obviously, the problem with higher dimensional chord spaces is that we can’t visualize them; since each individual musical voice requires its own dimension, we quickly
lose the ability to present musical information in a clear and intuitive manner. One
solution is to depict only the portion of the space directly relevant to our musical
needs. In this book we will typically be interested in voice-leading relationships
among nearly even chords belonging to familiar scales. Happily—and somewhat surprisingly—it turns out that there are simple three-dimensional lattices representing
all of the relevant musical relationships.34
There are two types of graph most directly relevant to our needs. The ﬁrst depicts
chords whose size (number of notes) exactly divides the size of the scale containing them. These can be used to represent nearly even two-, three-, four-, or six-note
chords in twelve-note chromatic space. (This is because two, three, four, and six all
divide twelve.) These lattices are circular “necklaces” of cubes of various dimensions,
each linked to its neighbors by shared vertices. The second kind of structure arises
when the number of notes in the chord is relatively prime to the number of notes in
the scale—which is to say that no positive integer other than one divides both numbers. Here the relevant voice-leading facts are represented by a necklace of cubes sharing a common face with their neighbors. This type of lattice can be used to represent
ﬁve- or seven-note chords in twelve-tone chromatic space, and chords of any size in
any seven-note scale.35
Figure 3.11.1 presents a pair of examples. The ﬁrst represents single-semitone
voice leadings among perfect ﬁfths and tritones. (Consult Figure 3.3.1 to see how
this ﬁgure sits in continuous space.) Each square contains two perfect ﬁfths and two
tritones, with tritones being common to adjacent squares. (The square on the right
edge shares a vertex with that on the left, forming a “circle of squares.”) As shown in
the ﬁgure, there are two possible paths from one shared vertex to the next, representing the two ways of sequentially raising or lowering the tritone’s notes.36 Contrast
this with Figure 3.11.1b, which depicts single-step voice leadings among thirds and

34 For our purposes a “lattice” is a graph whose vertices lie on a regular cubic grid, with vertices connected by edges only when they are adjacent on the grid. Strictly speaking, our graphs are only locally lattice-like, since they contain topological twists, but the term “lattice” is evocative and I will use it. Douthett
and Steinbach (1998) describe the ﬁrst class of lattices considered in this section, while Tymoczko (2004)
describes the second.
35 In principle, there is also a third category of lattices that results when the number of notes in the
chord shares a common divisor with the number of notes in the scale. Though these lattices are typically
not needed, you may enjoy exploring their structure.
36 For example, the two single-semitone displacements A®Bf and Ef®E will transform the tritone
{A, Ef} into {Bf, E}. If we ﬁrst raise A®Bf and then Ef®E, we move along the upper half of the leftmost
square on Figure 3.11.1a; while if we ﬁrst raise Ef®E and then A®Bf, we move along the lower half.

103

104

theory
Figure 3.11.1 The two fundamental kinds of discrete lattices. The ﬁrst is a circle of squares
linked by shared vertices, representing single-semitone voice leading among equal-tempered
tritones and perfect ﬁfths. The second is a circle of squares linked by common edges,
representing single-step voice leading among diatonic fourths and thirds.

fourths in the C diatonic scale. (In making this graph, I have represented diatonic
scale steps, such as C-D or E-F, as having equal size; Chapter 4 explores this idea in
detail.) Where the squares in the earlier ﬁgure are linked by a common vertex, those
in Figure 3.11.1b share a common edge. Here, each square contains three diatonic
fourths and one diatonic third: fourths zigzag through the center of the ﬁgure like
the stripe on Charlie Brown’s sweater, while thirds lie on the external vertices. Once
again, the voice leadings within each square represent different ways of ordering the
same pair of single-step motions: for example, to move from {E, A} to {F, B}, we could
either raise E to F and then A to B; or we could raise A to B and then E to F. The ﬁrst
path goes by way of {F, A} while the second moves through {E, B}.
One ﬁnds closely analogous structures in higher dimensions. For example, suppose we want to graph voice-leading relationships among nearly even three-note
chords in the chromatic scale. Since three evenly divides twelve, the lattice contains
three-dimensional cubes linked by a common vertex (Figure 3.11.2a). As we have
learned, the shared vertex is an augmented triad, with the edges of the cubes representing different ways that the augmented triad’s notes can be raised or lowered by
semitone: for instance, we can move from Cs augmented to C augmented by ﬁrst
lowering F, then Cs, then A; alternatively, we could ﬁrst lower A, then Cs, then F.
Each of these sequences traces out a different series of edges on the top cube of Figure
3.11.2a. (Note that the chords on a single cube draw their notes from two semitonally
adjacent augmented triads and hence belong to the same hexatonic scale.37) By contrast,
37 For example, the chords on the cube containing F, A, and Cs major all belong to the hexatonic scale
C-Cs-E-F-Gs-A, to be discussed in the next chapter.

A Geometry of Chords
Figure 3.11.2 (a) The cubic lattice at the center of three-note chromatic space. The shared
vertex is the augmented triad; the edges represent different ways of raising or lowering the
augmented triad’s notes by semitone. (b) The cubic lattice at the center of three-note diatonic
space. Here, the cubes share a face with their neighbors.

nearly even three-note diatonic triads are represented by a lattice of the second kind,
since three and seven have no common divisor. The resulting graph, shown in Figure
3.11.2b, consists of a series of stacked cubes, each sharing a face with its neighbors.
This graph is analogous to the linked squares of Figure 3.11.1b, though its structure
is somewhat more complex. We will return to it momentarily.
The ﬁrst type of lattice is relatively easy to understand. If the number of notes in the
chord exactly divides the number of notes in the scale, then the scale contains chords
that are perfectly even.38 These sit at the very center of (continuous) chord space and
form the vertices shared by the lattice’s adjacent cubes. The remaining edges on the lattice identify the various ways in which one can successively raise or lower each note of
this perfectly even chord.39 Thus the edges in Figure 3.11.1a show how one can succes-

38 Strictly speaking, this is true only when we measure distance using “scale steps” (discussed in
Chapter 4). However, in the familiar chromatic scale, scale-step distances are equivalent to log-frequency
distances. At the moment, the chromatic scale is our primary concern.
39 Since the chord has n notes, there are at ﬁrst n possible notes to lower; having lowered one note,
there are (n − 1) remaining possibilities, and so on. Geometrically, the various sequences of “lowerings”
outline an n-dimensional cube. To see this, note that one can construct an n-dimensional cube whose
vertices consist of all the points with individual coordinates that are either 0 or 1: in two dimensions, the

105

106

theory
Figure 3.11.3 (a) The lattice at the center of four-note chromatic space is a circle of fourdimensional cubes linked by a shared vertex. The shared vertex is the diminished seventh
chord. The labels “bFr” and “dFr” designate “French sixth” chords on D and B; these points
appear to lie close to each other on the interior of the cube, but this is an artifact of the
three-dimensional representation. (b) The edges of the four-dimensional cube represent the
different ways of raising or lowering the notes of the diminished seventh chord.

sively raise or lower the notes of the tritone by semitone, while those in Figure 3.11.2a
show how one can raise or lower the three notes of the augmented triad. Figure 3.11.3
illustrates the four-dimensional case. Here we have a series of four-dimensional cubes—
also known as “tesseracts”—linked to their neighbors by shared vertices. (Figure 3.11.3
projects this four-dimensional structure into what looks like three Euclidean dimensions, much as we can draw the outlines of a three-dimensional cube using a twodimensional piece of paper.40) As expected, the shared vertices are diminished seventh
chords, with the edges recording the various ways of sequentially raising or lowering
points (0, 0), (0, 1), (1, 0), and (1, 1); in three dimensions, the points (0, 0, 0), (0, 0, 1), (0, 1, 0), (1, 0, 0),
(1, 1, 0), (1, 0, 1), (0, 1, 1) and (1, 1, 1); and so on. The edges of the cube can be traced out by starting at
the point (1, 1, . . . , 1), and considering all the ways of successively “lowering” coordinates (changing them
from 1 to 0), until (0, 0, . . . , 0) is reached.
40 Actually, the illustration is two-dimensional, but our brains automatically construct a threedimensional scene. In a true four-dimensional representation any two intersecting lines in the tesseract
would form 90° angles, but in the three-dimensional projection this is not possible. Similarly, in four
dimensions the two “French Sixth” chords are far apart, whereas in three dimensions they seem close.

A Geometry of Chords

their notes. Chords on a single “tesseract” draw their notes from two semitonally adjacent diminished seventh chords, and hence belong to the same octatonic scale. Thus
chords on the hypercube containing F7, D7, B7, and Af7 all belong to the octatonic scale
D-Ef-F-Gf-Af-A-B-C. Readers may be relieved to learn that this is the most complicated lattice we will need to use in this book. Although an analogous (six-dimensional!)
structure represents nearly even six-note chromatic chords, its chords can typically be
interpreted as incomplete forms of familiar seven-note scales.
The second type of lattice appears when the size of the chord and the size of
the scale have no common divisor. In this case, the scale will not contain any perfectly even chords; instead, it will contain nearly even chords that form a near interval
cycle—that is, a circular sequence of notes all but one of which are linked by the same
interval, with the unusual interval being either one scale step larger or smaller than
the rest.41 Three examples are shown in Figure 3.11.4: two- and three-note chords in
diatonic space, and seven-note chords chromatic space. In each case, it is possible to
Figure 3.11.4 When the size of the chord and the size of the scale are relatively prime, the
maximally even chord is a “near interval cycle”—a circle of notes all but one of which are
linked by the same interval, with the unusual interval being just one step different from the
others. Because of this, the chords can be linked by a chain of single-step voice leadings.
(a) Diatonic ﬁfths linked by single-step voice leading. (b) Third-related diatonic triads linked
by single step voice leading. (c) Diatonic scales linked by single-semitone voice leading.

diatonic steps: 4

diatonic steps: 3

3

C

G

3

[C]

C

E

4

C

F

B

F

3
[C]

4
G

4

C

[B]

4

3

3

E

C

F

3

4

[C]

3

A

[C]

A

[C]

3

chromatic steps:
7
F

7
C

7

7
G

7

7
D

7

7
A

7

7
E

6
B

7

6

F

7

F

C

G

D

A

E

Bf

F

F

C

G

D

A

Ef

Bf

F

7

7

7

7

6

7

7

41 These scales were studied by Clough and Myerson (1985), Clough and Douthett (1991), and Erv
Wilson (in unpublished work).

107

108

theory
Figure 3.11.5 Single-step voice
leading links near interval cycles
into a circle, structurally analogous
to the familiar circle of ﬁfths. Here,
the circle of two-note diatonic ﬁfths,
each linked to its neighbors by
single-step motion.

Figure 3.11.6 A “generalized circle of ﬁfths” is near, but not exactly at, the center of chord
space. In (a), the circle of diatonic ﬁfths zigzags through the center of the Möbius strip. In
(b), the circle of diatonic triads zigzags three-dimensionally through the center of three-note
chord space.

shift the position of the unusual interval by moving a single note by just one scale
step. Consequently, these chords can be linked by a sequence of single-step voice
leadings somewhat analogous to the familiar circle of ﬁfths (Figure 3.11.5).42 This

42 Here I am considering the circle of ﬁfths to represent single-semitone voice leadings among diatonic
scales: (C, D, E, F, G, A, B)®(C, D, E, Fs, G, A, B)®(Cs, D, E, Fs, G, A, B)®. . . . Theorists sometimes consider the circle of ﬁfths to be a sequence of ﬁfth-related pitches, such as C®G®D® . . ., but this perspective is not germane to the current discussion.

A Geometry of Chords

“generalized circle of ﬁfths” will lie as close as possible to the center of chord space (at
least for chords belonging to that particular scale), but it will not be exactly at the
center (Figure 3.11.6).
Figure 3.11.7 arranges our circle of diatonic ﬁfths in a regular zigzag pattern.43
These diatonic ﬁfths are the most nearly even two-note chords in diatonic space. To
add the second-most even chords, we can rearrange the order of the voice leadings on the
central zigzag. For example, we move from {A, E} to {B, F} along the zigzag by way of
the sequence (A, E)®(B, E)®(B, F), ﬁrst raising A to B, and then E to F. But suppose
we were to reorder these two single-step shifts: raising the E in {A, E} produces the
diatonic third {A, F}, while raising the A in {A, F} brings us to {B, F}. Geometrically,
these reordered voice leadings complete the square on the left side of Figure 3.11.7b.
By continuing this process we can generate all the single-step voice leadings among
diatonic thirds and fourths, thus reconstructing the lattice in Figure 3.11.1b.
Remarkably, this same process of “rearranging” is sufﬁcient to construct all the
voice-leading lattices of the second type. By way of illustration, let’s generate a voiceleading graph representing nearly even seven-note chords in chromatic space. The
diatonic circle of ﬁfths is shown in Figure 3.11.8a: here we move from C diatonic to
G diatonic by the semitonal shift F®Fs, from G diatonic to D diatonic by the shift
C®Cs, and so on. This circle lies as close as we can get to the center of seven-note
Figure 3.11.7 (a) The two-note diatonic “circle of ﬁfths,” represented as a regular zigzag.
(b) To include diatonic thirds, simply reverse the order of every pair of voice leadings, for
instance by letting E®F operate on the ﬁfth {A, E}. This converts the zigzag into a series of
squares each sharing a common edge.

43 By regularizing the zigzag, we are again making the decision to treat all “scale steps” as having the
same size.

109

110

theory

chord space, given twelve-tone equal temperament. Figure 3.11.8b adds the secondmost even seven-note chord by rearranging adjacent voice leadings as described in the
previous paragraph: C®Cs takes C diatonic to the G “acoustic scale” (or D melodic
minor ascending) while F®Fs takes G acoustic to D diatonic. (Note that the resulting
graph is two-dimensional, even though seven-note chords live in seven dimensions!)
We can even create a three-dimensional version of the graph by scrambling the order
of three successive voice leadings on the diatonic circle of ﬁfths. Here we begin with
a three-dimensional zigzag that moves alternately up, right, and into the paper. We
then apply all six reorderings of three adjacent voice leadings to a generate a cube:
for instance, the scales on the lower left cube in Figure 3.11.9 result from applying
to C diatonic the six different orderings of F®Fs, C®Cs, and G®Gs. (Note that
F®Fs is always represented by a vertical line, while C®Cs is always horizontal, and
G®Gs always moves into the paper.) The resulting three-dimensional lattice, which
describes voice-leading relationships among the four most even twelve-tone equaltempered chords in seven-dimensional space, is structurally analogous to the graph
of three-note diatonic triads shown in Figure 3.11.2b. Here the circle of ﬁfths zigzags
three-dimensionally through the center of the space, much as the circle of thirds zigzagged through the two-dimensional Figure 3.11.8.44

Figure 3.11.8 (a) The familiar circle of ﬁfths connects ﬁfth-related diatonic scales by singlesemitone voice leading. (b) To include the second-most even ﬁve-note chords scramble the
order of adjacent voice leadings, for instance by letting C®Cs operate on C diatonic before
F®Fs does.

44 In principle, we could continue this process by adding a fourth or even ﬁfth dimension to the graph,
thus extending the lattice so that it covers more and more of seven-dimensional chord space.

A Geometry of Chords
Figure 3.11.9 We can extend the scale lattice to three dimensions. The result depicts singlesemitone voice leading among the four most even seven-note chromatic chords. We will
discuss these scales in the next chapter.

Again, the key point is that the lattices in our second category—representing
objects as diverse as diatonic seventh chords, octatonic triads, and familiar sevennote scales—are all structurally similar. At their center is a generalized circle of ﬁfths
that zigzags through two, three, or more dimensions. These chords are near interval
cycles linked by a chain of single-semitone voice leadings. The rest of the lattice is
generated by rearranging its voice leadings: for a two-dimensional graph, begin with
a two-dimensional zigzag and switch the order of each pair of adjacent voice leadings,
producing a sequence of squares sharing a common edge (as in Figures 3.11.7 and
3.11.8b); for a three-dimensional graph, begin with a three-dimensional zigzag (up,
right, in) and scramble the order of every three consecutive voice leadings, producing
a series of stacked cubes sharing a common face (as in Figure 3.11.9). This process of
“scrambling” adds successively less even chords to the lattice, extending it farther and
farther from the center of chord space. (Thus, where the dimension of the ﬁrst kind
of graph is controlled by the size of the chords we want to represent, the dimension
of this second kind of graph is controlled by the number of distinct chord types we
are interested in.) We will return to these structures throughout the book, using the
“scale lattice” to represent voice leadings among familiar seven-note scales and using
the three-note diatonic lattice to represent familiar classical voice-leading patterns.
Music theorists tend to take it for granted that we can use discrete lattices to represent voice-leading relationships, in large part because these discrete structures preceded the more comprehensive geometrical spaces we have discussed in this chapter.
But on reﬂection, it is actually quite remarkable that (say) the one-dimensional circle

111

112

theory

of ﬁfths can faithfully represent voice-leading relationships among seven-note diatonic
scales. After all, diatonic scales are seven-note objects inhabiting a seven-dimensional
space, and we have no reason to expect that six of these dimensions would turn out to
be irrelevant. And yet it turns out that for most practical purposes we can make do by
representing diatonic voice leadings on the familiar circle of ﬁfths. This suggests that
the circle of ﬁfths is quite a special structure which lies within seven-note chord space
in a very particular way. Other lattices are not special in this way and do not accurately
model voice-leading distances, even though they might appear to do so. In general,
it is extremely difﬁcult to distinguish “faithful” lattices (such as the circle of ﬁfths)
from unfaithful lattices (such as the familiar Tonnetz). To understand these structures
in a deep and principled way, we must reﬂect on how they are embedded within the
continuous spaces described here. Those of you who want to explore this issue further should consult Appendix C. Those who are more interested in music analysis can
instead focus on internalizing the two types of lattice described in this section. The
important point is that it is typically sufﬁcient to understand the discrete lattices, and
to be able to construct the graph germane to a particular musical situation.

3.12

two musical geometries

We have now developed two geometrical representations of the same musical facts—
the circular pitch-class space of Chapter 2 and the higher dimensional spaces discussed in this chapter. These two representations are complementary, in the sense
that relationships that are difﬁcult to understand in one are often easier to understand in the other. Let’s conclude by considering some of the strengths and weaknesses of the two models.
In some ways, the circular space of Chapter 2 is simpler and more convenient
than its higher dimensional counterparts. In this chapter we’ve created individual
spaces for chords of various sizes: the space of two-note chords is two-dimensional, the space of three-note chords is three-dimensional, and so on. But there is
no analogous description of the space of all chords.45 Furthermore, it can be very
difﬁcult to visualize relationships among larger chords, since a new dimension is
required for each additional voice. By contrast, the circular representation uses a
single circle to depict chords of any size, and there is no sense that two-note chords
and three-note chords occupy fundamentally different worlds. Nor are there any
special problems associated with large chords, as we can always add more points
to the circle.
Moreover, the spaces discussed in this chapter do not provide a natural way to represent the similarity between chords with the same pitch-class content but different
“doublings.” For example, the collections {C, E, E, G} and {C, E, G, G} are repre-

45 We can actually construct these spaces, but they are inﬁnite-dimensional and almost impossible to
visualize. Furthermore, distance in the resulting spaces does not accurately represent voice-leading size (see
Callender, Quinn, and Tymoczko 2008).

A Geometry of Chords
Figure 3.12.1 Two collections of paths linking the points {C, E, G} and {D, F, A}. On the
left, the three-voice voice leading (C, E, G)®(D, F, A); on the right, the four-voice
(C, C, E, G)®(F, A, D, F).

sented by widely separated points in four-note chord space, yet they are musically
quite similar; ordinarily, both would be considered C major chords. This problem is
again ameliorated in the circular representation, which does not require us to distinguish the number of times each note appears: the chords {C, G}, {C, C, G} can both
be modeled using the same two points on the circle, C and G. Voice leadings with
“doublings” can be represented as different collections of paths between the same sets
of points. Thus Figure 3.12.1 models the voice leadings (C, E, G)®(D, F, A) and (C, C,
E, G)®(F, A, D, F) as two different ways to link the same conﬁgurations of black and
gray points on the circle. Once again, the circular model seems more ﬂexible than the
higher dimensional alternative.
The problem with the circle, however, is that it is easy to use but hard to understand. One could stare at circular pitch-class space for a long time without ever realizing that voice leadings can be decomposed into purely parallel and purely contrary
components. And important voice-leading relationships can sometimes be hard to
see. (Quick: which of its transpositions is the chord in Figure 3.12.2 closest to? Now
look at Figure 3.11.8 and ask yourself the same question.) Nor does circular space
make manifest structural relations such as those we uncovered in the Allelujia Justus
et Palma or the Brahms C minor Piano Quartet. So at least in some cases, the circular
model will obscure important features of musical structure.
By contrast, higher dimensional chord spaces provide a powerful set of visual
tools for thinking about music. We can describe the process of musical abstraction—
the ignoring of octave and order information—as a matter of concentrating on a
single “tile” of musical wallpaper. Abstract concepts like “individual T-relatedness”
(or even “scalar transposition”) can be translated into concrete visuospatial terms.

113

114

theory
Figure 3.12.2 In circular pitch-class space, it is
not immediately obvious which of this chord’s
transpositions it is closest to.

Plotting music in the spaces can yield insight into its structure (§3.5). And though
the higher dimensional spaces are unwieldy, lattices such as those in §3.11 can be used
to convey a large amount of musical information very quickly, mapping a wealth of
compositional possibilities in a clear and extremely efﬁcient manner. To use such lattices is to exploit the higher dimensional chord spaces described in this chapter, even
if we do not explicitly represent the whole space from which they are drawn.
In all of these ways, then, the higher dimensional spaces provide useful complements to the simpler, circular model of Chapter 2. Ultimately, a deep understanding
of music likely requires ﬂuency with both models. (As the physicist Richard Feynman
once put it, “every theoretical physicist who is any good knows six or seven different
theoretical representations for exactly the same physics.”46) By learning multiple ways
to represent the same music, we can develop ﬂexibility of mind and deepen our grasp
of the underlying structures—even if, in the end, we prefer one representation to
another. Readers who do not share my aesthetic appreciation for the higher dimensional chord spaces may therefore still be able to appreciate them as part of a program
of music-theoretical calisthenics. In stretching our minds to understand these exotic
structures, we will surely strengthen our appreciation for the richness latent in ordinary musical notation.

3.13

study guide

Readers who want to improve their understanding of musical geometry should practice three basic skills. First, representing voice leadings on the two-note Möbius strip
of Figure 3.3.1. Second, representing single chords, as well as the pure contrary component of three-note voice leadings, on Figure 3.8.6. (It may also be useful to try
representing pure contrary two-note voice leadings on Figure 3.7.2a.) And third, constructing the lattices describing voice-leading relationships among musically interesting objects—for instance, the most even two-note chords in the pentatonic and

46 Feynman 1994, p. 162.

A Geometry of Chords

whole-tone scales, the most even three-note chords in the diatonic and whole-tone
scales, the most even four-note chords in the diatonic and octatonic scales, and the
most even ﬁve-note chords in the chromatic scale. (In constructing these lattices, use
the various graphs in this chapter as guides, and consider the scale step to be a unit of
distance.) After practicing these particular tasks, the more general geometrical principles should start to become clear. It may also be helpful to read the chapter once,
spend some time with the questions in Appendix F (perhaps augmented by the more
detailed discussion in Appendix B), and then return to the chapter a second time,
repeating as necessary. In the end, passive reading is no substitute for a little bit of
active, hands-on exploration. Just as nobody will ever learn to play the piano simply
by reading about it, nobody will learn geometry unless they pick up a pencil and start
working through some exercises.
Readers who are hungry to explore analytical applications can turn directly to
Chapter 8, which is concerned with chromatic voice leading. Chapter 9 also uses the
geometry of seven-dimensional scale space to investigate twentieth-century music,
though it should be read after Chapter 4. The geometrical spaces described in this
chapter also appear in Chapter 6, where they provide a framework for retelling
the history of Western music. However, this chapter is probably best read after the
remaining theoretical material in Part I.

115

chapter 4

Scales
Now we’re ready to incorporate scales into our developing theoretical apparatus. We’ll
begin by modeling scales as “musical rulers” that allow us to measure distances in
pitch and pitch-class space. We’ll then investigate a number of familiar scales, including the pentatonic, diatonic, chromatic, and melodic minor. This leads to a discussion
of the relation between modulation and voice leading. Finally, we investigate scalar
and interscalar transpositions—concepts that are useful not just for understanding
scalar music, but also for understanding voice leading more generally. The upshot is
that there is an interesting duality, or complementarity, between chord and scale. Not
only can chordal concepts (e.g. voice leading) help us understand scalar processes
(e.g. modulation), but the reverse is also true; concepts like scalar transposition provide useful tools for understanding relationships between chords.1

4.1

a scale is a ruler

Intuitively, the opening of The Sound of Music’s “Do, Re, Mi” (Figure 4.1.1) involves
three repetitions of the same musical pattern: when composing each phrase, Richard
Rogers simply “did the same thing” at different pitch levels. (This, of course, is part
of the song’s cheery didacticism—it’s supposed to teach kids music.) But we are hard
pressed to describe this sense of sameness using the ideas developed so far. From the
standpoint of Chapter 2, (C, D, E) and (D, E, F) are fundamentally different objects,
since they are not related by transposition, inversion, or any other combination of
OPTIC symmetries.
The difﬁculty, of course, is that we are thinking chromatically rather than diatonically. Instead of describing F as being one semitone above E, we should describe
it as being one scale step above E. Once we start to think diatonically we realize that
each phrase begins with two ascending scale steps, with the entire pattern moving up
by step at each repetition. The moral is that a scale provides us with an alternative
measure of musical distance, and that we must be careful to choose the right distance
metric for the job. In principle, any collection of pitches can be a scale: a scale’s notes
do not have to be very close to one another, nor are they required to repeat after every

1 The ideas in this chapter are based on Tymoczko 2004 and 2008b.

Scales
Figure 4.1.1 The opening notes
of the ﬁrst phrases of “Do, Re,
Mi,” interpreted chromatically
and diatonically. The numbers
represent intervals as measured
relative to the two scales.

octave, nor is it necessary that scales have “ﬁrst” or “tonic” notes (Figure 4.1.2). All the
scale needs to do is to tell us how to move up and down by 1 unit, or scale step.2
Octave-repeating scales, which contain each of their pitches in every possible
octave, can be represented as points in circular pitch-class space.3 When depicting
them geometrically we can choose whether the visual layout should reﬂect chromatic
or scalar distance. (Note: throughout this chapter, the term “chromatic” refers to the
continuous, log-frequency measure of §2.1, rather than to distances along some chromatic scale.4) For example, Figure 4.1.3a uses chromatic distance, representing C and
D as farther apart than E and F, while Figure 4.1.3b uses scalar distances, placing
the seven notes around the circle so that steps all appear to be the same size. We
can do something similar even when working with the higher dimensional chord
spaces of the previous chapter. For example, Figure 4.1.4a draws the two-note Möbius
strip, labeling only the dyads in the C diatonic scale. Points are connected by lines
when they can be linked by voice leading in which both voices move by diatonic step:

Figure 4.1.2 The “Do, Re, Mi”
pattern in other scales.

2 Clough and Meyerson (1985) use the term “diatonic length” to refer to the scale-speciﬁc measure of
musical distance.
3 Non-octave-repeating scales, though musically quite interesting, occur only sporadically in Western
music; we will not discuss them here.
4 Only in equal temperaments do scale distances correspond to log-frequency distances.

117

118

theory

the roughly horizontal lines represent parallel motion within the scale; the roughly
vertical lines represent contrary motion within the scale. The irregularity of the
resulting grid reﬂects the fact that the scale’s steps are not all the same chromatic
size. Figure 4.1.4b redraws the graph using scalar distance, so that the grid is perfectly
regular and all scale steps appear to be equally large.5
Figure 4.1.3 An octave-repeating scale is a circular arrangement of pitch classes. It can be
drawn either using chromatic distance (a) or scalar distance (b).

Figure 4.1.4 Two-dimensional chord space, drawn using chromatic distance (a) and scalar
distance (b). Only the white notes are labeled.

5 You may ﬁnd it interesting to draw lines representing single-step voice leading among perfect ﬁfths
and major thirds; this produces the discrete lattice in Figure 3.11.1b.

Scales

To my eye, Figure 4.1.4a has a three-dimensional quality, resembling a crumpled
piece of paper or an aerial view of a hilly city, such as San Francisco. This impression of three-dimensionality testiﬁes to the way our visual system has evolved to
manipulate multiple kinds of distance. When we look down at San Francisco, we
need to infer the intrinsic length of the city blocks from their apparent length on
our retinas. Intrinsically the blocks are all (roughly) equal, since San Francisco is a
grid city, but the blocks appear different, since some travel uphill. (When seen from
above, these uphill blocks look shorter, as we lose the vertical dimension.) These two
visual distances are closely analogous to the two musical distances we have been discussing. Just as the hot air balloonist needs to juggle multiple visual distances when
looking down at San Francisco, so too does the musician need to realize that the line
segments in Figure 4.1.4a have the same diatonic length, but different chromatic
sizes. Remarkably, all of this is encapsulated in the crumpled appearance of Figure
4.1.4a—demonstrating once again that geometry can help us understand abstract
music-theoretical relationships.

4.2

scale degrees, scalar
transposition, and scalar
inversion

Since a scale provides a measure of musical distance, it also deﬁnes scale-speciﬁc
notions of transposition, inversion, chord type, and set class. These allow us to adapt
the ideas of the previous chapters to our new scalar perspective.
We begin by assigning numbers to the notes in the scale—arbitrarily selecting
some note as scale degree 1, labeling the note immediately above it scale degree 2,
the note two steps above it scale degree 3, and so on (Figure 4.2.1). (The choice of a
ﬁrst scale degree is a mere notational convenience and does not imply that this note
is more signiﬁcant than the others.) Scale degree numbers are analogous to numerical pitch-class labels, with one trivial difference: while music theorists label pitch
classes starting from zero, they label scale degrees starting from one.6 Note that while
scale degree numbers are dependent on the arbitrary choice of a ﬁrst scale degree,
scalar distances are not—in C diatonic, for instance, the scalar distance between C
and D is always one scale step, no matter what the ﬁrst scale degree happens to be.
Musicians refer to these distances in a somewhat confusing way, using the terms “a
second,” “a third,” and “a fourth” to refer to scalar distances of one, two, and three
steps, respectively.
Transposition and inversion are the two distance-preserving operations in chromatic space. We can deﬁne new operations of scalar transposition and scalar inversion
that preserve scalar distances. To transpose relative to a scale, simply add a constant
to each scale degree (Figure 4.2.2). (Here we use “scale degree arithmetic”—for an
6 It would be possible to bring the two conventions in line, for instance, by labeling scale degrees starting from zero. This would make scale degree labels formally identical to pitch-class labels.

119

120

theory

scale degree:
1
scalar
distance:

2

1

3

4

5

6

7

Figure 4.2.1 Scale degrees and
scalar distances. A scalar distance
of one step is called a “second,” a
distance of two steps is “a third,” and
so on.

2

n-note scale, we add or subtract n until the result lies between 1 and n, inclusive.7) To
invert relative to a scale, choose a ﬁxed point that will remain unaffected by the inversion. Any note x scale steps above the ﬁxed point gets sent to the note x scale steps
below the ﬁxed point, and vice versa. Scalar inversion can be represented algebraically
by subtraction from a constant value: in C major, we invert (C, D, F) around the ﬁxed
point E by subtracting each scale degree from 6, transforming 1, 2, 4 into 5, 4, 2, or (G,
F, D).8 The mathematics is identical to that in §2.2, only using scale degree numbers
rather than chromatic pitch-class labels.
Relative to a scale, two chords belong to the same chord type (transpositional set
class) if they are related by scalar transposition. Thus, relative to C harmonic minor,
the chords {B, D, F} and {C, Ef, G} are both “triads,” and hence transpositionally
related, even though one is diminished and the other is minor (Figure 4.2.3). Relative
to C harmonic minor, {Af, B, Ef} is not a triad, because Af and B are only one scale
step apart. (Chromatically, of course, it is an Af-minor triad and is transpositionally
related to C minor.) This shows that the same chords can be transpositionally related
relative to one scale, but not another.9 Scalar “set classes” can be deﬁned in the obvious way, as groups of chords related either by scalar transposition or scalar inversion.
Thus {C, D, F} and {D, F, G} belong to the same set class relative to C harmonic minor,
because they are related by scalar inversion around Ef.
Figure 4.2.2 (a) To transpose up by three scale steps, add 3 to each scale degree number. (b)
To invert around E (scale degree 3), subtract each scale degree number from 6 (= 3 × 2). In
both cases, use “scale degree arithmetic,” adding or subtracting 7 until the result lies between
1 and 7.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7
C D E F G A B

F G A B C D E
4 5 6 7 1 2 3

7
B

1
C

2
D

3
E

4
F

5
G

6
A

7 To transpose (F, G, A) up by three steps in the C diatonic scale, add 3 to (4, 5, 6) obtaining (7, 8, 9).
Then subtract 7 from any numbers larger than 7, producing (7, 1, 2).
8 To invert around ﬁxed point x, one subtracts each scale degree from 2x.
9 In a scalar context, letter names often indicate distance. Thus, {Af, B, Ef} has a step while {C, Ef, G}
does not.

Scales
Figure 4.2.3 Relative to the C harmonic minor
scale, these chords all belong to the same
transpositional set class, and are therefore triads.
{Af, B, Ef} is not a member of this set class, and is
not a triad, even though it is related to {C, Ef, G}
by chromatic transposition.

It is even possible to assign scale degree numbers to notes that are not in the scale.
Relative to C diatonic, the note Cs can be considered scale degree 1.5, since it lies halfway between scale degrees 1 and 2 (Figure 4.1.3). Similarly, Eμ (E quarter-tone sharp)
can be considered scale degree 3.5, since it is halfway between scale degrees 3 and 4. It
follows that scalar transposition and inversion can act on notes outside the scale! For
example, we can shift (C, D, E) up by half a scale step to produce (Cs, Ds, Eμ), or we
can invert (C, D, Ds) around Ds to produce (F, E, Ds).10 Proceeding in this way, we
can apply scalar transposition and inversion completely promiscuously—shifting any
collection of notes by any fraction of a scale step.
This suggests the perverse musical strategy of writing music that uses the C diatonic scale to measure musical distance, while not privileging its notes in any way.
For example, Figure 4.2.4 repeatedly transposes the C major triad by one and a half
scale steps, producing {Ef, Gf, Bf}, {F, A, C} and {Gs, Bμ, Ds}.11 The resulting music
is guided by the diatonic scale without emphasizing the white notes themselves. A
brilliant music theorist, gifted with extremely sharp ears and a somewhat demented
musical imagination, might even be able to discern the presence of the scale from the
deformations it introduces as chords move through musical space. I stress that I am
not recommending this as a practical possibility; my point is simply that a musical
scale is very similar to what mathematicians call a metric, or a method of measuring
distance. In principle, a scale can function in this way even in highly chromatic contexts such as Figure 4.2.4. This is just to repeat the point that a scale need not also be
a macroharmony.

Figure 4.2.4 This music
uses the C major scale
to measure distance,
while also containing
notes foreign to the scale
(compare Figure 4.1.1).

10 Inversion around a point halfway between two scale degrees sends scale tones to scale tones. Here,
for example, C and D get sent to F and E.
11 Gf is 1.5 scale steps above E, since it is halfway between F and G. Similarly, Bμ is 1.5 scale steps above
A, since it is halfway between B and C. Note that we are using the log-frequency metric to measure fractions
of a scale step (§2.1).

121

122

theory

4.3

evenness and scalar transposition

Listeners are typically aware of both scalar and log-frequency distance at the same
time. We know that (D, E, F) is in some sense “the same” as (C, D, E), but we also
know that (E, F) is different from (D, E). Ordinary musical terminology adopts this
twofold perspective, asserting that (E, F) and (D, E) are both “seconds” (one-step
intervals), while adding the qualiﬁcation that the ﬁrst is “minor” and the second
is “major.”12 Scalar music is interesting precisely because of this doubleness. When
moving musical patterns along a scale, composers inevitably transform their material
in subtle ways, creating a pleasing mixture of identity and difference.
For scalar music to be successful, these induced variations must be small—otherwise, listeners would not be able to treat (D, E, F) as being essentially similar to (C, D,
E). Figure 4.3.1a presents an example of a scale that fails spectacularly in this regard.
Scalar transposition transforms (C, Cs, D) (analogous to “Do, a deer”) into (Cs,
D, Bf) (“Re, a . . . drop?!!?!?”), creating an eight-semitone step that sounds nothing
whatsoever like the one-semitone step between C and Cs. By contrast, Figure 4.3.1b
presents a relatively even three-note scale, in which scalar transposition is completely
successful and gestures retain their shape as they are transposed. Such passages are
common in Western music, demonstrating that scalar terminology can be useful even
when we are investigating objects that are not traditionally considered to be scales.
Clearly, scalar transposition will be precisely equal to chromatic transposition
when the scale’s notes are distributed perfectly evenly in pitch-class space—as in
the case of the familiar whole-tone scale. When the scale is nearly even, then the
two forms of transposition will be nearly but not exactly the same. In some ways
this latter situation is preferable: scalar transposition along a perfectly even scale
does not introduce any variations into the music and can become boring rather
quickly. A bit of unevenness therefore adds musical interest by introducing a degree
of variation. Interestingly, we can also make an analogous point about chords. When
a chord divides the octave perfectly evenly, efﬁcient voice leading typically involves
parallel motion in all voices and does not create the effect of independent melodic

Figure 4.3.1 (a) An uneven scale, in which the step between D and Bf is much larger than
the others. (b) A small but nearly even scale, containing only the notes {C, E, G}.

12 “Major” and “minor” here mean “big” and “little,” as in Ursa major and Ursa minor; they do not refer
to the major and minor tonalities.

Scales
Figure 4.3.2 (a) Chords that divide the octave completely evenly can be connected to their
transpositions by efﬁcient but parallel voice leading. (b) Slightly uneven chords can be
connected to their transpositions by voice leading in which the voices move by different
distances, creating the sense of counterpoint. (c) Along a completely even scale, scalar
transposition introduces no variation into music. (d) A small amount of unevenness creates
slight amounts of variation, which can often be desirable.

lines (Figure 4.3.2). A little bit of unevenness is preferable here as well, allowing us
to escape parallelism by causing the voices to move unequally. We might therefore
say that both scales and chords are subject to the Goldilocks Principle—not too much
evenness, because that would be boring, and not too little, because that would lead
to musical disorder.
Near evenness therefore plays at least three fundamentally different roles in musical life: the nearly even collections can be linked to their transpositions by efﬁcient
voice leading, they include the acoustically consonant chords, and they also allow
for scalar transpositions that introduce moderate but not overwhelming amounts of
variation into musical textures. It is somewhat remarkable that these three separate
considerations all point in the same musical direction. Intuitively, one would think
that the requirements for constructing contrapuntal music had nothing in common
with the requirements for constructing effective scales, and this in turn might lead
to the expectation that composers had an enormous amount of freedom in creating
alternative musical languages. The overdetermination of Western chords and scales
leads to the very opposite conclusion. For insofar as composers are interested in harmonic consistency, acoustic consonance, or scalar transposition, they will necessarily
ﬁnd themselves gravitating toward the same familiar musical objects.

4.4

constructing common scales

Since scales typically function as macroharmonies, tonal composers have reason to
be interested in scales containing many consonant intervals. And since the octave
is the most consonant of the intervals, composers have reason to use scales that are
maximally saturated with octaves—that is, scales in which each note has an octave
both above it and below it. But this, of course, is just to say that the scale is octave
repeating. Octave-repeating scales are therefore overdetermined in their own modest
way: besides being easy to use and remember, they also contain as many octaves as
they possibly can.

123

124

theory

The second-most consonant interval, the acoustically pure perfect ﬁfth, is just a
hair’s breadth larger than its familiar equal-tempered cousin. Suppose you would like to
construct an octave-repeating scale that is maximally saturated with acoustically pure
ﬁfths—that is, you would like as many notes as possible to have ﬁfths both above them
and below them. It has been known for thousands of years that a ﬁnite scale can never
have pure ﬁfths above and below each of its notes; the best one can do is construct scales
in which all but two notes have this property—in other words, “stacks of ﬁfths” such
as those in Figure 4.4.1. If the scale divides the octave nearly evenly, then the ﬁnal note
of the stack is nearly a perfect ﬁfth away from the initial note.13 Figure 4.4.1 identiﬁes
three salient possibilities: a stack of ﬁve perfect ﬁfths falls approximately 0.9 semitones
short of three octaves, a stack of seven perfect ﬁfths exceeds four octaves by about 1.137
semitones, and a stack of twelve perfect ﬁfths overshoots seven octaves by nearly 0.25
semitones.14 We can therefore build nearly even scales containing four, six, and eleven
perfect ﬁfths, otherwise known as the pentatonic, diatonic, and chromatic scales. The
pentatonic has a “near ﬁfth” approximately equal to a minor sixth; the diatonic has a
“near ﬁfth” approximately equal to a tritone; and the chromatic scale has a “near ﬁfth”
a bit smaller than the perfect ﬁfth. Different tuning systems will assign slightly different sizes to these intervals, depending on how exactly they compromise between the
demands of evenness and acoustic purity. We will return to this issue momentarily.
Let us now play the same game with thirds. Suppose you would like to create a
scale maximally saturated with acoustically pure major or minor thirds. Figure 4.4.2
shows that three acoustically pure major thirds, or four acoustically pure minor
thirds, are about half a semitone away from an octave. To extend these stacks further
would create very small melodic intervals that would be awkward to sing and play,
and this is rarely done in Western music. Instead, musicians consider the cycle C-EGs-C to be closed, containing two pure thirds (C-E and E-Gs) and one “near major
Figure 4.4.1 (a) A stack of ﬁve perfect ﬁfths falls 0.9 semitones short of three octaves. (b) A
stack of seven perfect ﬁfths overshoots four octaves by 1.14 semitones. (c) A stack of twelve
ﬁfths overshoots seven octaves by 0.25 semitones. (Note that the Bs is not quite the same as
Cn.) By eliminating the top note of each stack we can form a relatively even scale with one
“imperfect ﬁfth.”

13 Carey and Clampitt (1989) unpack the term “almost” using the mathematics of continued fractions.
14 Beyond twelve notes, a stack of ﬁfths has microtonal intervals about a quarter of a semitone large,
which are very difﬁcult to sing. We will not consider these scales here.

Scales
Figure 4.4.2 (a) A stack of four major thirds falls 0.41
semitones short of an octave. (b) A stack of ﬁve minor
thirds overshoots an octave by 0.62 semitones.

third” (Gs-C). (Modern equal temperament of course regularizes the thirds so that
they are exactly the same size, with the resulting augmented triad dividing the octave
into three precisely even parts.) Similarly, four minor thirds are considered to form
a closed cycle A-C-Ef-Gf-A, consisting of three pure minor thirds and one “near
minor third”—or in equal temperament, four completely equal intervals.
Unlike our stacks of perfect ﬁfths, these thirds-cycles are too small to serve as satisfying macroharmonies. However, we can combine cycles to make larger collections.
The hexatonic scale (Figure 4.4.3a) combines two augmented triads at a distance of a
perfect ﬁfth. This scale is maximally saturated with major thirds while also containing
a large number of perfect ﬁfths. However, it does not divide the octave particularly
evenly, since its steps are (approximately) one and three semitones large. The octatonic
scale (Figure 4.4.3b) is analogous to the hexatonic, but is built with minor-third cycles;
it contains a large number of minor thirds and perfect ﬁfths. Because its steps are one
and two semitones large, it is considerably more even than the hexatonic scale. Hexatonic and octatonic are close cousins, being structurally similar and playing important
roles in nineteenth- and twentieth-century music. A third possibility, the whole-tone
scale (Figure 4.4.3c), combines two augmented triads at a distance of a major second;
although it is not particularly saturated with consonances, it is perfectly even. In principle, we could use diminished seventh chords to construct a perfectly even eight-note
scale, although it is not available in twelve-tone equal temperament.
We can also form two-octave stacks of major and minor thirds, as in Figure 4.4.4.
The thirds can be arranged to produce four familiar scales: diatonic, “acoustic” (or
melodic minor ascending), harmonic minor, and “harmonic major.”15 The acoustic
scale is so-called because it is approximately equal to the ﬁrst seven pitch classes of
the harmonic series; it is usually labeled relative to the ordering (C, D, E, Fs, G, A, Bf),
Figure 4.4.3 (a) The hexatonic scale combines two augmented triads at a distance of a
perfect ﬁfth. (b) The octatonic scale combines two diminished sevenths at a distance of a
perfect ﬁfth. (c) The whole-tone scale combines augmented triads at a distance of a major
second; it is perfectly even, but contains no perfect ﬁfths.

15 In principle, there is a ﬁfth possibility, C-E-Gs-C-Ef-Gf-A, which has two instances of a single note.
In some tuning systems these two Cs are slightly different.

125

126

theory
Figure 4.4.4 Four scales can be represented as nearly even stacks of three major thirds and
four minor thirds: diatonic (a), acoustic (b), harmonic minor (c), and harmonic major (d).

known as the “C acoustic collection.”16 (This is equivalent to either the mixolydian
mode with raised fourth degree or the lydian with lowered seventh.) The harmonic
scales are the only ones we have considered that are not inversionally symmetrical:
the harmonic minor is ubiquitous in classical music, while its inversion, the so-called
harmonic major scale, was investigated by nineteenth-century musicians such as
Weitzmann and Rimsky-Korsakov.17 It can be described as a major scale with lowered
sixth degree or as a harmonic minor scale with raised third.
Figure 4.4.5 categorizes our eight scales based on their step sizes. The scales on
the left—diatonic, acoustic, whole tone, and octatonic—have steps that are at most
two semitones large, and thirds (two-step scalar intervals) that are either three or
four semitones large.18 These scales are important because they permit composers to
import traditional compositional techniques to new scalar environments: by selecting adjacent scale tones, a composer can create melodies that are recognizably stepwise (i.e. whose notes are linked by one- or two-semitone intervals); and by selecting
scalar “thirds” a composer can create chords that are recognizably “tertian” (i.e. whose

16 The ﬁrst thirteen harmonic partials of C are roughly equal to the pitch classes C-C-G-C-E-G-Bf-CD-E-Fs-G-A, with the eleventh and thirteenth partials (Fs and A) being rather ﬂat relative to their equaltempered counterparts. The acoustic scale is the best equal-tempered approximation to these notes.
17 See Riley 2004.
18 In their twelve-tone equal-tempered versions; other versions of the scales have steps that are approximately one or two semitones large, and thirds that are approximately three or four semitones large. Not surprisingly, these scales have been thoroughly investigated, by writers such as Berger (1963), Lendvai (1971),
Gervais (1971), Whittall (1975), Pressing (1978, 1982), van den Toorn (1983), Howat (1983), Antokoletz
(1984, 1993), Perle (1984), Russom (1985), Forte (1987, 1990, 1991), Taruskin (1985, 1987, 1996), Parks
(1989), Cohn (1991), Rahn (1991), Larson (1992), Callender (1998), Clough, Engebretsen, and Kochavi
(1999), Quinn (2002), Zimmerman (2002), Caballero (2004), and Rappaport (2006). See Tymoczko 1997,
2002, and 2004 for more.

Scales
Figure 4.4.5 The scales in (a) have steps that are either one or two semitones large, and
thirds that are three or four semitones large. Those in (b) have at least one step that is three
semitones large. The top three scales in (b) have thirds that are three or four semitones large.
The pentatonic scale is enclosed in a box because it is a subset of the diatonic.

adjacent notes are linked by three- or four-semitone intervals). The scales in the second group—harmonic minor, harmonic major, hexatonic, and pentatonic—have at
least one step that is three semitones large, and hence lead to more exotic melodies.
However, the ﬁrst three scales have thirds that are three or four semitones large, and
can again be used to construct “tertian” chords. By contrast, pentatonic thirds are
four or ﬁve semitones large, which means that stacks of pentatonic thirds tend to
sound like “fourth chords” (that is, chords whose notes are ﬁve chromatic steps apart).
Figure 4.4.6 shows that twentieth-century tonal composers often used the pentatonic
scale to create the impression of “fourthiness.”
In twelve-tone equal temperament, our scales have another useful property as
well: they contain every chord that does not itself contain a “chromatic cluster” such
as {C, Cs, D}.19 The scales thus provide a technique for managing a greatly extended
harmonic vocabulary that nevertheless stops short of atonality’s extremes—that
is, composers can construct harmonies by freely choosing notes from one of these
scales, secure in the knowledge that they will never generate a dissonant chromatic
cluster. Conversely, the scales provide a ready “reservoir” of melodic notes with which
to accompany any cluster-free chord. Note in particular that “polychords,” formed
by superimposing two triads, can always be embedded within one of these scales.
In this sense, they ﬁt naturally with the extended tertian sonorities characteristic of
twentieth-century tonal music.
A ﬁnal word about tuning and temperament. Temperament enters the picture because of the need to balance the demands of regularity and acoustic purity.
A Pythagorean twelve-tone chromatic scale contains acoustically pure ﬁfths, but
does not divide the octave precisely evenly. Conversely, the twelve-tone equal-tempered chromatic scale sacriﬁces purity in the name of evenness—with all its steps
19 Note that from this point of view the pentatonic scale is redundant, since it is a subset of the diatonic.

127

128

theory
Figure 4.4.6 Diatonic fourths and pentatonic thirds. In (a), from mm. 34–35 of Debussy’s
“La ﬁlle aux cheveux de lin,” diatonic fourths give way to pentatonic thirds. In (b), from Ligeti’s
Piano Concerto (second movement, mm. 60–61) diatonic ﬁfths are superimposed on pentatonic
fourths (the inversions of pentatonic thirds). In (c), Herbie Hancock uses pentatonic thirds in
the ﬁfth chorus of “Eye of the Hurricane,” from the album Maiden Voyage. (d) Pentatonic thirds
at the end of the chorus of the Decemberists’ “Here I Dreamt I Was an Architect.”

being precisely the same size, but its ﬁfths being very slightly impure.20 Beyond these
two alternatives are a variety of other options, such as just intonation and meantone tuning, each enforcing a slightly different compromise between evenness and
euphony. The important point is that the scales we have been considering will be
interesting no matter which intonational compromise we favor, simply because they
divide the octave fairly evenly, while also containing a large number of consonances.21
20 Similarly, in the just major scale, six of the seven thirds are acoustically pure, but one of the six perfect
ﬁfths is not; alternative tuning schemes redistribute the unevenness differently among the various intervals.
21 In some alternative tuning systems there may be possibilities not considered here. For example, Paul
Erlich (personal communication) has pointed out that in 22-tone equal temperament, it is possible to
construct scales with ﬁve minor thirds and two major thirds.

Scales

That so many of them can be played on the ordinary piano keyboard is testimony to
the power and ﬂexibility of the twelve-tone equal-tempered system.

4.5

modulation and voice leading

Figure 4.5.1 presents the transition section from the ﬁrst movement of Mozart’s
G major Piano Sonata, K. 283. The ﬁrst three bars are sequential, transposing the
same music up one step at each repetition, while the last three bars contain a second
sequence, now transposed up two steps at a time. As the music repeats, the accidentals
change: Fn moves to Fs in measure 4 and Cn moves to Cs in m. 6.
Suppose we ask a naive question: why say that Mozart’s music changes scale? Why
not say instead that Mozart uses a nine-note scale containing all the white notes plus
Fs and Cs? The answer lies in the music’s sequential structure: we would like to say
that the leaps (D, F), (E, G), and (Fs, A), are two-step scalar intervals, but there can be
no scale in which (D, F), (E, G), and (Fs, A) are all two steps apart.22 Thus, if we wish
to claim that the passage is a sequence—the same pattern repeated at different musical levels—we are required to postulate changes in the underlying scale.
In fact, we are forced to postulate speciﬁc voice leadings between scales. This is
because the sequence of scalar intervals will be preserved only if we assert that the
F moves up by semitone to the Fs, and the Cn moves up by semitone to Cs. To see
why, look at the last six notes in the fourth bar of the example, D-F-E-G-Fs-A. Presumably, we would like to say that the music here consists in a repeating “up two,
down one” pattern. But if this is right, then the Fn and Fs must occupy the same
Figure 4.5.1 (a) The transition from the ﬁrst movement of Mozart’s G major Piano Sonata,
K. 283. (b) The passage involves two voice leadings between scales.

22 Such a scale would have to contain E, F, Fs, and G, in which case the interval E-G would be at least
three scale steps large.

129

130

theory

abstract position: the note Fn is one step above E, the note Fs is one step below G,
and the distance E-G is two scale steps. The only way these facts are consistent is if
the scale degree that used to be located at F has somehow moved to Fs—or in other
words, if there has been a voice leading between scales.
We conclude that a piece’s scalar structure can determine speciﬁc voice leadings
between its macroharmonies. It is our desire to analyze the music using scale steps,
and in particular to do justice to its sequential structure, that requires us to postulate speciﬁc scalar voice leadings. I ﬁnd it useful here to imagine a frog hopping in a
regular way around a gently drifting circle of lily pads—say, forward by two lily pads,
back by one lily pad, forward by two, back by one, and so on (Figure 4.5.2). As the
frog hops, the fourth lily pad moves into a new position, with the others remaining
ﬁxed. Clearly, to describe the frog’s motion perspicuously, we need to measure in
units of lily pads. (It would be somewhat odd to describe it as hopping forward by 10
centimeters, backward by 3 centimeters, and so on, oblivious to the fact that the size
of its jumps is determined by the position of the pads!) But we also need to take into
account the fact that the lily pads are themselves shifting: the phrase “lily pad #3” acts
as a kind of variable that can refer to various locations in physical space.23 In much
the same way, we often want to analyze music using scale steps even while the scales
themselves are changing. In these contexts a scale degree is a kind of abstract address
(“the musical location one step above E and one step below G”) that can point to a
variety of different chromatic locations (such as Fn or Fs).24
We can now see that traditional modulation is typically a two-stage business.
Modulation is often initiated by voice leading between scales—the fourth degree
gets raised by semitone, the leading tone gets lowered, and so on (Figure 4.5.3). This
change of scale permits the introduction of the new key’s V7 chord, setting the stage

3

2

4

Figure 4.5.2 A frog,
hopping along a circle
of gently shifting lily
pads.

1

23 The idea of a scale degree as pointer is captured by Agmon’s two-dimensional model of the diatonic
system (Agmon 1989), which plays a role in forthcoming work by Steven Rings.
24 Some music uses variable scale degrees that can come in multiple forms. For example, the seventh
scale degree in classical minor-key music can occur either as a raised leading tone or as a lowered subtonic.
Here, it is as if the lily pads were moving much more rapidly, with the abstract address “seventh scale
degree” shifting from leading tone to ﬂatted seventh on a measure-by-measure (or even beat-by-beat)
basis. Unfortunately, it would take us too far aﬁeld to consider ﬂexible scale degrees in more detail.

Scales
Figure 4.5.3 (a) Classical modulation as a two-stage process. Here a modulation from A
major to E major, in which the scale shifts before the tonal center (represented by the boxed
note). Thus we ﬁrst change D to Ds and then shift the tonic (boxed) note from A to E. (b) In
twentieth-century tonality, one frequently ﬁnds a change of scale without a change of tonal
center. For example, The Who’s “I Can’t Explain” moves from E mixolydian in the verse to E
major in the chorus; here the tonal center stays ﬁxed while D moves to Ds.

for a shift in the tonal center. Thus, in the typical modulation from tonic to dominant, the raising of the fourth scale degree occurs prior to the conclusion of the V7–I
cadence in the new key. (In fact, it sometimes takes a while for our ears to be convinced that the scale shift represents a genuine change in tonic, rather than a passing
melodic inﬂection.) In classical music, shifts between parallel keys (such as C major
and C minor) are unique insofar as they do not involve any change of tonic. But
in twentieth-century tonality, we encounter a much wider range of tonic-preserving
modulations, including all the shifts between parallel diatonic modes.
It is important to understand that the points I have been making do not depend in
any way on notation. The question is about conceptualizing music in terms of scalar
distances, and this does not require that the music be notated at all—in the case of our
Mozart example, it merely requires that it be useful to conceptualize the distances F-A
and Fs-A as thirds, and hence to infer that the note F has moved to Fs. Nevertheless,
notation can often help us determine voice-leading relationships among scales. Suppose we imagine that the seven letter names A–G represent distinct musical voices,
so that there is an “A” voice, a “B” voice, and so on. Accidentals can then be taken to
indicate how the letter-voices move: thus when Mozart replaces Fn with Fs, he signals
that the “F voice” has moved up by semitone to Fs. In other words, standard musical
notation faithfully reﬂects the fact that the ﬁrst modulation in Figure 4.5.1 occurs by
way of the voice leading (C, D, E, F, G, A, B)®(C, D, E, Fs, G, A, B), while the second
occurs by way of (C, D, E, Fs, G, A, B)®(Cs, D, E, Fs, G, A, B).
Of course, scalar voice leading can occur in nonmodulatory contexts as well. Consider, for example, the passages in Figure 4.5.4. In the ﬁrst, the notation suggests that
the G in a Bf major scale moves down to Gf, creating Bf harmonic major, while
in the second it suggests that F moves up to Fs, producing G harmonic minor. We
can experience this difference without musical notation: for instance, an improvising
musician might play the diminished chord in Figure 4.5.4a, anticipating a continuation whereby the Gf moves downward to F, while on another occasion the same

131

132

theory
Figure 4.5.4 Spelling often indicates a difference in musical function. Here, the chord {A, C,
Ef, Gf} would typically lead back to a Bf major triad, while {A, C, Ef, Fs} would lead to G
minor. Spelling can be interpreted as indicating speciﬁc voice leadings between scales.

improviser might play the same chord anticipating a continuation where the Fs rises
to G. Our musical expectations are powerful enough that the same chord can even
sound different in these two contexts. (Certainly, when imagining the passages in my
head I experience them quite differently.) Here again, notation can clarify matters,
even though the actual phenomena do not depend on notation itself.

4.6

voice leading between common
scales

In twelve-tone equal temperament, the four most even seven-note scales are the diatonic, acoustic, harmonic minor, and harmonic major. Consequently, their voiceleading relations are modeled by one of the lattices described in §3.11 and repeated
here as Figure 4.6.1.25 As mentioned earlier, the diatonic circle of ﬁfths zigzags threedimensionally through the center of the ﬁgure, moving successively up, right, and into
the paper. It turns out that the remaining scales are also linked by a chain of singlesemitone voice leadings. For instance, beginning with A harmonic major, we ﬁnd
A harmonic major®A harmonic minor®D acoustic®E harmonic major®
E harmonic minor ® A acoustic ®. . . .
This is a second “circle of ﬁfths” whose unit of sequential repetition is three scales
long. These scales wind their way around the diatonic circle, somewhat in the manner of a double helix. However, the two strands are not quite the same shape: where
the diatonic circle takes a right-angled turn after every step, the nondiatonic strand
moves in a straight line through each acoustic collection.
25 In twelve-tone non-equal-tempered contexts, we would ﬁnd similar lattices whose vertices are
minutely displaced.

Scales
Figure 4.6.1 Voice leadings among seven-note scales. The diatonic circle of ﬁfths (dark solid
line) starts at C diatonic (lower left front), while the nondiatonic circle (dashed line) starts at
G acoustic (lower right front).

The harmonic and acoustic scales are closely related to the transpositionally symmetrical whole-tone, hexatonic, and octatonic scales. Figure 4.6.2 shows that we
can change whole tone into acoustic by a voice leading in which a single pitch class
“splits” into its chromatic neighbors; because of the whole-tone scale’s sixfold transpositional symmetry, there are six possible acoustic scales that can be reached in this
way.26 Similarly, octatonic can be transformed into acoustic by the reverse process—a
transformation in which a major second “merges” into its central note. (Again, since
the octatonic scale is transpositionally symmetrical, there are four ways to “merge”
into an acoustic collection.) Octatonic can move to harmonic major or minor by a
more complicated process of “merging”: here, we fuse three notes spanning a minor
third, producing the minor second in the center of the span—for instance, {Cs, Ds,
E} becomes {D, Ef}, transforming C octatonic into G harmonic minor. (There are
eight such possibilities for every octatonic scale, four leading to harmonic major and
four leading to harmonic minor.) Finally, the hexatonic can be transformed into harmonic major or minor by the reverse process: here, a minor second such as {Gs, A}
splits to become a three-note scale fragment whose outer notes span it, such as {G,
Af, Bf}. There are six such possibilities for every hexatonic scale, three leading to
harmonic major and three leading to harmonic minor.

26 Callender (1998) uses the words “split” and “fuse” to refer to these “non-bijective” voice leadings
(§4.9). Related discussions of scale-to-scale voice leading (though not always using those terms) can be
found in Perle 1984, Taruskin 1996, Howat 1983, Antokoletz 1993, and Tymoczko 2004.

133

134

theory
Figure 4.6.2 (a) To transform a whole-tone scale into an acoustic, “split” one note into its
two chromatic neighbors. (b) To transform an octatonic scale into an acoustic, “merge” a
major second into the note at its center. (c) To transform an octatonic scale into a harmonic
major or minor, “merge” three notes spanning a minor third into the semitone they enclose.
(d) To transform a hexatonic collection into a harmonic major or minor, “split” a semitone
into a three-note scale-fragment enclosing it.

Figure 4.6.3 describes these relationships using an inverted pyramid, with the
three transpositionally symmetrical scales on the top line. The middle line contains
the nondiatonic seven-note scales, while the diatonic scale is at the bottom. Scales are
connected by line segments if they can be linked by particularly efﬁcient voice leading: either a “split” or “merge” described in the preceding paragraph, or one of the
single-semitone voice leadings represented on Figure 4.6.1. The numbers above each
line indicate the presence of multiple possibilities for that particular kind of voice
leading. Thus the notation “¬6” on the line connecting whole tone to acoustic indicates that there are six different ways to “split” a note of the whole-tone scale, creating
six different acoustic collections. By contrast, “1®” points in the opposite direction,
because for any particular acoustic scale there is only one way to “merge” its notes to
create a whole-tone collection.
The table in Figure 4.6.4 shows how the nondiatonic seven-note collections can
be used to connect transpositionally symmetrical scales. Every scale shares six of its
seven notes with the octatonic scale to its left, and ﬁve of six notes with the wholetone or hexatonic scale above it. (For example, G acoustic and Df acoustic share six
notes with Cs-D octatonic and ﬁve notes with Df whole tone.) In addition, each
seven-note scale shares six of its notes with some diatonic collection. Figure 4.6.5 tries
to convey the same information graphically: the central core features the full cycle
of 36 seven-note nondiatonic scales, each linked to its neighbors by single-semitone
voice leading. On the outside of this central circle runs the diatonic circle of ﬁfths;
another can be found within the central circle. (Here, the double-headed arrows connect scales sharing six of their seven notes: the A harmonic major collection, for example, shares six notes with A diatonic; while the next collection along the non-diatonic

Scales
Figure 4.6.3 Voice leadings among familiar scales. The transpositionally symmetrical scales
are at the top. The harmonic and acoustic scales mediate between these and the diatonic.
The numbers indicate how many scales of each type can be connected by the voice leadings
described in Figures 4.6.1 and 4.6.2. Thus the whole-tone scale can be connected to six
different acoustic scales by a “split,” while every acoustic scale can be connected to only one
whole-tone scale by a “merge.”

circle, A harmonic minor, shares six notes with C diatonic.) The labels along the central circle indicate the nearest octatonic, whole-tone, and hexatonic scales. This exotic
and almost alchemistical graph provides a way to visualize all the voice leadings we
have been discussing. I encourage you to verify that Figures 4.6.1, 4.6.3, and 4.6.5
provide different perspectives on the same basic relationships.

Figure 4.6.4 Each scale in the table shares six of its seven notes with the octatonic scale to its
left, and contains ﬁve of the six notes in the whole-tone or hexatonic scale above it.

135

136

theory
Figure 4.6.5 A geometrical representation of the voice leading between diatonic, acoustic,
harmonic major/minor, whole-tone, hexatonic, and octatonic scales. Here “wt 1” and “wt 2”
refer to the Cs and D whole tone scales, respectively; “oct 1,” “oct 2,” and “oct 3” refer to the
Cs-D, D-Ef, and Ds-E octatonic scales; and “hex 1,” “hex 2,” “hex 3,” and “hex 4” refer to the
Cs-D, D-Ef, Ds-E, and E-F hexatonic scales.

4.7

two examples

The previous section placed the acoustic and harmonic scales between the diatonic
and the transpositionally symmetrical scales, since each shares six notes with some
diatonic collection, while also being very close to some octatonic, whole-tone, and
hexatonic collections. (This is represented by the fact that the harmonic and acoustic
scales occupy the central line of the inverted pyramid in Figure 4.6.3.) And in fact,
twentieth-century composers often use acoustic and harmonic collections to mediate
between these different harmonic worlds. For example, at the end of the central section of “Mouvement,” Debussy moves from Fs mixolydian to C whole tone by way of
the E acoustic scale (Figure 4.7.1). This acoustic collection is as close as possible to the
other two, sharing ﬁve of the whole-tone scale’s six notes, and six of the diatonic scale’s
seven notes. In this way, Debussy creates a smooth transition from familiar diatonic
modality to the much more exotic world of the whole-tone scale. This was one of

Scales
Figure 4.7.1 At the end of the B section of Mouvement, Debussy moves from Fs mixolydian
to the C whole tone by way of the Fs mode of E acoustic.

his favorite compositional techniques, with similar progressions appearing repeatedly
throughout his works.27
For a more complicated example, consider “Sunlight Streaming in the Chamber,”
the ﬁrst of Prokoﬁev’s 1916 Five Poems of Anna Akhmatova (Figure 4.7.2). The music
begins with a repeating ﬁgure that echoes the opening of Stravinsky’s Petrouchka,
composed just a few years earlier. I interpret the underlying harmony here as an E
major triad, which can be connected to the following C major by semitonal voice
leading. C major then initiates a stepwise descent through B minor, A major, G major,
and Fs major, each generating familiar scales. The music then shifts suddenly to C
diatonic, moving toward a half cadence on an Fs half-diminished seventh. The second half of the song begins by alternating between E minor (with added C) and A9
chord (with G in the bass), vaguely suggesting ii–V in D major. The piece then shifts
to D acoustic (A melodic minor) for six measures, ending with a turn to C-Df octatonic. This is the ﬁrst appearance of the octatonic scale in the piece and it has a somewhat surprising effect, giving the impression of a question mark or raised eyebrow
rather than an exclamation point.
Figure 4.7.3 graphs Prokoﬁev’s scales using the two-dimensional scale lattice of
Figure 3.11.8. The diatonic and acoustic collections form a compact region of the
graph: the four diatonic collections (C, G, D, and A) are all adjacent on the zigzag of
ﬁfths, with the two acoustic collections (D and E) connected to these scales by singlesemitone voice leading.28 Although the music does not always exploit these connections, there are a number of transitions that do so. (For instance, the move from B
melodic minor to A diatonic, or the progression from C diatonic to G diatonic to D
diatonic.) Overall, there are six shifts involving single-semitone voice leading, ﬁve
or six two-semitone shifts, one or two three-semitone shifts, and one four-semitone
shift (Figure 4.7.4). It is interesting that the more dramatic shifts occur at the beginning and end of the song, with the smoother motions concentrated in the middle.
27 See Chapter 9 and Tymoczko 2004.
28 Note that I am considering the opening to be in E mixolydian rather than E major; if one wishes to
assert the presence of E major, then there are ﬁve diatonic collections in the piece.

137

138

theory

Figure 4.7.2
An outline of
Prokoﬁev’s
Op. 27 No. 1.

Figure 4.7.3 The scales in
Prokoﬁev’s piece form a
connected region.

Scales
Figure 4.7.4 Prokoﬁev typically modulates by relatively efﬁcient
voice leading, with the most dramatic changes occurring at the
beginning and end of the piece. Here, the numbers refer to the total
number of semitonal shifts required to connect each scale to its
successor: thus, the number “3” in the second line indicates that
it takes 3 semitonal shifts (G®Gs, A®As, C®Cs) to change G
diatonic into E acoustic.

The ﬁnal modulation deserves some comment. Had Prokoﬁev wanted to create a
smooth transition from the antepenultimate D diatonic scale to the concluding CDf
octatonic, he could have done so, since both scales share almost all their notes with A
acoustic. (See Figure 4.7.3, where this is obvious.) However, the penultimate acoustic
collection does not share a large number of notes with the ﬁnal octatonic scale. (It
does however share ﬁve notes with the preceding D diatonic.) Nevertheless, this D
acoustic scale still has audible links to both the diatonic and octatonic scales, since
it is “nearly transpositionally related” to both (§2.8). In other words, the mediation
here is one of internal intervallic structure rather than particular common tones:
Figure 4.7.5 shows that the acoustic scale shares the step-interval sequence 2-1-2-2-2
with the diatonic and the sequence 2-1-2-1-2 with the octatonic. Consequently, the
piece articulates a gradual transition at the level of interval content, with the acoustic
scale containing more tritones than the diatonic, but fewer than the octatonic, fewer
ﬁfths than the diatonic, but as many as the octatonic, and so on.29
Overall, Prokoﬁev’s music suggests a somewhat loose and playful structure—
the sense is of a relatively intuitive use of closely related scales, rather than a more
logical or systematic exploration. Nevertheless, it is signiﬁcant that he uses closely
related scales that can be linked by efﬁcient voice leading, and that he often modulates so as to highlight these connections. It is also relevant that his scalar vocabulary consists entirely of scales we have discussed, suggesting that our abstract,
scale-theoretic considerations do indeed capture his actual concerns. Chapter 9 continues this line of argument, demonstrating that the techniques we have identiﬁed

29 This sort of transition occurs frequently in twentieth-century music, for instance at the opening of
Debussy’s “Fêtes” (the second of the Nocturnes) and the third of Prokoﬁev’s Ten Pieces, Op. 12.

139

140

theory
Figure 4.7.5 In Prokoﬁev’s piece the acoustic scale mediates between diatonic and octatonic
in a somewhat abstract way. On the left side of (a) we see that the A acoustic scale can
mediate between D diatonic and the C-Df octatonic, sharing almost all of its notes with both
collections. However, the right side of (a) shows that Prokoﬁev presents the D acoustic scale
instead. (b) When we consider intervallic structure, we see that the acoustic is similar to both
diatonic and octatonic, sharing step patterns 2-1-2-1-2 with the octatonic and 2-1-2-2-2
with the diatonic.

here are symptomatic of a much more general practice stretching from late nineteenthcentury tonality to contemporary jazz and postminimalism.

4.8

scalar and interscalar
transposition

Figure 4.8.1 shows two appearances of the subject of Shostakovich’s Fugue in E
minor, one in E aeolian, and the other in G mixolydian.30 The two forms of the subject are related by a double process of transposition: a scalar transposition downward
by diatonic step, from aeolian to mixolydian, combined with chromatic transposition upward by ﬁve semitones, from G diatonic to C diatonic (Figure 4.8.2). Though
this combination of scalar and chromatic transposition can occasionally be found in
earlier centuries, it plays a central role in twentieth-century tonal composition, particularly in the works of composers such as Debussy, Ravel, Stravinsky, Shostakovich,
Steve Reich, and John Adams. By way of illustration, Figure 4.8.3 cites rehearsal 13
of Debussy’s “Fêtes,” where scalar transposition upward by two steps combines with

30 The theme itself does not contain the aeolian mode’s Fs. However, it is present both in the key signature and the countersubject.

Scales
Figure 4.8.1 The subject
in Shostakovich’s Fugue in
E minor, Op. 87 No. 4, as it
appears at the opening of the
piece and in m. 22.

Figure 4.8.2 The two forms of the subject relate by scalar and chromatic transposition.

Figure 4.8.3 Rehearsal 13 of Debussy’s “Fêtes” (Nocturnes II).

chromatic transposition downward by three steps. The resulting voice leading shifts
Af dorian into Af lydian, raising Gf, Cf, and Df.
Note that these two kinds of transposition can sometimes combine to produce a
simple change of accidentals, as in the opening of the Rondo from Clementi’s Piano
Sonata, Op. 25 No. 2 (Figure 4.8.4). The theme, which originally begins on scale
degree 5 in G major, returns on scale degree 1 of D major, with Cs replacing Cn.
Though one could say that Clementi simply moved the note Cn up by semitone, it is
also possible to describe the relationship as combining two separate transpositions:
scalar transposition down by four scale degrees followed by chromatic transposition up seven semitones. These two transpositions nearly cancel each other out,
leaving behind the single-semitone shift C®Cs as a residue. As we will see, there

141

142

theory
Figure 4.8.4 The D-major theme in
the Rondo from Clementi’s Piano
Sonata, Op. 25 No. 2, originally
begins on scale degree 5 in G major,
but returns in the transition with Cn
replaced by Cs. The two forms of the
theme can be related by a combination
of scalar and chromatic transposition.

are a number of musical circumstances in which it is proﬁtable to think in precisely
this way.
If scalar transposition moves a musical pattern along a single scale, then a
slightly more general process of “interscalar transposition” moves a pattern from one
scale to another.31 Figure 4.8.5 tracks the main motive of Bach’s D minor invention as
it moves from D harmonic minor scale to F major and D melodic minor ascending
(G acoustic). Although the scale changes, each form of the motive uses precisely the
same set of scalar intervals. In fact, if we label the notes of D harmonic minor and F
major in the standard way, we can use the very same scale degree numbers to describe
the ﬁrst two passages in the ﬁgure. In this sense, we can say that they are related
by zero-step interscalar transposition. Similarly, if we label the degrees of D melodic
minor starting from D, then Figure 4.8.5a relates to (c) by two-step interscalar transposition—meaning that each note of Figure 4.8.5c is two scale degrees higher than
the corresponding note of Figure 4.8.5a. Of course, the number of steps involved in
an interscalar transposition depends on our arbitrary choice of the ﬁrst scale degree.
What is important is the fact that two passages are related by interscalar transposition, not the particular label we apply to the relationship.
Figure 4.8.5 Three forms of the motive in
Bach’s D minor two-part invention. Scale
degrees are shown above each example.

31 See Santa 1999 and Hook 2007a. Hook (2007b and 2008) and Tymoczko (2005) explore the relation
between key signatures and interscalar transpositions.

Scales

Figure 4.8.6 identiﬁes interscalar transpositions in Debussy, Stravinsky, and Shostakovich. The ﬁrst two examples involve interscalar transposition from the diatonic
scale to the acoustic. The third is interesting insofar as its “scales” are simple triads.
(This is the gimmick of Shostakovich’s A major fugue; it is a “bugle fugue” that treats
triads as if they were scales.) Thus in Figure 4.8.6c, the main theme originally appears
in the A major triad (top line); when it returns in minor, at m. 21, it has moved to a
new three-note scale, Fs minor. This is interscalar transposition by zero steps (middle
line). Eventually, in the stretto, the theme is transposed diatonically along the A major
scale (bottom line). Thus the bottom two lines of Figure 4.8.6c are connected by
descending-step interscalar transposition.32

Figure 4.8.6 Interscalar transposition in the opening of Debussy’s “Fêtes” (a), Stravinsky’s
Rite of Spring (b), and Shostakovich’s A major fugue (c).

32 Transposing (Cs, A, Fs) down by step produces (A, Fs, Cs). A zero step interscalar transposition
takes (A, Fs, Cs)—or “third, root, ﬁfth” in the minor triad—to (Cs, A, E), or “third, root, ﬁfth” in the
major triad.

143

144

theory

One terminological point: the previous examples describe what might be called
“interscalar transpositions in pitch-class space,” since they link octave-repeating scales
with the same number of notes. There is an even more general musical transformation that relates scales of different sizes, which we can call “interscalar transposition
in pitch space.” Figure 4.8.7 presents examples from Debussy and Steve Reich. These
transformations introduce octave-dependent changes into the music: for example,
the D5 in the top line of Figure 4.8.7a gets mapped to C, whereas the D4 gets mapped
to Bf. Consequently, we cannot speak of “what happens to the pitch class D”; instead,
we need to speak about what happens to speciﬁc pitches in speciﬁc registers. By contrast, when the scales have the same number of notes, then all pitches in a pitch class
are transformed in exactly the same way. (For example, the interscalar transposition
in Figure 4.8.6a moves every D up by three semitones.) This in turn means that these
interscalar transpositions can be modeled as voice leadings between pitch-class sets.
This is precisely why they will be important in what follows.

Figure 4.8.7 (a) “Fêtes” presents the same pattern of scalar intervals in the seven-note
dorian mode and the six-note whole-tone scale. (b) Steve Reich’s Variations for Winds, Strings,
and Keyboards presents the same pattern of scalar intervals in the six-note diatonic hexachord
and the ﬁve-note pentatonic scale.

4.9

interscalar transposition and
voice leading

In the ﬁnal sections of this chapter I want to switch gears somewhat, exploring the
connections between scale theory and voice leading. To prepare for this discussion we
need to make a subtle conceptual shift: instead of thinking of chords as being embedded within larger scales, we will start to think of them as scales unto themselves. In other
words, we will think of the C major chord as being a “scale” whose three scale degrees
are C, E, and G, respectively. (This is just what we did in discussing Figure 4.8.6c,

Scales

Shostakovich’s A major fugue.) This will allow us to represent the voice leading (C,
E, G)®(B, E, G) as an interscalar transposition that sends the ﬁrst scale degree of the
C major triad to the third scale degree of the E minor triad (C®B), the second scale
degree to the ﬁrst (E®E), and the third scale degree to the second (G®G). Once we
start thinking in this way, we will see that there is a deep connection between the notion
of an “interscalar transposition” and the general problem of identifying efﬁcient voice
leadings between chords.
To understand why, notice that scalar and interscalar transpositions represent a
very special kind of voice leading: not only are they free of voice crossings, but they
remain so no matter how their voices are distributed in pitch space. (For this reason, I
will say that they are “strongly crossing free.”) For example, the ﬁrst voice leading in
Figure 4.9.1 has no crossings no matter how we change the register of its individual
voices. By contrast, the second voice leading is only weakly crossing free, since transposing its lowest voice up by an octave creates a crossing between the bottom two
voices. Given a strongly crossing-free voice leading, we can always arrange its voices
so that each chord spans less than an octave, with ascending steps in one chord being
sent to ascending steps in the other (Figure 4.9.2).33 But this in turn implies that the
voice leading is a scalar or interscalar transposition, since it sends any scalar interval
in the ﬁrst chord to the same scalar interval in the second.
Figure 4.9.1 The voice leading in (a) is
strongly crossing free: no matter what octave
its voices are in, there will never be crossing.
The voice leading in (b) is crossing free but not
strongly so, since a crossing is created when the
lowest voice moves up by octave (c).

Figure 4.9.2 In a strongly crossing-free voice
leading, the voices can be transposed by
octave so that each chord is in “close registral
position,” spanning less than an octave.
Ascending steps in one collection are sent to
ascending steps in the other.

The connection to voice leading lies precisely here: in §2.7, we saw that, for any
“reasonable” measure of voice-leading size, removing voice crossings never makes
the voice leading larger. (See also Appendix A.) This means that we can take any
voice leading and, by repeatedly removing voice crossings and changing the octave
in which voices appear, eventually produce a scalar or interscalar transposition. Since
octave shifts don’t affect the voice leading, and since removing crossings never makes
it larger, the ﬁnal voice leading is guaranteed to be at least as small as the original (Figure 4.9.3). Consequently, there is always a maximally efﬁcient voice leading between
33 Conversely, any voice leading that can be arranged in this way is an interscalar transposition.

145

146

theory

any two chords that is a scalar
or interscalar transposition.34
It follows that the concept of
interscalar transposition will
be relevant wherever efﬁcient
voice leading is important.
Let me illustrate with a few
concrete examples. Figure 4.9.4
identiﬁes the minimal voice
leading between C major and
A minor triads. If we consider
each triad to be a scale, with
root, third, and ﬁfth being its
ﬁrst, second, and third scale
degrees, then the voice leading
is an interscalar transposition
by one ascending step.35 Similarly, the most efﬁcient voice leading between the C major and C minor triads is an
interscalar transposition by zero steps (root to root). The ﬁgure also shows that the
most efﬁcient voice leading between Cø7 and Ef7 chords is an interscalar transposition by three steps (root to seventh), and the most efﬁcient voice leading between F
diatonic and G acoustic scales is an interscalar transposition by one descending step
(scale degree one to scale degree seven).36 Geometrically, interscalar transpositions can
be represented as collections of crossing-free paths between two concentric circles, as
in Figure 4.9.5. Appendix A shows that these voice leadings correspond to paths that
do not “bounce off ” the mirror boundaries of higher-dimensional chord space.
Figure 4.9.3 Repeatedly octave-transposing and
removing crossings will eventually produce a strongly
crossing-free voice leading. (a) Transposing the bass
voice up by octave produces a crossing (b). Switching
the bass and tenor in the ﬁrst chord removes the
crossing (c). Transposing the tenor up by octave
produces another crossing (d). Switching soprano and
alto in the ﬁrst chord removes this crossing (e), yielding
a strongly crossing-free voice leading. Since removing
crossings never makes a voice leading larger, the voice
leading in (e) is at least as small as that in (a).

Figure 4.9.4 The minimal voice leading
between C major and A minor triads (a),
between C major and C minor triads (b),
between Cø7 and Ef7 chords (c), and between
F diatonic and G acoustic scales (d). All are
interscalar transpositions.

34 Here and for the remainder of this section, I use “voice leading” to mean “voice leading without doublings, in which every note in one chord is mapped to exactly one note in the other.” Mathematically, these
are called bijective voice leadings. We will return to the issue of doublings at the end of the section.
35 Here and in what follows, I always consider the root of a traditional chord to be its ﬁrst scale degree.
36 Considering G to be the ﬁrst scale degree of the G acoustic collection. If we consider the scale to be
D melodic minor and number its scale degrees from D, then the relevant interscalar transposition is two
ascending steps.

Scales
Figure 4.9.5 Strongly crossingfree voice leadings can be
represented geometrically
by non-intersecting paths
connecting two concentric
circles. Here the music
progresses radially outward,
from the inner circle to the
outer. The voice leading (F, Gs,
B, Ds)®(E, Gs, B, D) holds Gs
and B constant, moving F and
Ds down by semitone.

Throughout this book I have emphasized that Western music involves the simultaneous satisfaction of two independent constraints—a vertical constraint that requires
chords to be structurally similar, and a horizontal constraint that dictates that they
be connected by efﬁcient voice leadings. Clearly, to satisfy these constraints, a composer must be able to ﬁnd the efﬁcient voice leadings between arbitrary chords. This
need is all the more pressing when we reﬂect that composers regularly ask questions
that require sorting through a large number of possibilities. Suppose, for example,
you write the chord in Figure 4.9.6, and decide to move it to some nearby dominant
seventh; to solve this problem, it is (in principle) necessary to search 288 different
voice leadings to all twelve dominant sevenths. It is rather remarkable, therefore, that
composers, theorists, and even beginning music students manage to ﬁnd efﬁcient
voice leadings so quickly, and with so little apparent effort.
Our discussion helps explain how this can be possible. Rather than searching all the
different voice leadings between chords, musicians need consider only the small number
of interscalar transpositions. For example, if you want to ﬁnd a minimal voice leading between the C half-diminished and F dominant seventh chords, it is sufﬁcient to
consider the four interscalar transpositions shown in Figure 4.9.7—mapping the root
of the half-diminished to the root, third, ﬁfth, and seventh of the dominant seventh
chord, respectively. This reduces the number of potential voice leadings by a factor of six,
from twenty-four down to four. (For larger chords the reduction of effort is even more

Figure 4.9.6 Suppose a composer decides to connect this F halfdiminished seventh chord to some dominant seventh chord by
maximally efﬁcient voice leading. There are almost three hundred
possible voice leadings to consider. Yet musicians manage to solve
problems like this very quickly.

147

148

theory
Figure 4.9.7 In order to ﬁnd the minimal voice leading between two chords, it is necessary
to check only the interscalar transpositions between them. Here, the ﬁrst interscalar
transposition maps the root of Cø7 to the root of F7, the second maps root to third, the third
maps root to ﬁfth, and the fourth maps root to seventh. Having chosen a destination for the
root, the rest of the voice leading is completely determined by the fact that it is an interscalar
transposition.

dramatic.) Thus when harmony teachers enjoin their students to avoid voice crossings,
they are actually achieving two distinct aims: they are encouraging a kind of composition in which the voices remain registrally separate, and hence easy to distinguish aurally,
while also drastically reducing the “search space” that students must consider when looking for efﬁcient voice leadings. This last point, though rarely discussed, is arguably central to the whole enterprise of Western composition: for if “crossed” voice leadings could
be smaller than their uncrossed counterparts, it would be enormously more difﬁcult to
combine harmonic consistency with efﬁcient voice leading—simply because it would be
very hard to sort through all the voice-leading possibilities.
It follows that there are both perceptual and conceptual reasons to expect that
voice crossings should be infrequent, since crossings make life difﬁcult for both listener and composer. And when we look at actual music we ﬁnd that voice crossings are indeed rare, occurring only 5% of the time even in the most polyphonic of
styles.37 Furthermore, when they do occur it is often proﬁtable to interpret them as
embellishments of more basic, crossing-free paradigms. For example, the opening
of Palestrina’s motet “Adoramus Te,” shown in Figure 4.9.8, can plausibly be said to
be based on crossing-free voice leadings in the bottom staff—with the crossing not
only serving to add melodic interest, but also allowing Palestrina to evade the parallel ﬁfths and octaves that would otherwise occur.38 (Notice that in this passage the
top three voices typically articulate voice leadings between complete triads, with the
bass adding doublings—a technique that we will explore later.) Chapters 6 and 7 will
generalize this observation by showing that a large majority of voice leadings, in a
large range of music, can be understood as embellishments of a few basic templates,
all of which are strongly crossing free. This in turn suggests that composers really
do privilege the crossing-free voice leadings, perhaps thinking of voice crossings as
surface-level embellishments to be used only on special occasions.
37 The ﬁgure “5%,” which refers to the percentage of voice leadings containing crossings, is based on a
statistical survey of a large number of MIDI ﬁles of vocal compositions by ﬁfteenth and sixteenth-century
composers. There is some evidence that the rate of voice crossings gradually decreases over this period. Note
that some of these voice leadings are only weakly crossing-free.
38 These sorts of voice crossings are quite common in Renaissance music, for example in the opening
phrase of Lassus’ Prophetiae Sibyllarum.

Scales

One word of caution: for simplicity, I
have been considering
voice leadings without
doublings, in which
the number of voices
is equal to the number
of notes in each of the
two chords. However,
it sometimes happens
that a minimal voice
leading maps multiple
notes in the one chord to a single note in the other. For example, the ﬁrst voice leading in Figure 4.9.9 is smaller than any of the four-voice voice leadings between the C
and E major seventh chords. This, clearly, is not an interscalar transposition.39 Fortunately, in many practical applications, we can ignore this complication, restricting
our attention to voice leadings without doublings. (Figure 4.9.10 demonstrates that,
for nearly even three- and four-note chords, maximally efﬁcient voice leadings are
almost always doubling free.) In the grand scheme of things, this is quite fortunate,
for otherwise the composer’s task of ﬁnding efﬁcient voice leadings would be considerably more difﬁcult than it already is.

Figure 4.9.8 The opening phrase of Palestrina’s “Adoramus Te”
can be interpreted as embellishing a fundamentally crossing-free
template.

Figure 4.9.9 The ﬁve-voice voice leading on the left
is smaller than any of the four-voice alternatives.
Here, three voices move by one semitone, whereas the
smallest four-voice alternative moves one voice by
three semitones and one voice by one semitone. Voice
leadings containing doublings cannot be identiﬁed
using the techniques discussed in this chapter.

2 notes
3 notes
4 notes
5 notes
6 notes
7 notes
8 notes

All Chords Nearly Even
0%
0%
10%
1%
29%
2%
48%
8%
61%
19%
69%
14%
73%
11%

Figure 4.9.10 The probability that the minimal
voice leading between two randomly chosen
n-note chords will involve “doublings,” as in
Figure 4.9.9. The ﬁrst column represents the
likelihood of doublings when the chords are
selected randomly from all pairs of n-note
chords, while the second represents the
likelihood when chords are restricted to the four
most even n-note chords. Nearly even chords
with four or fewer notes thus require doublings
only rarely.

39 More precisely, it is not an interscalar transposition between four-note chords; it is an interscalar
transposition between the ﬁve note chords {C, E, E, G, B} and {E, Gs, B, B, Ds}, but it is not obvious how to
ﬁgure out which notes to double. There exist efﬁcient algorithms for solving this problem, but the details
are too technical to discuss here (see Tymoczko 2006 and 2008b).

149

150

theory

4.10

combining interscalar and
chromatic transpositions

Let me end by showing how scale theory can be used to model the intuitive knowledge possessed by sophisticated tonal composers. To begin, note that the interscalar
transpositions linking any transpositions of the same two chord types will always
be related by individual transposition. For instance, the scalar transpositions linking
the C major triad to itself are individually transpositionally related to the interscalar
transpositions linking the C major to the E major triad, and indeed to those connecting any other major triads (Figure 4.10.1). This is because transposition can never
introduce voice crossings into a voice leading, even when applied individually.
From this it follows that we can decompose any strongly crossing-free voice leading from C to E major into two parts: a scalar transposition that moves each note
down by some number of scale steps (relative to the C major triad) and a chromatic transposition that moves each note up by some number of semitones. This
voice leading will be efﬁcient when these two components nearly cancel out—as,
for instance, when a one-step descending scalar transposition nearly neutralizes the
Figure 4.10.1 (a) The scalar and/or interscalar transpositions between any transpositions of
the same two chord types are always individually T-related. (b) The minimal voice leading
between C and E major triads can therefore be analyzed as the combination of a one-step
descending scalar transposition with a four-semitone ascending chromatic transposition.
(c) More generally, the minimal (three-voice) voice leading between any major triads can be
depicted as combining chromatic and scalar transposition. As the chromatic transposition
increases, the descending scalar transposition increases as well, so that the two forms of
transposition cancel out.

Scales

four-semitone ascending chromatic transposition (Figure 4.10.1). In fact, we can
produce a similar decomposition of any strongly crossing-free voice leading between
any two major triads. Again, the voice leadings will be efﬁcient when the two transpositions combine to leave each voice roughly where it was: thus in Figure 4.10.1c
the descending scalar transposition increases as the ascending chromatic transposition does.
Figure 4.10.2 uses this idea to organize the efﬁcient voice-leading possibilities
between half-diminished and dominant seventh chords. Here, we represent voice
leadings between half-diminished and dominant sevenths as combining an interscalar transposition (from C half-diminished to C dominant seventh) with a chromatic
transposition to some other dominant seventh. Again, there is an inverse relationship between the two transpositions, so that one counteracts the other. Thus we see
that efﬁcient voice leadings occur when scalar or interscalar transpositions neutralize the
effects of chromatic transpositions.
The upshot is that we can provide a surprising and nontrivial answer to what
might otherwise seem like a hopeless question: what is it that a composer knows,
when she knows all the most efﬁcient voice leadings from one type of chord to
another? For example, what does a composer know when she can easily identify the
most efﬁcient path between any particular half-diminished and dominant seventh
chords? Our answer is: she knows how to combine interscalar and chromatic transpositions. That is, in the particular case of half-diminished and dominant sevenths, she
knows how to combine the four templates in Figure 4.10.2a with the various chromatic transpositions. Thus a seemingly complicated musical skill—knowing all the
most efﬁcient voice leadings between two chord types—reduces to a much simpler
kind of knowledge, knowing how to combine two familiar kinds of transposition.
In the second half of the book, I show how this idea allows us to understand
chromatic music “from the inside,” revealing some of the remarkable ways in which
nineteenth-century composers explored the contrapuntal possibilities available to
them. For now, let me simply offer a few hints about what is to come. Figure 4.10.3
analyzes the ﬁrst four resolutions of the half-diminished seventh chord in the prelude
to Wagner’s Tristan, showing that the ﬁrst two involve interscalar transposition by
zero steps, whereas the last two involve interscalar transposition by ascending step.
Besides helping us understand these relationships, scale theory can prompt us to ask
new questions: for example, we might ﬁnd ourselves wondering whether Wagner uses
the other two interscalar transpositions in his opera, or whether he ever substitutes
one scalar transposition for another. Similarly, Figure 4.10.4 contains a series of progressions that resolve a seventh chord into a triad. Scale theory can show us that the
ﬁrst two voice leadings are closely related, since they map the root of the seventh
chord to the root of the triad, whereas the third maps the root to the ﬁfth.40 Finally,
consider the situation of a composer who wants to identify efﬁcient (three-voice)
voice leadings from major to minor triads. Having absorbed the ideas in this chapter,

40 Here we can conceive of the triad as a four-note scale with one doubled note.

151

152

theory
Figure 4.10.2 (a) The four interscalar transpositions from the C half-diminished
seventh chord to the C dominant seventh. (b) The minimal voice leading between the
C half-diminished and F dominant seventh chords combines the third of these interscalar
transpositions with chromatic transposition upward by ﬁve semitones. (c) The minimal
(four-voice) voice leading between any half-diminished and dominant seventh chords
combines one of these interscalar transpositions with a chromatic transposition. Again, as the
chromatic transposition increases, the descending interscalar transposition increases as well,
so that the two forms of transposition cancel out.

Scales
Figure 4.10.3 The ﬁrst four resolutions of the
half-diminished seventh chord in Wagner’s
Tristan. The ﬁrst two map root to root, while
the second two map root to third.

Figure 4.10.4 Three chromatic voice
leadings. The ﬁrst two map the root of the
ﬁrst chord to the root of the second, and
can be considered interscalar transpositions
from a seventh chord to a triad with
doubled root. The last maps the root of the
ﬁrst chord to the ﬁfth of the second.

the composer will see that there are really just three basic possibilities: once the destination of the root is chosen, the rest of the interscalar transposition is determined.
Each possibility gives rise to a family of voice leadings, all related by individual transposition and hence sharing the same basic voice-leading structure.
The broader moral is that there is indeed a close connection between chord concepts and scale concepts. Fundamentally, a scale is a large chord, and a chord is just a
small scale: both participate in efﬁcient voice leadings, and both can be represented
using the same basic geometries; composers develop musical motifs by transposing
them along familiar chords, as if chords were just very small scales (Figs. 4.3.1b and
4.8.6c); and efﬁcient voice leading frequently involves interscalar transposition or
strongly crossing-free voice leadings. In fact, it even turns out that there is a close
analogy between the idea of decomposing voice leadings into scalar and chromatic
transpositions, and the idea of analyzing them into pure parallel and pure contrary
components. Thus there are signiﬁcant theoretical advantages to adopting a uniﬁed
perspective that treats chords and scales similarly.
Those of you who are interested in pursuing this idea in greater technical detail
should consult Appendix C, while those who are impatient for analysis can instead
turn to Chapters 8 and 9. Everyone else is encouraged to proceed to Chapter 5 in an
orderly fashion.

153

chapter 5

Macroharmony and Centricity
Having discussed harmony, counterpoint, and acoustic consonance, we’ll now turn
to macroharmony and centricity, the last of the ﬁve features. First, we’ll explore the
ways in which composers might combine harmonic and macroharmonic consistency.
Then we’ll develop two analytical tools for quantifying macroharmony: pitch-class
circulation graphs, which record how fast a piece cycles through the pitch classes, and
global macroharmonic proﬁles, which represent the relative proportion of large collections in a piece. We’ll then introduce pitch-class proﬁles to describe both “local”
centricity (or rootedness) and “global” centricity (or tonicity). Together, these tools
amount to a “generalized theory of keys” allowing us to conceptualize the possibilities
between complete atonality and traditional scale-based tonality.

5.1

macroharmony

When we think about harmony, we automatically think about chords. In fact, we
are so ﬁxated on chords that we sometimes forget they tell only part of the story. To
counteract this tendency, Figure 5.1.1 uses the same chords to construct two very different sequences: the ﬁrst, containing twelve triads from the C diatonic scale followed
by twelve triads from the Fs diatonic scale, is placid and restful; the second, alternating between C and Fs diatonic scales, is considerably more angular and energetic.
The difference suggests that musical experience is strongly colored by what we have
heard recently: after a number of white notes, a C diatonic triad will sound relatively
consonant, while after a sequence of black notes, it will sound more jarring and out
of place. It is as if previously heard notes linger in our memory, mixing with what we
are currently hearing to create a harmonic penumbra—a “macroharmony” extending
beyond the boundaries of the temporal instant.
In thinking about macroharmony we need to ask at least four questions:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Does the music articulate identiﬁable macroharmonies other than the total
chromatic?
How fast do these macroharmonies change?
Are the various macroharmonies in the piece structurally similar—that is,
related by transposition or nearly so?
Are the macroharmonies consonant or dissonant?

Macroharmony and Centricity
Figure 5.1.1 Two sequences containing the same chords, but in different order. The ﬁrst
sounds considerably less chromatic than the second.

From this point of view, our two sequences are very different. The ﬁrst is both
macroharmonically consistent (which is to say that it articulates a pair of diatonic
collections, related by transposition) and macroharmonically consonant (since those
collections are themselves relatively consonant). The second is macroharmonically
consistent only in a trivial sense, since it cycles through the complete chromatic
collection every two measures or so. More important, it is macroharmonically dissonant, because the chromatic scale is itself fairly dissonant. As a result, the second sequence sounds considerably less “tonal” than the ﬁrst, even though they use
exactly the same triads.
Note that our questions echo those we might ask about ordinary harmonies:
macroharmonies, like harmonies, can be consonant or dissonant, and sequences of
macroharmonies can be harmonically consistent just as chord progressions can. Thus
Figure 5.1.2 exhibits a macroharmonic transition from mild dissonance to greater
consonance and back, somewhat akin to a classical V7–I–V7 progression. (To say
this is just to repeat the basic point that traditional Western music uses similar techniques on different time scales.) In fact, in some twentieth-century music macroharmony becomes the primary bearer of harmonic signiﬁcance. Mechanical, repetitive,
or random chord changes can create a sonic “wash” in which changes in macroharmony become more salient than the individual chords. Listening to Debussy’s
“Voiles,” Stravinsky’s “Dance of the Adolescents,” or Reich’s Different Trains, it is
motion between macroharmonies that really strikes the ear. Harmonic states are

Figure 5.1.2 Each section of Debussy’s “Voiles” uses a different scale. The switch from whole
tone to pentatonic to whole tone moves from greater dissonance to greater consonance and
back again.

155

156

theory

here intermediate between chord and key, lasting longer and containing more notes
than classical chords, but also moving faster than classical keys.

5.2

small-gap macroharmony

Suppose we would like to write music that is harmonically consistent while also conﬁning itself to a macroharmony with ﬁve to eight pitch classes. How should we go
about doing this?
One strategy is just to choose a collection of similar chords that together contain
no more than ﬁve to eight notes. For instance, we could chose A minor, F major, and
Df major, which together form a six-note hexatonic scale (Figure 5.2.1). This works
well until we get bored of our chords, at which point we notice—somewhat ruefully—
that the macroharmony is quite limited. First, the only major or minor triads it contains are those with roots on F, A, and Df. Second, it contains only a small number of
chord types: if, for example, we later decide to use stacks of fourths (such as F-Bf-Ef
or F-B-E), we must choose another macroharmony, since the hexatonic scale contains
no fourth chords whatsoever. The problem, it turns out, is that the hexatonic scale
has a number of three-semitone “gaps” between successive notes—or to coin a term,
it is a “3-gap macroharmony.” Because of this, there are no fourth chords in the collection, and no triads with roots
Figure 5.2.1 One way to combine harmonic and
other than F, A, or Df.1
macroharmonic consistency is to choose a set of
By contrast, a macroharmony
chords that together contain a relatively small
whose steps are at most two seminumber of notes. Here, the A minor, F major, and Df
tones large (i.e. a “2-gap macroharmajor triads contain the pitches of a hexatonic scale.
mony”) will always contain both
a triad and a fourth chord above
each of its notes. This is because
harmonic terms like “triad” and
“fourth chord” typically allow for some variation in interval size. For example,
the term “triad” refers to a stack of three- or four-semitone intervals. Consequently,
for each chord tone there are two semitonally adjacent options to choose from: given
the root C, we can put the third at either Ef or En, and given the third En, we can
put the ﬁfth at either Gn or Gs. In a 2-gap macroharmony, one of these options will
always be contained within the scale.
The principle here is related to what I call the “Fundamental Theorem of Jazz,”
which states that you can never be more than a semitone wrong.2 The basic idea is that
when trying to ﬁt a particular chord into a 2-gap macroharmony, one only needs to
shift its notes by semitone at most. This is illustrated in Figure 5.2.2. The connection

1 For instance, neither of the fourths above Df is in the collection, since both Gf and G fall in the gap
between F and Af.
2 While the name “Fundamental Theorem of Jazz” is a joke, the principle does play an important role
in jazz theory.

Macroharmony and Centricity

to jazz lies in the fact that improvisers often make Figure 5.2.2 In a 2-gap
use of 2-gap macroharmonies; consequently, any macroharmony, out-of-scale notes
note they play will either belong to the macrohar- can be moved into the scale by
semitone, in either direction.
mony or can be a chromatic neighbor to one of its
notes. Practically speaking, this means that if one
ﬁnds oneself accidentally playing a note outside
the macroharmony, it can always be reinterpreted
as a chromatic neighbor to an adjacent macroharmonic tone. In fact, with a 2-gap macroharmony,
the improviser is free to shift either upward or downward by semitone. (If a particular
note is not in a 2-gap macroharmony, then both of its chromatic neighbors are.3) This
is quite useful, since out-of-macroharmony notes can be instantly corrected, without
the improviser having to think about exactly how he or she has gone wrong.
Observe that there is a difference between “having small gaps” and the “near evenness” of Chapter 4. In a nearly even scale, scalar transposition resembles chromatic transposition, which means that we can take a harmony that is inside the scale and transpose it
along the scale without distorting it much. In a 2-gap macroharmony, any note is at most
one semitone away from some note in the macroharmony, which means that we can take
any sonority whatsoever and “squeeze” it into the macroharmony without distorting it
much. This difference is illustrated by Figure 5.2.3. Note, in particular, that a collection
can be nearly even while still having large gaps (e.g. the major triad). Conversely, a collection can have reasonably small gaps while still being somewhat uneven.4
Figure 5.2.3 Near evenness and gaplessness. Chords can be transposed along a nearly even
scale with minimal distortion (a). In a gapless scale (b), chords outside the scale can be
“squeezed” into the scale with minimal distortion. Here, the E minor triad is squeezed into
the C acoustic scale by shifting B down by semitone.

3 In a 3-gap macroharmony, one can never be more than a semitone wrong, but there may be no choice
about whether to slide upward or downward by semitone.
4 For example, the eight-note collection {C, Cs, D, Ds, E, Fs, Gs, Bf} has its semitones distributed
unevenly.

157

158

theory
Figure 5.2.4 Set classes
representing 2- and 3-gap
macroharmonies.

Nevertheless, it is true that the most even collections generally have the smallest
gaps, relative to other collections of that size. Figure 5.2.4 shows that the twelvetone equal-tempered system has four ﬁve-note 3-gap macroharmonies, including
the pentatonic scale, the “dominant ninth” chord, and the “diminished seventh
plus one” chord. There is only one six-note 2-gap macroharmony (the whole-tone
scale), while there are 17 six-note 3-gap macroharmonies. The three seven-note
2-gap macroharmonies are the diatonic, acoustic, and “whole tone plus one” scales.
Finally, there are eight eight-note 2-gap collections, including the octatonic scale.
Once again, we ﬁnd familiar musical objects—such as the diatonic and acoustic
scales—turning up in a variety of different theoretical contexts. And once again,
we see that the goal of combining elementary tonal features (in this case harmonic
and macroharmonic consistency) places nontrivial constraints on the composer. It
is relatively easy to write music that exhibits harmonic or macroharmonic consistency, but more difﬁcult to write music that exhibits both at once: we cannot simply
choose harmonies and macroharmonies willy-nilly, mixing and matching them to
our hearts’ content.

5.3

pitch-class circulation

We’ll now develop some tools for quantifying macroharmony, starting with graphs
that represent how many pitch classes are used over various spans of musical time.
The concept is easiest to explain by way of an example. Figure 5.3.1 shows that if
we look at every three consecutive notes of the opening of Bach’s F major two-part
invention, we ﬁnd on average 2.4 distinct pitch classes. Similarly, if we look at every
four-note window of the music, we ﬁnd on average 2.9 pitch classes. Figure 5.3.1c
compiles this data into a pitch-class circulation graph, which shows how many pitch
classes are found in windows of various sizes. Such graphs are very crude tools that
do not tell us anything about the character of the macroharmonies; furthermore,
they can be inﬂuenced by textural features independent of the music’s underlying

Macroharmony and Centricity
Figure 5.3.1 (a) The theme of Bach’s F major two-part invention, along with the number of
pitch classes in the ﬁrst several three- and four-note windows. (b) A table listing the average
number of pitch classes per window in the excerpt, for window sizes between 1 and 10 notes.
(c) The same information expressed as a graph.

Number of pitch classes

6

Window Average Number
Size
of Pitch Classes
1
1
2
1.9
3
2.4
4
2.9
5
3.4
6
3.9
7
4.4
8
4.8
9
5.1
10
5.6

5
4
3
2
1
0

1

2

3

4

5
6
Window size

7

8

9

10

harmonic structure.5 But by providing a rough picture of how fast a piece of music
moves through the available notes, they can help us get a quantitative grip on how
“chromatic” it is.
Figure 5.3.2 graphs the pitch-class circulation in a number of familiar pieces.
Palestrina’s Pope Marcellus Mass is at the bottom, while Webern’s Piano Variations,
Op. 27 is at the top. These two curves have a similar shape, rising quickly and ﬂattening out rather sharply. The quick rise reﬂects the fact that, over short time scales, the
two composers both tend to exhaust a particular collection of notes—the seven diatonic notes in Palestrina’s case and the twelve chromatic notes in Webern’s. The point
at which the graphs level off tells us how large the macroharmony is, with Palestrina’s
leveling off below Webern’s since the diatonic scale is smaller than the chromatic. The
ﬂattening itself indicates the relative absence of macroharmonic change: Webern’s
twelve-tone piece systematically cycles through the only twelve notes available to him,

5 Since pitch-class circulation graphs measure the number of pitch classes per note attack, they are susceptible to differences in tempo, with slower pieces often appearing to be more chromatic than faster pieces.
The presence of tremolo or other repetitions also tends to artiﬁcially decrease the “chromaticism” of the
music. Furthermore, in constructing these graphs it is necessary to “linearize” simultaneous attacks, so that
one comes before the other. (This can be done in a random fashion, hoping that the size of the data set will
wash away any inaccuracies introduced by the process.) For these reasons, these graphs should be taken with
a grain of salt, as providing a very general picture that may not always be accurate in its precise details.

159

theory
Figure 5.3.2
Pitch-class
circulation in
several wellknown pieces.

12

Number of pitch classes

160

10
8
Webern, Op. 27
Wagner, Tristan Prelude
Brahms, Op. 118
Beethoven, Hammerklavier
Mozart, K. 310, I
Palestrina, Pope Marcellus Mass

6
4
2
1

51

101
151
Window size

201

251

and as a result his graph reaches a completely horizontal plateau; Palestrina’s occasional use of nondiatonic notes creates a very gradual slope over larger spans of time.
Each piece is macroharmonically static, since any two of its mid-length segments will
contain roughly the same pitch classes.
Between these extremes lies most of the music of the classical tradition. Figure
5.3.2 shows that pieces by Mozart, Beethoven, Brahms, and Wagner exhibit a distinctive harmonic proﬁle, with their graphs rising very quickly and then leveling off
much more gradually. (In fact, a typical 10-note excerpt of classical music contains
roughly half the pitch classes in a typical 100-note excerpt.6) The quick rise reﬂects
the fact that the music again cycles through a collection of available notes, as in
Palestrina and Webern. The more gradual ﬂattening indicates that the macroharmonies are themselves changing, albeit at a much slower rate. Modulation here ensures
a slow but steady supply of fresh pitch classes, causing the graph to level off much
more gradually.
Figure 5.3.2 is consistent with a truism of music history: that chromaticism gradually increased over time, beginning with modest explorations during the baroque and
classical eras, thriving during the nineteenth century, and culminating in complete
atonality. Our graph shows that from Palestrina through Wagner, later composers
do indeed tend to utilize faster rates of pitch-class circulation, reﬂecting increasingly
rapid modulations to increasingly distant tonal areas, increasing use of altered chords,
and so on. (Of course, some of this is selection bias: including composers such as
Gesualdo and Satie would complicate the matter considerably.) Furthermore, as we
will see below, there is relatively little difference between the rate of pitch-class circulation in the highly chromatic tonal music of Max Reger and the fully atonal music
of Schoenberg. In this sense, atonality does represent a relatively natural response to
the saturated chromaticism of late nineteenth-century tonality. We will return to this
thought below.
6 Statisticians would say that these graphs are log-linear to within window sizes of about 256 notes.

Macroharmony and Centricity

5.4

modulating the rate of pitch-class
circulation

In most Western music, the rate of pitch-class circulation is itself a harmonic variable
to be manipulated. For example, Figure 5.4.1 graphs the rate of pitch-class circulation found in selected Chopin Etudes, the ﬁrst book of Debussy’s Preludes, the individual numbers of Stravinsky’s The Rite of Spring, and a selection of Shostakovich’s
Op. 87 Preludes and Fugues. All four works display enormous variation, ranging from
Palestrina-like sections that use just a few pitch classes, to highly chromatic sections

Figure 5.4.1 Pitch-class circulation in Chopin’s Etudes (a) and Debussy’s Preludes (b). Both
collections cover an enormous range, comparable to that of the entire classical tradition
(compare Figure 5.3.2).

Number of pitch classes

12
10
8
Op. 10 No. 2
Op. 10 No. 6
Op. 25 No. 11
Op. 25 No. 10
Op. 25 No. 4
Op. 25 No. 3
Op. 10 No. 9
Op. 25 No. 12
Op. 10 No. 4

6
4
2
1

51

101
151
Window size

201

251

Number of pitch classes

12
10
8
6

6. Des pas sur la neige
4. "Les sons et les parfums ..."
1. Danseuses de Delphes
9. La serenade interrompue
3. Le vent dans la plaine
8. La ﬁlle aux cheveaux de lin
5. Les collines d'Anacapri
2. Voiles

4
2
1

51

101
151
Window size

201

251

161

theory
Figure 5.4.1 (Continued) Pitch-class circulation in Stravinsky’s Rite of Spring (c) and
Shostakovich’s Preludes and Fugues (d). Again, the pieces cover a large range.

Number of pitch classes

12
10
8
Procession of the Sage
Introduction (Part II)
Introduction (Part I)
Ritual of Abduction
Dance of the Adolescents
Ritual Action of the Ancestors
Spring Rounds
Evocation of the Ancestors

6
4
2
1

51

101
151
Window size

201

251

12
Number of pitch classes

162

10
8
6
Fugue 15
Fugue 2
Prelude 23
Fugue 12
Prelude 21

4
2
1

51

101
151
Window size

Fugue 14
Fugue 24
Fugue 7
Prelude 12
Fugue 1
Prelude 14

201

251

in which all twelve notes are in play. This of course reﬂects a common technique for
creating large-scale form: composers can generate long-term harmonic change by
juxtaposing moments of relative calm—in which the music remains ﬁxed in a small
macroharmony—with passages of more rapid and aggressive chromaticism.
This diversity in the rate of pitch-class circulation stands in stark contrast to
the homogeneity of much atonal music. Figure 5.4.2 graphs the pitch-class circulation in Schoenberg’s Op. 11 piano pieces and Webern’s Op. 27 variations. The outer
movements of both pieces are almost indistinguishable from one another, while
their middle movements are ever so slightly less chromatic. The difference between
Figures 5.4.1 and 5.4.2 is truly remarkable: where Chopin, Debussy, Stravinsky, and
Shostakovich embraced a vast array of macroharmonic states, a diversity comparable to that of the entire history of Western music, Schoenberg and Webern restricted

Macroharmony and Centricity
Figure 5.4.2 Pitch-class circulation in Schoenberg’s Op. 11 and Webern’s Op. 27 piano pieces.
The individual movements of each piece are much more similar than in Figure 5.4.1.

Number of pitch classes

12
10
8
Schoenberg, Op. 11 No. 1
Schoenberg, Op. 11 No. 3
Schoenberg, Op. 11 No. 2

6
4
2
1

51

101
151
Window size

201

251

Number of pitch classes

12
10
8
Webern, Op. 27 No. 1
Webern, Op. 27 No. 3
Webern, Op. 27 No. 2

6
4
2
1

51

101
151
Window size

201

251

themselves to a much narrower region of musical space. This no doubt helps explain
why some listeners ﬁnd atonal music to be somewhat static. In writing music with a
consistently fast rate of pitch-class circulation, atonal composers deprived themselves
of one important tool for creating large-scale harmonic change.
It is notable that historians have sometimes used stylistic categories to describe
the macroharmonic diversity in the music of Debussy, Stravinsky, and Shostakovich.
The low-circulation passages are said to evoke particular genres—the diatonicism of
ancient music, the pentatonicism or exoticism of non-Western music, and so on—while
the high-circulation passages are associated with modernism. In this way, composers
favoring macroharmonic diversity are sometimes made out to be polyglots, stylistic
magpies who borrow from many different sources. In some cases, this characterization
is accompanied by an evaluative narrative, as if diatonicism represents a regressive,

163

164

theory

backward-looking tendency, while thoroughgoing chromaticism represents a progressive or forward-looking attitude. Macroharmonic diversity is thus associated with
stylistic mawkishness, testifying to an incomplete embrace of modernity.
Of course, it is true that many twentieth-century composers were interested in
evoking a range of styles. Nevertheless, I think we should be careful to separate the
issue of style from the purely harmonic effects that stylistic juxtaposition can create. Rather than seeing Debussy, Stravinsky, and Shostakovich as stopping short of a
complete and consistent chromaticism, I would therefore prefer to describe them as
embracing modulation—writing music that presents a wealth of different macroharmonic states and that changes the rate of pitch-class circulation to reinforce larger
formal boundaries. (In fact, I suspect that critics have sometimes resorted to stylistic
categories in part because we lack precise theoretical terms for talking about phenomena such as pitch-class circulation.) From this point of view, it is thoroughgoing
chromaticism that is conservative, as it abandons macroharmonic change in favor of
musical textures that are harmonically uniform in the large. In this respect it recalls
the macroharmonic stasis of the earliest Western music.

5.5

macroharmonic consistency

Pitch-class circulation graphs show us how fast pitch classes are passing by, but do not
provide any sense of what the macroharmonies actually are; as a result, they cannot
distinguish between quickly modulating diatonic music and nondiatonic music in
which all twelve pitch classes are constantly in play. This can be seen by comparing
Schoenberg’s Op. 11 No. 1 with John Coltrane’s solo on “Giant Steps” (Figure 5.5.1).
Both pieces have almost identical rates of pitch-class circulation, even though Schoenberg’s music is intuitively “more chromatic” than Coltrane’s.
What we need are global macroharmonic proﬁles that identify the ﬁve- to eightnote macroharmonies used in a particular piece. Given an excerpt of music, we can
exhaustively tabulate all the three-note chord types, four-note chord types, ﬁve-note
chord types, and so on.7 Figure 5.5.2 presents the six- and seven-note collections in
Schoenberg and Coltrane’s pieces. As we would expect, the graph of Coltrane’s solo
is highly peaked, reﬂecting the fact that it is saturated with diatonic scales and scale
fragments. By contrast, Schoenberg’s piece features a much more even distribution
of chord types, not strongly emphasizing any particular six- or seven-note collection.
(On these graphs, the x-axis is labeled using Allen Forte’s hard-to-decipher numerical
labels for set classes; what is important here is just the overall difference in shape—
Coltrane’s graph is much more peaked than Schoenberg’s.8) We can therefore say

7 As before, the analysis here is simplistic but hopefully unbiased: I simply “linearize” simultaneous
attacks by arpeggiating them in an essentially random way, and then count up the successive macroharmonies in the piece. That is, for each note i and each size n, I identify the n-note chord type that begins
with note i.
8 For Forte’s labeling system, see Straus 2005 or Forte 1973. In general, the more chromatic set classes
(such as 0123) have smaller numbers, while more even chord types have larger ones.

Macroharmony and Centricity
Figure 5.5.1 Schoenberg’s Op. 11 and John Coltrane’s Giant Steps solo have identical rates of
pitch-class circulation (a), even though Coltrane’s solo is tonal (b).

that Coltrane’s solo is macroharmonically consistent in a way that Schoenberg’s piece
is not: Coltrane emphasizes one particular seven-note collection, while Schoenberg
makes relatively indiscriminate use of almost all the available seven- and eight-note
macroharmonies.9 To be sure, Coltrane’s music modulates very quickly, thus ensuring
a high overall rate of pitch-class circulation; but unlike Schoenberg, the local structure of his music clearly articulates familiar scales.
One can make a similar distinction among musical styles in which pitch classes
circulate more slowly. Figure 5.5.3 contrasts Debussy’s “La ﬁlle aux cheveux de lin”
with Satie’s “Theme of the Order,” from Sonneries de la Rose + Croix. The opening of
Debussy’s piece very clearly articulates Ef natural minor and Gf acoustic scales, separated by a brief cadence on Ef major. Satie’s piece, although it uses relatively few accidentals, does so sporadically and without a clear system; as a result it is difﬁcult to separate
the music into regions exemplifying recurring macroharmonies. Yet both pieces have
relatively low rates of pitch-class circulation, and are in this sense “not very chromatic.”
9 Of course, Schoenberg’s music is macroharmonically consistent by virtue of using the chromatic
scale, but this is trivial.

165

theory
Figure 5.5.2 The relative preponderance of different chord types in pieces by Schoenberg and
Coltrane. Coltrane’s graph is highly peaked at points representing familiar tonal collections.
Schoenberg’s piece does not emphasize any larger collections to the same extent. The x-axis
uses a variant of Forte’s (1973) set-class labels, where a half-integer i + .5 represents the
inversion of chord i. Thus, the harmonic major scale, 32.5, is the inversion of the harmonic
minor, 32.

20
Coltrane, “Giant Steps” solo
Percent of total

15

{C, D, E, F, G, A}

Schoenberg, Op. 11 No. 1

10

5

0
0

5

10

15

20 25 30 35
Six-note chord type

40

45

50

20

diatonic scale
Schoenberg, Op. 11 No. 1
15
Percent of total

166

Coltrane, “Giant Steps” solo

10

5

0
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

Seven-note chord type

Taken together, these four pieces demonstrate that the informal music-theoretical
term “chromatic” involves the interaction of at least two independent variables: rate
of pitch-class circulation and the degree of emphasis on particular macroharmonies.
Figure 5.5.4 tries to represent the situation visually. Music such as Schoenberg’s, which
combines a high rate of pitch-class circulation with a low degree of macroharmonic
consistency, will be heard as very chromatic; conversely, music such as Debussy’s,
with a low rate of pitch-class circulation and a high degree of macroharmonic consistency, will be heard as non-chromatic. Pieces such as “Giant Steps” or Satie’s “Theme”

Macroharmony and Centricity
Figure 5.5.3 Debussy’s “La ﬁlle aux cheveux de lin” (a) and Satie’s “Theme of the Order,”
from Sonneries de la Rose + Croix (b).

Rate of pitch class circulation

are somewhat more difﬁcult to classify, Figure 5.5.4 The rate of pitch-class
because the simple opposition between circulation is independent of the degree of
“chromatic” and “non-chromatic” breaks emphasis on particular macroharmonies.
The four pieces we have been discussing
down: Coltrane’s piece has faster pitchstake out four different regions in the space
class circulation than Satie’s, but more of musical possibilities.
clearly articulates speciﬁc macroharmoSchoenberg
Coltrane
nies; while Satie’s circulates through the
pitch classes more slowly, but without
articulating identiﬁable macroharmonies. Each is somewhat chromatic in its
own distinctive way.
Global macroharmonic proﬁles can
also be useful analytically. For example,
Satie, “Theme”
Debussy
Figure 5.5.5 identiﬁes the most prominent seven- and eight-note collections in
Emphasis on particular macroharmonies
the opening four sections of The Rite of
Spring. The introduction is relatively chromatic, superimposing multiple tonalities
without emphasizing any familiar macroharmony. (The melodic minor scale is the
most prominent seven-note collection, but it appears only 9% of the time.) The “Dance
of the Adolescents” features a larger preponderance of harmonic and melodic minor
scales—chieﬂy because its famous opening chord is a harmonic minor collection,

167

168

theory
Figure 5.5.5 The most common large collections in the ﬁrst four sections of the Rite of
Spring. Each section has a distinct macroharmonic proﬁle.
Introduction
Prevalent
Seven-note
Collections

melodic minor (9%)

Prevalent
Eight-note
Collections

Various chromatic
collections:
(0, 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 8, 9)
(12%)
(0, 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8)
(8%)

Dance of the
Adolescents
harmonic minor
(18%)
melodic minor
(16%)
diatonic (8%)
supersets of the
above

Ritual of
Abduction

Spring Rounds

subsets of the
octatonic

diatonic (53%)

octatonic
(18%)

supersets of the
diatonic

while the ﬁnal section emphasizes the A mode of F acoustic.10 While neither of the
opening sections involves much explicitly octatonic material, the “Ritual of Abduction” is highly (18%) octatonic. Finally, “Spring Rounds” is extremely diatonic (55%).
Overall, these ﬁgures indicate that Stravinsky’s piece exhibits a large-scale transition
from the highly chromatic opening to the very diatonic “Spring Rounds,” a transition
mediated by familiar nondiatonic scales. This transition might be compared to those
we encountered in Debussy and Prokoﬁev (§4.7), though spread out over a much
longer span of time.
The Rite of Spring can be usefully contrasted with Shostakovich’s Op. 87 Preludes
and Fugues. Both pieces belong to the twentieth-century extended-tonal tradition,
drawing on tonal techniques while also featuring moments of extreme chromaticism,
superimposition of multiple scales, and other modernistic devices. However, where
Stravinsky makes relatively frequent use of nondiatonic scales, the Preludes and
Fugues are profoundly and almost stubbornly diatonic. Figure 5.5.6 shows that the
diatonic scale is the most prominent macroharmony in almost every one of Shostakovich’s 48 preludes and fugues, sometimes by an enormous degree.11 (Indeed, in the
ﬁrst fugue it is the only macroharmony.) In fact, Shostakovich’s minor-mode pieces
are even more diatonic than Bach’s—largely because Shostakovich eschews V–i progressions in favor of diatonic cadences that hearken back to a pre-tonal modality.
In this respect, Shostakovich’s pieces are more neo-classical than post-impressionist;
like Copland, Piston, and many other mid-twentieth-century composers, the Preludes and Fugues tend to move between diatonicism, chromaticism, and polytonality
without exploring nondiatonic scales. This is part of what endows the music with its
distinctive austerity.

10 See Tymoczko 2002 for related observations.
11 One of the few exceptions, the Fs minor fugue, is built on the seventh mode of G harmonic major;
we discuss it in Chapter 9.

Macroharmony and Centricity
Figure 5.5.6 (a) The height of each bar represents the proportion of seven-note
macroharmonies that are diatonic. The diatonic scale is the most common seven-note
collection in all but four of Shostakovich’s Preludes and Fugues, and in some pieces it is the only
macroharmony. The most common non-diatonic collection is represented by a thin gray line;
in only four movements does it rise above the black line. (b) Shostakovich’s minor-key pieces
are considerably more diatonic than Bach’s minor-key Preludes and Fugues. In particular,
Shostakovich rarely uses the harmonic and melodic minor scales, preferring the natural minor.

Percent diatonic

100
80
60
40
20
0
1

3

5

7

9

Harmonic minor

5.6

11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25
Piece #

Bach

Shostakovich

25%

5%

Diatonic

20%

56%

Melodic minor

12%

3%

centricity

In many musical passages, a particular note is felt to be more prominent, important, or
stable than the others—in other words, to be a tonal “center.” The concept of centricity is
complicated, in part because it encompasses two closely related phenomena: rootedness,
which applies to individual chords, and tonicity, which refers to prominence over longer
stretches of musical time. Rootedness and tonicity are music-theoretical cousins, sharing a number of physiognomic characteristics while being of distinct parentage. And
just as the line between chord and macroharmony is sometimes blurry, so too is the distinction between rootedness and tonicity: in impressionist or minimalist music, it can
be difﬁcult to say whether the most important tone is a root, a tonic, or something in
between. For this reason, it is useful to try to develop a uniﬁed approach to the two phenomena, without presupposing that there will always be a sharp line dividing them.
Elementary music theory teaches that the “root” of a tertian chord is the lowest
note when the chord is arranged as an ascending chain of thirds: thus, E is the root of

169

170
Figure 5.6.1
Two progressions
that use the same
pitch classes,
but sound very
different.

theory

the collection {E, G, B}, regardless of
musical context. (I tell students that
to ﬁnd the root, they must ﬁrst write
the chord in snowman form.12) But
this is an oversimpliﬁcation: though
the two progressions in Figure 5.6.1
use the same pitch classes, the ﬁrst
sounds like i–iv in E minor, while
the second sounds more like V–I
in C major. A more ﬂexible theorist might therefore describe the chords in Figure
5.6.1b as G and C chords with “added sixths.” This shows that a sophisticated notion
of “root” cannot rely on mechanical rules like “the lowest note in a chain of thirds
is always the root”; instead, we must sometimes make more delicate psychological
judgments about the relative importance of notes. This issue arises all the time in
twentieth-century music: it would be odd to describe Figure 5.6.2 as a series of 16
repetitions of the same chord, rather than a transition from a dissonant sonority (in
which the notes D, Ef, and Fs predominate) to a more consonant sonority featuring
C, E, and G.
Contemporary theorists often use pitch-class proﬁles to represent differences of
importance among the notes in a chord. These useful devices are bar graphs in which
the x-axis represents pitch class and the y-axis represents a subjective assessment of
prominence, stability, or importance.13 The simplest conception of a chord is binary;
notes can be either inside the chord or outside of it, but no further differentiations
are made. This approach can be modeled using two-tiered pitch-class proﬁles, with
notes in the chord being assigned the value 1 and the rest being assigned 0 (Figure
5.6.3). The musical cases we have been considering require ﬁner gradations of prominence. For example, Figure 5.6.4 shows how we might describe the progressions in
Figure 5.6.1: the ﬁrst proﬁle assigns higher prominence to the pitch classes E and A,

Figure 5.6.2 The same notes are attacked on every sixteenth note, but there is a palpable
transformation over the course of the measure.

12 That is, as a stack of thirds, which looks like a self-supporting snowman. (Other inversions seem
to have a snowball ﬂoating unsupported in the air.) For seventh chords, you need “extended snowman
form.”
13 These sorts of graphs originate with Krumhansl and Shepard 1979. Related graphs have been used
by Deutsch and Feroe (1981) and are central to the work of Fred Lerdahl (2001). I discuss Lerdahl in
Appendix E.

Macroharmony and Centricity

while the second assigns higher prominence to
G and C. Figure 5.6.5 represents the music in
Figure 5.6.2, where there is a gradual shift from
2
D, Ef, and Fs to C, E, and G. In these cases, the
notion of chord membership becomes fuzzy,
admitting a range of values between 0 and 1.
We can also use pitch-class proﬁles to rep1
resent global centricity, or tonicity.14 Threetiered proﬁles provide a simple but effective
way to visualize musical modes: notes outside
0
the macroharmony are assigned the value
0, non-centric notes inside the macroharmony are assigned the value 1, and centric notes are assigned the value 2.15 Thus,
Figure 5.6.6 represents C lydian, G ionian, C phrygian, and G locrian modes. In
Figure 5.6.3 The simplest model of a
chord is a binary one: notes are either
in the chord or outside of it.

Figure 5.6.4 Pitch-class proﬁles can be used to reﬂect the fact that chord tones differ in terms
of their importance. Here, (a) and (b) represent the two progressions in Figure 5.6.1.

2

2

1

1

0

0

2

2

1

1

0

0

14 Note that local and global centricity can conﬂict in fascinating ways. For example, in C major, the
tonic note can sometimes be unstable, such as when it acts as a neighboring tone to the third of a V7 chord.
Relative to the local harmony, C is less stable than B; relative to the global key, however, the leading tone
is less stable than the tonic. Remarkably, our minds can encompass both perceptions at once, with global
pitch-class proﬁles playing a role even in the presence of conﬂicting local harmonic states.
15 The numerical values here are arbitrary; what is more important is the relative prominence of the
various notes. However, in some circumstances, we could use different numerical strengths to record different degrees of musical prominence. For example, Harold Powers (1958, p. 456) contrasts South Indian

171

172

theory
Figure 5.6.5 The music of Figure 5.6.2 can be represented as a continuous interpolation
between these two graphs, with the more prominent notes becoming less so, and the less
prominent notes becoming more so.
2

2

1

1

0

0

some theoretical contexts we may want to draw more ﬁne-grained distinctions: for
example, there is a palpable difference between an E phrygian mode in which the
ﬁfth scale degree is emphasized, and an E phrygian mode in which the fourth scale
degree is important (Figure 5.6.7).16 We could capture this with a four-tiered model
that distinguishes tonal center, second-most important tone, within-macroharmony
notes, and outside-macroharmony notes. Figure 5.6.8a goes even further by proposing a ﬁve-tiered pitch-class proﬁle for the key of C major: here, C is most important,
G the second-most important, E the third-most important, the remaining diatonic
notes fourth-most important, and the black notes last. (This graph is strongly
reminiscent of what Fred Lerdahl calls the “basic space” for C major, discussed in
Appendix D.) In extreme cases, we may even want to use graphs such as that in
Figure 5.6.8b, where we have continuous gradations of pitch-class stability. Here it
is impossible to draw sharp distinctions between notes “inside” the macroharmony
and those outside it.
An interesting piece, in this regard, is the “Petit airs au bord du ruisseau” from
Stravinsky’s Histoire du soldat. This playful bagatelle has an almost ﬂirtatious relation to traditional scale-based tonality: the piece uses ﬁve ﬁxed scale degrees (G-AB-D-E) and two mobile degrees that appear in distinct ﬂavors (F vs. Fs and C vs.
Cs). While some parts of the music clearly articulate distinct scales, others juxtapose
different forms of the “mobile” scale degrees to create a mild form of polytonality

ragas with Gregorian modality, writing “the drone-tonic is much more prominent with respect to the other
notes of any given raga than is any tone of a Gregorian piece, even the tenor of a psalm-tone.” We could
express this by adjusting the height of the tonic note in our graph.
16 Gregory Barnett (1998, pp. 266ff) uses secondary pitches (among other considerations) to argue
that seventeenth-century ideas about “key” derive from “church keys” rather than traditional modal theory.
Powers (1981, p. 453) offers some related observations about tonal differences between Renaissance motets
sharing the same ﬁnal. Historians such as Powers (1958, 1981, 1992) have rebelled against overly simple
conceptions of modality, pointing out that earlier musicians understood the phenomenon to include characteristic melodic gestures, complex pitch hierarchies, and so on. The point is well taken, but I think contemporary theorists sometimes have reason to use a basic deﬁnition according to which, for instance, “D
dorian” simply means “the white notes with D as tonal center.” (Barnett 1998 uses the term “tonality” as a
synonym for this minimalist deﬁnition of “mode.”) There is nothing wrong with using modern concepts
to analyze earlier music.

Macroharmony and Centricity
2

2

1

1

0

0

2

2

1

1

0

0

Figure 5.6.7 The melody in (a) emphasizes the notes E and A, while that in (b) emphasizes
E and B. Though both might be said to be “in E phrygian,” there is an important
difference between them. We might represent this difference by using pitch-class proﬁles
that identify the second-most important note in a mode.

(Figure 5.6.9). Interestingly, there is only one point in the piece where a single line
sounds distinct forms of the mobile notes in direct succession; for the most part,
it is as if the music were “locally scale-based” within each instrument. (This is precisely what leads me to consider F and Fs to be two different forms of the same
scale degree, rather than analyzing the music using a nine-note scale.) Figure 5.6.9b

173
Figure 5.6.6
Pitch-class
proﬁles for C
lydian, G ionian,
G locrian, and
C phrygian
(clockwise from
upper left).

174
Figure 5.6.8
A ﬁve-tiered
pitch-class
proﬁle
representing the
key of C major
(a) and a proﬁle
that does not
represent any
common key (b).

theory

2

2

1

1

0

0

Figure 5.6.9 Stravinsky’s “Petit airs,” from Histoire du soldat uses ﬁve “ﬁxed” pitches (G, A,
B, D, E) and two “mobile” pitch classes (C/Cs, and F/Fs) (a). We can represent the music
using a four-tiered pitch proﬁle (b), in which the “mobile” pitch classes are assigned a lower
weighting than the ﬁxed pitch classes. Here, A is assigned the highest value, indicating that it
functions as a tonic.

uses a pitch-class proﬁle to represent the
somewhat blurred tonality of this movement:
here, the proﬁle indicates that I consider A
the central pitch; the “ﬁxed” scale degrees are
assigned the value 1, indicating their relative
1
stability, while the mobile scale degrees are
assigned lower values, indicating their status
as ﬂuctuating, “secondary” pitches. But as the
0
graph shows, these notes are more signiﬁcant
than those that do not appear at all.
Global pitch-class proﬁles represent a psychological or conceptual phenomenon—the felt or imagined importance of the different pitch classes. However, the
2

Macroharmony and Centricity
Figure 5.6.10 (a) The distribution of pitch classes in the opening phrase of Mozart’s Jupiter
Symphony. (b) A three-tiered pitch-class that matches Mozart’s distribution reasonably well.

statistical distribution of notes in a piece often correlates reasonably well with the
three-tiered pitch proﬁles we would intuitively describe them with.17 (Terminological note: I distinguish pitch-class distributions, which measure the statistical frequencies of notes in a piece, from pitch-class proﬁles, which represent subjective assertions
about psychological importance.) For example, Figure 5.6.10 shows the frequencies
of the pitch classes in the ﬁrst 23 measures of the ﬁrst movement of Mozart’s Jupiter
Symphony. This statistical distribution resembles a three-tiered pitch-class proﬁle in
which both C and G are assigned the value 2, while the remaining diatonic notes are
assigned the value 1—an arrangement that captures the intuitive sense that C and G
are most stable in the key of C major, and that the diatonic tones are more stable than
the nondiatonic tones. Note that we cannot recover all the information about pitch
prominence simply by counting pitch classes, since G appears more frequently than
C. But this should not be surprising, as there are many ways of generating centricity besides note repetition. What is interesting is that a very crude count of the pitch
classes provides a reasonable guide to the relative importance of the notes.
Indeed, pitch-class distributions can sometimes reveal interesting facts about
the tonality of speciﬁc passages. For example, Figure 5.6.11 records the note frequencies of the three solos in “Freedom Jazz Dance,” from the Miles Davis Group’s
Miles Smiles. The piece is an example of “modal jazz,” in which the rhythm section
plays a relatively static riff emphasizing Bf. Though the music is ostensibly in a
single key, the pitch-class distributions are all very different, suggesting that the
three soloists have different interpretations of the piece’s “Bf-ness.” Davis’s distribution suggests Bf dorian, with Bf, C, Df, F, and G occurring most frequently,
while Shorter’s is more suggestive of Bf mixolydian, emphasizing Af, Bf, C, D, and
F. Hancock’s is considerably more chromatic than either of these, and the relative
lack of A, C, and Gf may suggest Bf octatonic. In Chapter 9, we will see that some
of these differences result from the fact that the soloists do, in fact, play different
17 This observation derives from Krumhansl and Schmuckler 1986. See also Krumhansl 1990 and 2004.
Chapter 9 of Huron 2007 contains a particularly informative discussion.

175

176

theory
Figure 5.6.11 Pitch-class distributions of the three solos in “Freedom Jazz Dance,” from the
album Miles Smiles. Each soloist emphasizes different pitches, suggesting different ways of
conceiving of the key.
2

2

1

1

0

0

2

1

0

Figure 5.6.12
A hypothetical
proﬁle in
which C and
Df are equally
important.

scales over the ﬁxed Bf ostinato. But scales are not the whole story. Even within a
single scale, the musicians choose to emphasize different notes, creating very different shadings of the underlying Bf tonality.
Compositionally, I ﬁnd pitch-class proﬁles to be extremely useful devices. I like to
ask: could I construct (or improvise) music that reﬂects Figure 5.6.8b? Could I write
music that realizes Figure 5.6.12, in which both C and Df are perceived as equally
important? The basic technique here is simply to make sure that the more prominent
notes in the pitch-class proﬁle are accented in various ways. Figure 5.6.13 provides
an excerpt from a short computer-composed etude, in which pitch-class proﬁles
were used as probability tables that determine the likelihood of each note’s appearing. Another example, from a more conventional piece, is given in Figure 5.6.14. In
composing this music, I began with the idea of “coloring” a single tonic note with a
variety of secondary pitches. The pitch proﬁles
2
in (b) provided an intuitive guide, allowing me
to construct a sequence of improvisatory lines
that gradually broadened the music’s macroharmonic content. The result is a kind of
1
blurred, burbling texture, in which the note A
is a vey clear tonal center. (Note that the rhythmic language gradually congeals in concert
0
with the harmonies, moving from indeterminate

Macroharmony and Centricity
Figure 5.6.13 Three pitch-class proﬁles, along with a passage of computer-generated music
embodying the third. Readers with access to the internet can hear a short computer-generated
etude on the companion website that moves between the three proﬁles.
2

2

2

1

1

1

0

0

0

to determinate notation.) It seems to me that there is an enormous amount of unexplored musical territory here, representing the no-man’s-land between traditional
tonality and full-on atonality. Pitch-class proﬁles, by helping us visualize this territory, can help us imagine ways to explore it.

5.7

where does centricity come from?

Broadly speaking, theorists have explained centricity in two ways. Internal explanations assert that the structure of a group of notes is sufﬁcient to pick one out as a
tonal center, without any effort on the composer’s part. External explanations focus
on what composers do, asserting that composers make notes more prominent (or
stable) by playing them more frequently, accenting them rhythmically or dynamically, placing them in registrally salient positions, and so on. Rather than being a
property of collections considered abstractly, centricity is a property of collections as
they are used in actual music.

177

Figure 5.6.14 The opening three phrases of my piece Cathedral (one phrase per line), along with the three pitch-class proﬁles that inspired them.

2

1

0

2

1

0

2

1

0

Macroharmony and Centricity

Internalists typically cite principles such as the following:
I1.
I2.

A note is more prominent if it is the lower note of one or more consonant
intervals (perfect ﬁfth, major third, or minor third) in the macroharmony.
A note is more prominent if it does not form sharp dissonances (tritone, or
minor second) with any note in the macroharmony.

Principle I1 suggests, for example, that C is the most prominent tone in the collection
{C, E, G} and that the note B is poorly suited to be the tonic of the C diatonic scale,
since there is no scale tone a perfect ﬁfth above it. There is actually some psychological evidence in favor of this view: in an interesting series of experiments, Erkki
Huovinen has shown that listeners, when asked to identify the tonic of a series of
notes, generally prefer a note that has a perfect ﬁfth above it.18 Other theorists, such as
Schoenberg and Ramon Fuller, have used these ideas to argue that ionian and aeolian
are the most natural or appropriate modes of the diatonic scale.19
By contrast, external explanations assert that pitch classes become stable or prominent by
E1.
E2.
E3.
E4.
E5.
E6.
E7.

Appearing more frequently;
Being held for longer durations;
Being accented dynamically;
Being accented rhythmically;
Being accented registrally (in other words, occurring as melodic high
points and low points);
Being the target of stepwise melodic motion, particularly stepwise contrary
motion converging on a particular pitch class; and
Being doubled at the octave, or paired with the note a ﬁfth above.

These external explanations all focus on notes as they are deployed compositionally.20
Note that the two approaches suggest two drastically different views about what is
and is not musically possible. For suppose internal factors are relatively weak: in this
case, composers can easily override “internal” centric tendencies, choosing to emphasize notes by a variety of external means. However, if internal factors are strong then
composers are ill-advised to disregard them—for by attempting to emphasize something other than a collection’s “natural” tonal center, they may create music that is
unconvincing, inconsistent, or otherwise aesthetically deviant. It is interesting that

18 See Huovinen 2002.
19 Schoenberg 1911/1983, Fuller 1975.
20 Cultural factors sometimes play an essential role in determining centricity. For example, many nineteenth-century pieces are structured around tonic chords that rarely appear. To understand these pieces,
one must hear them as yearning for a consummation that is continually deferred. In these and other cases,
appropriate determination of the tonal center requires initiation into a cultural practice, rather than simple examination of the formal properties of the music. (See Huron 2007, for more.) Some writers, such as
Reti (1958) and Huovinen (2002) go so far as to consider centricity to be something that the listener does,
rather than a property of musical stimuli as such; on this account, centricity is a result of “tonal focusing”
by which listeners organize pitch material around a primary tone.

179

180

theory

Figure 5.7.1
(a) Diatonic
music with no
clear center.
(b) Chromatic
music with a
clear center.

these two views played a crucial role in early twentieth-century music history, with
a number of prominent Germanic musicians (including Schoenberg and Schenker)
inclined toward internalism, and a number of non-Germanic musicians (including
Debussy) taking the opposite view.21 The divergence between nonscalar atonality and
scalar “extended tonality” can thus be traced, at least in part, to this difference of
music-theoretical opinion: for Schoenberg and others, centricity was a matter of a
natural law, and hence it was necessary to choose between traditional tonality and
the wholesale abandonment of centricity. For composers in the French and Russian
traditions, centricity was a compositional choice, and thus it was possible to contemplate musical styles that made use of new modes and scales.
My own sympathies lie very much with the external view: in most practical cases,
I believe the internal contributions to centricity are relatively weak and can easily be
overridden. Consequently it is entirely possible to write diatonic music that is acentric, or chromatic music that emphasizes a particular note (Figure 5.7.1). I do not

21 Schoenberg’s view was that the diatonic scale has an inherent tonal center, but that the chromatic scale does not; see, for example, Chapter 20 of his Theory of Harmony (1911/1983). Perle
(1996) echoes Schoenberg’s conclusions almost a century later. For the opposite view, see Helmholtz
(1863/1954, pp. 365–366). Helmholtz’s externalism was shared by composers such as Grieg, Debussy,
and Stravinsky.

Macroharmony and Centricity

consider either kind of music to be “unnatural.”22 Nor do I have any problem with
any of the diatonic modes (or any other mode of any other scale): I am entirely convinced by the music of the Renaissance, of Debussy, Ravel, and Shostakovich, and of
contemporary jazz and rock; I enjoy those numerous passages of twentieth-century
music that make use of symmetrical scales while still asserting a tonal center; and as a
composer I believe I can make virtually any note of virtually any collection sound like
a tonic. (This last conviction has been reinforced by my experience with computers:
by emphasizing particular notes through repetition, duration, loudness, and stepwise melodic motion, it is easy to create the effect of centricity in otherwise random
sequences.) Any theorist who wants to argue against these convictions would have to
ﬁght an uphill battle: indeed, the very claim that the phrygian mode is deﬁcient, or
that centric music cannot use symmetrical scales, strikes me as evidence of a limited
musical imagination.

5.8

beyond “tonal” and “atonal”

I want to close this chapter—and by extension, the theoretical half of the book—by
showing how we can use these ideas to orient ourselves relative to the broad spectrum of contemporary musical styles. I’ll begin by contrasting two twentieth-century
movements: the chromatic tradition, which rejects ﬁve- to eight-note macroharmonies in favor of the chromatic scale; and the scalar tradition, in which limited macroharmonies continue to play a signiﬁcant role. I’ll then suggest that our inquiry into
the ﬁve basic components of tonality might help us envision new possibilities lying
between these two extremes.

5.8.1 The Chromatic Tradition
A standard trope of music history asserts that the chromatic tradition originates in the
extended tonality of post-Wagnerian chromaticism. According to this narrative, composers such as Strauss and Reger began to make heavy use of chromatic voice leading,
to the point where familiar analytical concepts began to lose their purchase: pitch-class
circulation increased, traditional scales became less important, and centricity became
less obvious, with key-deﬁning progressions (such as I–ii–V7–I) gradually disappearing. Later composers, feeling that it was unreasonable to retain acoustic consonance
while abandoning the other components of tonality, created atonality as we know it.
In my view, this narrative is essentially right: macroharmony was indeed the ﬁrst
casualty in the war on tonality, and highly chromatic “wandering tonality” does begin
to approach atonality both in its rate of pitch-class circulation and in the absence

22 Interestingly, the internal view has been defended both by radical atonal composers and by conservative opponents of atonality, including Schoenberg (1911/1983, p. 394) and William Thomson (1991,
pp. 87–88). Thus, although these two writers have diametrically opposed aesthetic orientations, they have
a similarly limited conception of tonal possibilities.

181

theory
Figure 5.8.1
(a) Reger’s tonal music
sometimes circulates
through the pitch
classes almost as fast
as Schoenberg’s atonal
music. (b) Some of
Reger’s pieces exhibit a
very broad distribution
of macroharmonies,
comparable to that
found in atonal music.
Again, set-classes on the
x-axis are labeled using
Allen Forte’s system, so
that “15” corresponds to
his set “7–15.”

12

Number of pitch classes

182

10
8
Schoenberg, Op. 11 No. 1
Reger, Op. 73

6
4
2
1

51

101

151

201

251

Window size
14
Schoenberg, Op. 11 No. 1

Percent of total

12

Reger, Op. 73

10
8
6
4
2
0
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

Six-note chord type

of traditional macroharmonies.23
Figure
Schoenberg, Op. 11 No. 3
5.8.1 shows that Reger’s
15
Reger, Op. 129 No. 2
music sometimes circulates quickly through
10
the twelve pitch classes
while also abandoning
5
clearly articulated macroharmonies. (The road
0
to atonality, one might
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12
say, was paved with
Three-note chord type
chromatic voice leading.) That said, there
is still an important step from Reger to Schoenberg. For not only did Schoenberg
“emancipate the dissonance,” treating any possible combination of notes as a potential
20

Percent of total

Figure 5.8.2
Reger’s highly
chromatic
tonal music
often exhibits
more harmonic
consistency than
Schoenberg’s
atonal music.
Here, the “spike”
indicates that the
music is saturated
with major and
minor triads.

23 See Proctor 1978.

Macroharmony and Centricity

harmony, but he also took the much more radical step of rejecting harmonic consistency—in other words, the very idea that harmonies should be structurally similar to
one another. By way of illustration, Figure 5.8.2 contrasts the distribution of threenote chords in Schoenberg’s Op. 11 No. 3 and Reger’s Op. 58 No. 5: where Reger’s
graph is strongly peaked at the familiar major and minor triads—which together
account for more than a third of the three-note chords in the piece—Schoenberg’s
graph is much ﬂatter, suggesting a much more even distribution of chord types. In
this respect, Schoenberg’s music goes far beyond the simple rejection of tonality: by
abandoning harmonic consistency, he took the radical step from “everything is permitted” to “everything is permitted at all times.” Not only was he willing to use any
collection of notes as a harmony, but he was also willing to use an enormous range of
chord types within very short temporal spans.24
It is worth asking whether this feature of Schoenberg’s music might have been an
unintended byproduct of the decision to abandon consonant chords. We have seen that
harmonic consistency and conjunct melodic motion can be combined only under very
special circumstances, typically involving acoustically consonant chords. It follows that
composers who abandon consonance may put themselves in a difﬁcult situation, sacriﬁcing their ability to achieve the traditional two-dimensional coherence of Western
music. Certainly, it is suggestive that the music of the second Viennese school often
occupies two opposite poles: pointillistic textures that are harmonically consistent
(as in the opening of Webern’s Concerto for Nine Instruments), and conjunct passages
that use a very wide range of harmonies (as in the opening of Pierrot Lunaire’s “Die
Kreuze”).25 It seems possible that atonal composers did not explicitly choose to abandon
harmonic consistency or conjunct melodic motion; instead, this choice may have been
forced upon them by their prior rejection of acoustically consonant chords.
It is also clear that there are some speciﬁc ways in which atonal music resembles
random music. Figure 5.8.3a shows that the pitch-class circulation graph of the ﬁrst
movement of Schoenberg’s Op. 11 is nearly indistinguishable from that of an equally
long series of random pitches. Figures 5.8.3b–c compare the distributions of harmonies in Schoenberg’s piece with those in random sequences. Again, both atonality
and random music contain a broad and relatively even distribution of chord types.
Finally, Figure 5.8.3d contrasts the frequency of pitch classes in a Schoenberg movement with those in random sequences: the graphs are both relatively ﬂat, reﬂecting
the absence of clear points of tonal emphasis. (It is worth recalling that Schoenberg’s
later twelve-tone method was explicitly designed to promote ﬂat pitch-class proﬁles
of this sort: as Schoenberg emphasized, doubling or repeating notes could potentially give rise to feelings of centricity, which would be reﬂected by unevenness in the
pitch-class proﬁle.26) Taken together, the ﬁgures suggest that there is some truth to a

24 Curiously, this has been relatively little discussed in the literature, even though the abandonment of
harmonic consistency is (to my ear, at least) a fairly salient feature of Schoenberg’s music.
25 Of course, there are many passages that exhibit neither efﬁcient voice leading nor harmonic
consistency.
26 Schoenberg 1975, p. 219; Huron 2007 makes a similar point.

183

theory
Figure 5.8.3 (a) Pitch-class circulation in Schoenberg and in random notes. (b) Distribution
of six-note macroharmonies in Schoenberg and in random notes. (c) Distribution of threenote harmonies in Schoenberg’s Op. 11 No. 3 and in random notes.

Number of pitch classes

12
10
8
Schoenberg, Op. 11 No. 1
Random Notes

6
4
2
1

51

101

151

201

251

Window size

Percent of total

16
14

Schoenberg, Op. 11 No. 1

12

Random Notes

10
8
6
4
2
0
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

Six-note chord type

12

Percent of total

184

Schoenberg, Op. 11 No. 3

10

Random Notes

8
6
4
2
0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Three-note chord type

10 11 12

Macroharmony and Centricity
Figure 5.8.3 (d) Pitch-class distributions in Schoenberg’s Op. 11 No. 1 (left) and in random
notes (right).

2

2

1

1

0

0

common (“naive”) response to atonality—namely, “it sounds random.” Statistically
speaking, atonal music is often remarkably similar to random notes, and listeners
perceive this fairly accurately.
Of course, in abandoning tonality, Schoenberg and other atonal composers
attempted to substitute alternative methods of musical organization for those we have
been considering—some of which, such as the twelve-tone method, involve the order
of pitch sequences rather than their unordered pitch content. Discussions of atonal
music often focus on the difﬁculties involved in perceiving this alternative organization: sympathetic observers sometimes explain atonality’s unpopularity by comparing
it to a language that is very difﬁcult to learn, while more critical commentators, such
as Fred Lerdahl and Diana Raffman, suggest that atonal music may be organized
according to principles that are beyond any human perceptual understanding.27 The
preceding discussion suggests that we might want to reconsider this line of argument.
For appreciating atonal music requires more than simply learning to appreciate alternative methods of musical organization; it also requires learning not to respond to
those statistical features that the music shares with random sequences of notes. And
insofar as a listener fundamentally dislikes the sound of random pitches, then it may
not matter how atonal pieces are organized: after all, mere ordering does not typically
convert unpleasant stimuli into pleasant ones. (Imagine someone causing you pain, or
feeding you disgusting food, according to a perceptible and highly structured pattern!)
If this is right, then atonal music is not so much analogous to a language that is hard
to understand; instead, it is more like a taste that many people do not see the point of
acquiring. To put it crudely: people dislike atonal music, not because they have a hard
time understanding it, but because they think it sounds bad.28

27 See Babbitt 1958, Lerdahl 1988, and Raffmann 2003. Babbitt compares atonal music to advanced
mathematics, rather than a complex language, but the point is similar.
28 I should clarify that I am not denying that many listeners have a cognitive, language-like relation to
music; instead, I am suggesting that direct sensory pleasure also plays a signiﬁcant role. My claim is that,
in some cases, the unpleasantness of the musical stimuli may be more important than the perceptibility of
underlying structure: pleasant-but-random is perhaps preferred to unpleasant-but-structured.

185

186

theory

None of this implies that highly chromatic music actually is bad or otherwise aesthetically ﬂawed: on the contrary, I think moments of extreme chromaticism (and
even randomness) can often be artistically compelling. However, I do think that we
might have reason to resist the claim that fans of atonality constitute a cognitive elite,
or that the enjoyment of atonal music is a straightforward function of unusual powers
of musical understanding. For these claims tend to rely on the rather dubious suggestion that if people understood atonal music then they would like it—a claim that is no
more likely to be true of Schoenberg and Babbitt than it is of heavy metal or polka.
Instead, I think it is better to describe the aﬁcionados of atonality as having managed
to acquire a taste for highly chromatic musical textures: like the taste for clam chowder
ice cream, this is one that people often do not care to cultivate. But that neither makes
it worthy of approval nor condemnation—instead, it is just one of the myriad different
specialized pleasures whose pursuit makes contemporary society so colorful.

5.8.2 The Scalar Tradition
Diametrically opposed to atonality is the “scalar tradition” that makes extensive use
of familiar scales and modes. This tradition encompasses at least six major twentiethcentury movements—impressionism, neoclassicism, jazz, rock, minimalism/postminimalism, and neo-Romanticism—and a good deal of other music as well (including, to
various extents, music of Scriabin, Stravinsky, Bartók, and Shostakovich). Of course,
the scalar tradition is itself diverse: some styles (including mid-century neoclassicism
and contemporary rock) are predominantly diatonic, while others (including impressionism and jazz) make much greater use of nondiatonic scales; some composers
write largely scalar music, while others juxtapose familiar scales with chromatic or
even atonal passages. Nevertheless, we will see in Chapter 9 that there are enough
Figure 5.8.4 Nondiatonic scales in nineteenth-century music. In (a), a fragment of the
“Gypsy” scale (G-A-Bf-Cs-D-Ef-Fs) in Grieg’s Lyric Piece “Gjetergutt” (“Shepherd’s Boy”),
Op. 54 No. 1. In (b), the acoustic scale in Liszt’s “Angélus! Prière aux anges gardiens”), Années
de pèlerinage, Year 3.

Macroharmony and Centricity
Figure 5.8.5 (a) The two-dimensional modulatory space of twentieth-century diatonic
music. Horizontal motion corresponds to scalar transposition; vertical motion chromatic
transposition. The ﬁgure’s left and right edges are glued together, as are its top and bottom
edges. (b) The three-dimensional space of twentieth-century scalar music. Each plane of the
ﬁgure is analogous to (a); vertical motion changes the underlying scale.

rans
p

tic t

chro
ma

scale shift

ositi

on

commonalities among twentiethcentury composers to justify talk
of a scalar “common practice.”
Like the chromatic tradition,
octatonic
the scalar tradition has its origins
harmonic
in the late nineteenth century.
acoustic
Composers such as Chopin, Liszt,
Mussorgsky, Rimsky-Korsakov,
diatonic
Grieg, and Fauré began experimenting with the various modes
scalar transposition
of the diatonic scale, as well as
with whole-tone, octatonic, and melodic and harmonic minor scales (Figure 5.8.4).29
Historians have often conceptualized this tradition extrinsically—as reﬂecting “folk”
inﬂuences external to the functionally harmonic tradition. But we can also understand the scalar tradition intrinsically, as representing an expansion and generalization of traditional compositional practices. In particular, twentieth-century scalar
composers were the ﬁrst to systematically combine three fundamental musical operations: change of tonal center, change of scale, and chromatic transposition. These
operations are represented geometrically in Figure 5.8.5. Here, each plane represents
the combination of chromatic and scalar transposition, while motion between scales
is represented by vertical motion between the planes.30 The resulting modal system
29 Samson 1977 emphasizes the late nineteenth-century divergence between scalar and chromatic
traditions.
30 This diagram should be understood as an abstract representation of musical possibilities; it is not a
portion of the geometrical spaces described in Chapter 3.

187

188

theory
Figure 5.8.6 Twentieth-century scalar composers potentially have a very wide range of scales
and modes to work with.

Scale Type

Number
of Scales

Number
of Notes

Mode
Types

Total Number
of Modes

Pentatonic
Whole tone
Hexatonic
Diatonic
Acoustic
Harmonic Min.
Harmonic Maj.
Octatonic
Chromatic
TOTAL

12
2
4
12
12
12
12
3
1
70

5
6
6
7
7
7
7
8
12

5
1
2
7
7
7
7
2
1
39

60
12
24
84
84
84
84
24
12
468

provides a truly vast range of different key areas (Figure 5.8.6): instead of seven modes
or 24 major and minor keys, composers now have more than 450 different tonal areas
to chose from!
Within the scalar tradition, we can distinguish chordal from “pandiatonic” (or perhaps “panscalar”) approaches: chordal music preserves the two-tiered “chord within
scale” organization of earlier Western music; while pandiatonic music effaces the role
of chords as scales themselves begin to assert a more central harmonic role.31 (As mentioned earlier, Debussy’s “Voiles” is an early example of this second practice.) The distinction between these two approaches thus mirrors the distinction between the chromaticism
of composers like Reger and that of true atonality: Reger’s music, like traditional tonality,
preserves harmonic consistency, limiting itself to a small number of recognizable chord
types, while pandiatonic music (like more radical atonality) abandons harmonic consistency altogether. This is illustrated graphically in Figure 5.8.7. Once again, we see that the
binary opposition between “chromatic” and “nonchromatic” (or “tonal” and “atonal”)
blurs a number of more speciﬁc music-theoretical distinctions.
Returning now to a question broached earlier in this chapter: is it really true that
Western music became more chromatic over the course of its history? Clearly, there
is a sense in which it has: the progression from Palestrina to Mozart to Schubert to
Wagner to Reger to Schoenberg exhibits a steady and quantiﬁable increase in chromaticism (Figure 5.3.2). What is left out of this story is that late nineteenth-century
composers had already begun to rebel against this trend. This scalar tendency gathered steam throughout subsequent decades, culminating in an unprecedented explosion of diatonicism in the works of composers such as Shostakovich, Riley, Reich,
Glass, Pärt, Górecki, Adams, Bryars, and ter Veldhuis, not to mention jazz, rock,
and other popular forms of music. (The trend is also evident in the renewed appre-

31 The term “pandiatonic” was invented by Nicolas Slonimsky in the ﬁrst edition of Music Since 1900
(Slonimsky 1994). It has been applied both to diatonic music lacking harmonic consistency and to diatonic
music lacking centricity. Here, I use it in the former sense.

Macroharmony and Centricity
Figure 5.8.7 In both the scalar and chromatic traditions, there are genres exhibiting
harmonic consistency (top row) as well as genres in which harmonic consistency does not
play as an important a role (bottom).
Limited Macroharmony

YES

NO

traditional
scale-based tonality
(Debussy, Jazz)

“triadic atonality”
(Gesualdo, Reger)

NO

Harmonic Consistency

YES

pandiatonicism
(Voiles)

complete atonality
(Schoenberg, Babbitt)

ciation for early music.) Thus, where early twentieth-century historians might have
seen a relentless, ever-increasing drive toward chromaticism, twenty-ﬁrst century
musicians confront a very different environment, in which early twentieth-century
scalar music seems as much a harbinger of things to come as a relic of the past.

5.8.3 Tonality Space
Of course, the chromatic and scalar traditions represent just a portion of the huge
tapestry that is twentieth-century music. Figure 5.5.4 depicted twentieth-century
music as lying on a two-dimensional continuum, whose axes represented the rate of
pitch-class circulation and the explicitness of macroharmony. While the scalar tradition lies on the far right of the graph, and while complete atonality is in the lower
left corner, there is a considerable amount of music that does not ﬁt into either category. Many of Prokoﬁev’s pieces, for example, make free use of accidentals without
attempting to stay within a single scale for very long. Similarly, composers such
as Stravinsky, Milhaud, Bartók, and Shostakovich explored polytonal textures in
which familiar musical materials are superimposed, creating the effect of clashing
keys.32 Still others—such as the Messiaen of the Quartet for the End of Time or Vingt
regards sur l’enfant-Jésus—wrote music that embraces many different techniques,
being at different points traditionally tonal, polytonal, completely atonal, or several
of these at once (Figure 5.8.8).
Among these myriad approaches, György Ligeti’s “non-atonality” stands out as
being particularly relevant to the present discussion. Though dissonant, his music

32 Although several eminent composers and theorists have critiqued the notion of polytonality (Bartók
1976, pp. 365–366, Hindemith 1937/1984, Vol. 1, p. 156, Forte 1955, and Samson 1977, p. 256), the term
seems unobjectionable to me. Some music can be segregated into relatively independent musical streams,
each with its own sonic character—for instance, when two timbrally distinct instruments are widely separated spatially or in register. Here the auditory streams do not completely fuse, allowing us to distinguish
independent scales, macroharmonies, and even tonal centers in each stream.

189

190

theory
Figure 5.8.8 Messiaen’s “Première communion de la Vierge” (Vingt regards sur l’enfant-Jésus
No. 11) combines an octatonic-infused tonality with atonal upper-register gestures.

often exhibits a harmonic consistency that contrasts with the more classical atonality
of Schoenberg, Stockhausen, or Babbitt. This is in large part due to Ligeti’s innovative use of chromatic clusters—and more speciﬁcally, to his “micropolyphonic” technique of moving multiple voices within a ﬁxed chromatic collection. As I mentioned
in Chapter 1, this “micropolyphony” constitutes a uniquely modern solution to the
problem of combining conjunct melodic motion with harmonic consistency, one that
exploits the near-permutation symmetry of very uneven chords (§1.3.1, §2.9). (Alternatively, we can say that Ligeti’s music exploits the mirror boundaries of the higherdimensional chord spaces, rather than taking advantage of their twists [§3.6]). I ﬁnd
it remarkable that there are just two general techniques for combining conjunct melodies with consistent harmonies, the ﬁrst involving nearly even chords and underwriting the tonal procedures of the last ﬁve hundred years, the second involving clustered
chords and featuring in the atonality of the 1960s. It is particularly interesting that this
second solution arose almost ﬁfty years after the ﬁrst experiments with atonality—as if
it took that long for composers to abandon the doomed project of writing traditional
music with nontraditional sonorities, and to instead embrace a more radical approach
that exploits the distinctive virtues of nontraditional, clustered chords. In a real sense,
this music is unclassiﬁable: atonal by virtue of its dissonance, but tonal in its aspiration
to combine harmonic consistency with conjunct melodic motion.
One of my goals here has been to identify concepts that allow us to think about
the full spectrum of musical possibilities, ranging from traditional tonality to outright atonality. From this point of view, the ﬁve basic components of tonality are
useful insofar as they demarcate a collection of conceptual possibilities—as if each
were a musical “vector” pointing into its own abstract dimension. Together, these
(metaphorical) vectors span a region that could be called “tonality space.” We can
situate unfamiliar pieces or genres within this metaphorical space by asking questions
such as those in Figure 5.8.9. The ﬁrst set of questions concerns chords and melodies,
and generalizes the traditional concerns of harmony and counterpoint; the second
extends notions such as “mode,” “key,” and “tonic” to a broader range of macroharmonic possibilities. Collectively, they replace the opposition “tonal”/“atonal” with a
much more ﬁne-grained set of categories, more appropriate to the richness of contemporary musical practice.
Composers can use these questions to situate themselves within the world of
musical possibilities. For some, this may be a matter of settling in a relatively small

Macroharmony and Centricity
LOCAL
1. Does the music use a small set of similar-sounding chords?
1a. How consonant are these chords?
1b. Do these chords progress freely or are certain progressions favored?
2. Does the music use efficient voice leading?
2a. Does this voice leading take place in chromatic space or in another
scale?
2b. Does it exploit near symmetries, as discussed in Chapter 2?
2c. Can it be usefully modeled with the geometrical spaces of Chapter 3?
GLOBAL
3. How fast do pitch classes circulate?
4. Does the music articulate clear macroharmonies?
4a. Are these macroharmonies structurally similar to each other?
4b. How consonant are the macroharmonies?
4c. How fast do macroharmonies change?
4d. Does the music exploit efficient voice leading between these
macroharmonies?
4e. Does the music exploit “polytonal” effects by juxtaposing multiple
scales or macroharmonies, each retaining their own identity?
5. Is there a sense of tonal center?
5a. Are there important secondary pitches?

region of tonality space for the majority of their careers. (A strategy that is perfectly
reasonable insofar as one has a strong preference for a very particular kind of music,
or if one wants to appeal to audiences who do.) Others—following in the footsteps
of Stravinsky, Bartók, Shostakovich, Messiaen, Ligeti, and John Adams—may prefer
to compose music that traverses a broader range of tonality space, sometimes within
the span of a single piece. Unimaginative critics may decry this as a matter of polystylistic or postmodern inconstancy, but it is perhaps better described as a desire to
embrace the full range of musical opportunities, an attitude encapsulated in Mahler’s
famous remark that composers create musical worlds “with all the technical means
available.”33 For composers of a maximalist bent, tonality space is the ﬁeld in which
contemporary music operates, just as the 24 major and minor keys set the boundaries
of eighteenth-century musical exploration.
To my mind there is a lot of fertile ground here. Having completed the theoretical
portion of the book, my hope is that some of you will feel inspired to think about how
to combine the ﬁve features—whether by making creative use of nearly symmetrical chords, exploring the voice-leading spaces of Chapter 3, manipulating interesting
scales in novel ways, exploiting unusual pitch-class proﬁles, devising new combinations of scale, macroharmony, and centricity, or by doing something else entirely.
Those who are uncertain about how to proceed may beneﬁt from the analyses in Part
II, which consider the ways in which previous composers have solved this problem.
Besides deepening our appreciation for the music of the past, these analyses may suggest new directions to composers of the present.
33 See De La Grange 1973, p. 330.

191
Figure 5.8.9
Questions that
help us situate
music in tonality
space.

This page intentionally left blank

PART II

History and Analysis

This page intentionally left blank

chapter 6

The Extended Common Practice
In the second half of the book, we’ll employ our theoretical apparatus to ask speciﬁc
analytical and historical questions. Chapter 6 uses the ﬁve components of tonality as
a framework for reinterpreting the history of Western music, suggesting that a number of broadly tonal styles use very similar compositional techniques. The remaining
chapters take up speciﬁc issues raised by this overarching narrative. Chapter 7 discusses the harmonic syntax of eighteenth-century tonality, using geometrical models
to investigate general questions about chord progressions, sequences, and key distances. Chapters 8, 9, and 10 are mostly analytical, focusing on chromatic harmony,
twentieth-century scalar music, and jazz. Here the point is to demonstrate that the
theoretical apparatus is useful for explicating speciﬁc pieces as well as more general
historical trends.
Ultimately, the goal of Part II is to argue that Western tonal music constitutes an
extended common practice stretching from the eleventh century to the present day. By
now, this thesis should not be too surprising: since the ﬁve components of tonality
constrain each other in interesting and nonobvious ways, composers who wish to
combine them have only a few alternatives at their disposal. The simple fact is that
many composers from before Josquin to after John Coltrane have wanted to combine
these features, and hence have struggled with a problem that has a relatively small
number of solutions. We should therefore expect that when we dig deep enough, we
will start to ﬁnd interesting similarities among their approaches.
Chapter 6 illustrates this point by considering brief passages from ﬁve very different musical styles. The ﬁrst is eleventh-century, two-voice note-against-note counterpoint—the earliest and most basic form of Western polyphony. The second illustrates
the vocal counterpoint of the Renaissance. The third exempliﬁes the functional harmony of the baroque and classical eras, and embodies two related innovations: the
establishment of purely harmonic conventions and the increasingly systematic use
of modulation. The fourth style highlights nineteenth-century composers’ growing
awareness of chords as objects in chromatic space, while the ﬁfth illustrates twentiethcentury approaches to nondiatonic scales. Since my goal is to argue that there are
similarities between these ﬁve very different kinds of music, my discussion will necessarily abstract away from numerous historical particulars. This is precisely why I consider brief passages, rather than entire pieces. I trust you will agree that my examples
capture the spirit of the genres they represent.

196

history and analysis

6.1

disclaimers

There are several ways in which my approach might strike some readers as being
anachronistic. First, I will generally model chords as unordered collections of pitch
classes, and counterpoint as voice leadings in pitch-class space. These ideas, though
originating in the theories of Lippius and Rameau, are more commonly associated with the twentieth century. It is therefore worth repeating that my goal is to
describe music in a way that is useful to contemporary musicians, rather than to
explain how earlier composers actually thought. I should also reiterate that the very
notion of “pitch class” involves a signiﬁcant degree of abstraction: every composer
in every era thinks carefully about octave, instrument, and register, distinguishing
perfect fourths from perfect ﬁfths and root position from second-inversion triads.
Were this a hands-on guide to composition, I would need to spend a great deal of
time considering the various ways pitch-class voice leadings can be embodied in
real music. However, my purpose here is to provide more general theoretical tools
for understanding tonality—and in this context, an abstract approach is perfectly
appropriate.
The other major point of anachronism is that I am not going to worry much
about tuning and intonation. These are, of course, major preoccupations of music
theory, and tuning systems have coevolved with harmony in fascinating ways:
just intonation, which permits acoustically pure thirds, burgeoned alongside the
development of triadic harmony; while more equal temperaments accompanied
the increasing use of distant modulations.1 That said, standard tuning systems are
in the grand scheme of things reasonably similar, and can all be represented by
very similar geometrical structures. To be sure, tuning colors music in important
ways and can make a real difference to our listening experience. But it does not
fundamentally affect the very general theoretical relationships that are our main
subject.
Finally, since this chapter surveys musical pieces spanning a millennium, it will
necessarily omit many details. Professional music historians, who devote their lives to
understanding history in all its marvelous speciﬁcity, will look in vain for the nuanced
discussions that are their stock-in-trade. They may even feel, at some points, that my
descriptions are uncomfortably close to the potted histories of introductory music
appreciation classes. I make no apologies for this. It seems to me that there are some
fairly systematic connections between Western styles, and that these connections have
often been ignored. Insofar as conventional scholarship de-emphasizes or disregards
these general facts—perhaps in something like the way that a ﬁsh ignores the water in
which it swims—then I think it is worthwhile to try to discuss them, even at the risk
of seeming somewhat naive.2

1 For nontechnical (and wildly different) introductions to this subject, see Isacoff 2001 and Dufﬁn
2006.
2 Here I am inspired by Jared Diamond (1997), who attempts to uncover broad geographical factors
that constrain and inﬂuence the progress of human history. My geography is abstract and mathematical.

The Extended Common Practice

6.2

two-voice medieval counterpoint

Figure 6.2.1 returns to the Allelujia Justus et Palma, ﬁrst published in the eleventhcentury treatise Ad Organum Faciendum (How to Write Counterpoint), and discussed
previously in §3.5. Although it stands at the very beginning of the Western polyphonic tradition, the piece clearly exempliﬁes a number of our ﬁve features.
1.

2.

3.

4.

Conjunct melodic motion. In general the voices move by step, with contrary
motion preferred to parallel motion. There are no prohibitions against
parallel ﬁfths or octaves.
Acoustic consonance. The Montpelier organum treatise, roughly
contemporaneous with Ad Organum Faciendum, considers steps, sevenths,
and tritones to be forbidden dissonances. Thirds and sixths are imperfect
consonances which can be used only in the middle of phrases; unisons,
fourths, and ﬁfths are perfect consonances which can be used anywhere.
This accurately describes the musical examples in Ad Organum Faciendum,
though that text does not discuss imperfect consonances.3
Harmonic consistency. There is no robust notion of harmonic consistency,
or “chord” in the modern sense. Instead, intervals are categorized by
consonance and dissonance.
Macroharmony. The lines move within an enriched diatonic system
containing seven and a half notes: C, D, E, F, G, A, and Bf/Bn. The last of
these is a ﬂexible note that exists in both a “soft” (Bf) and a “hard” (Bn)
form. These two forms do not intermix; one does not progress directly to
the other, and care is taken to avoid clashes between different note forms in

Figure 6.2.1 The Allelujia Justus et Palma from Ad Organum Faciendum. Open and closed
noteheads represent the two different musical voices.

3 See Blum 1959. Note that I mean to be including compound intervals in this list: thus, an octave and
a third (15 or 16 semitones) is an imperfect consonance, while an octave and a ﬁfth (19 semitones) is a
perfect consonance.

197

198

history and analysis

5.

different voices. The two ﬂavors of B allow composers to avoid the tritones
E-Bf and F-B.
Centricity. Cadences are articulated by contrary motion onto a unison or
octave, with one voice moving by step and the other moving by step or
third. By modern standards there is only a weak sense of centricity, and the
music often seems to ﬂoat freely in diatonic space.

No less than the music of the high Baroque, then, our simple medieval style requires
the simultaneous satisfaction of harmonic and contrapuntal constraints: the principal
harmonic constraint is that intervals must be consonant, with perfect consonances
predominating and imperfect consonances appearing more rarely; contrapuntally, the
main requirement is that the music should feature a pair of conjunct melodies, often
moving in contrary motion. Early medieval music-theory treatises attempt to help
composers satisfy both constraints, typically by listing useful progressions in mindnumbing detail—“when one part ascends a step, the other, beginning at the octave
above may descend two steps and be at the ﬁfth”; “when one part repeats a note, the
other, beginning at the fourth above, may ascend by step to the ﬁfth”; and so on.
Let us see if we can use two-note chord space to describe these principles more
efﬁciently. Figure 6.2.2 labels the consonances in our simpliﬁed medieval system,
using dark type for the perfect consonances and lighter type for imperfect consonances. Perfect consonances are linked by line segments when it is possible to connect them by stepwise voice leading, and by dotted line segments when they can
be connected by “near-stepwise” voice leading—that is, voice leading in which one
voice moves by step and the other by third. To a good ﬁrst approximation, learning
to compose in this style involves internalizing the structure of this graph: perfect

Figure 6.2.2 Perfect and imperfect consonances in our simpliﬁed medieval system, displayed
on the Möbius strip. Solid lines in the interior of the ﬁgure correspond to stepwise voice
leadings, while dashed lines show nearly stepwise voice leadings.

The Extended Common Practice

consonances account for about 90% of the intervals in the Allelujia, with the two
voices moving stepwise or near stepwise 70% of the time.4 These numbers suggest
that our Möbius strip does indeed encapsulate the basic compositional knowledge
possessed by early medieval composers, acting as a kind of musical “game board” on
which they plied their trade.
Figure 6.2.3 traces out the seventh phrase of the Allelujia on the game board. For
clarity, I have shifted the location of the left and right boundaries, and have omitted
the imperfect consonances.5 Five of the eight voice leadings use near-stepwise voice
leading to connect perfect fourths and unisons (or ﬁfths and octaves). This is much
clearer on the Möbius strip than in the musical notation; we can see at a glance that
the phrase largely consists of line segments connecting boundary points (octaves or
unisons) to the nearest perfect fourth/ﬁfth on the inside of the strip. The geometrical
representation also shows that the latter part of the phrase contains a hidden repetition
of the opening: the initial dyads (G, G)®(E, A)®(F, F) form a wedge on the lower left

Figure 6.2.3 (a) The seventh
phrase of the Allelujia Justus
et Palma, traced out on the
Möbius strip. (b) The phase
contains four “nearly stepwise”
voice leadings connecting a
perfect ﬁfth to an octave (or
perfect fourth to a unison).

4 Stepwise motion in both voices counts for about 30% of the progressions, while near-stepwise motion
adds another 40%; individually, each voice moves stepwise about 50% of the time.
5 As explained in §3.2 the placement of the left and right boundaries is arbitrary.

199

200

history and analysis
Figure 6.2.4
Octatonic organum.

of the Möbius strip, which is echoed by wedge (C, C)®(E, B)® . . . ®(D, D) above it.
(See also the brackets above the musical notation.) However, the repetition is interrupted by a pair of parallel ﬁfths that bring the music to {D, A} and {F, C}.
One might think the consonant quality of this music derives primarily from the
fact that it uses consonant intervals. But as we saw in Chapter 5, its placid sonic character is also a function of its macroharmony. Figure 6.2.4 illustrates this point with a
piece of “octatonic organum” that parodies the Allelujia’s opening phrase: though the
parody uses only consonant intervals, it is more suggestive of a black mass or satanic
ritual than medieval Christian piety. This demonstrates quite clearly that the appeal
of early music is as much a function of the macroharmony as of the vertical intervals
themselves—a lesson that suggests contemporary composers need to pay as much
attention to macroharmony as to harmony proper.

6.3

triads and the renaissance

Figure 6.3.1 presents the opening of “Tu pauperum refugium,” the second part of Josquin’s motet “Magnus es tu, Domine.”6 As in the Allelujia Justus et Palma, the music is
Figure 6.3.1
The opening
of Josquin’s
“Tu pauperum
refugium.”
Beneath the staff,
I have shown
how the music
contains a series
of efﬁcient
three-voice voice
leadings between
three-note
chords.

6 This piece was published anonymously in 1504, and has been attributed to both Finck and Josquin
(see Judd 2006). It has been analyzed by writers such as Salzer and Schachter (1989), Berry (1976), Joseph
(1978), and Judd (2006).

The Extended Common Practice

largely diatonic, using stepwise melodic motion to articulate consonant harmonies.
But there are also some fundamental differences between the styles.
Consonance and counterpoint. Parallel ﬁfths and octaves are no longer
used. Fourths over the bass typically resolve to thirds, as if they had been
reclassiﬁed as dissonances (Figure 6.3.2). However, fourths are tolerated
between upper voices, giving them an ambiguous status between consonance
and dissonance.7 Diminished triads sometimes appear in ﬁrst inversion,
even though they contain a dissonant tritone. As a result, Josquin’s music is
signiﬁcantly less austere than the earlier medieval style.
Harmonic consistency. The music creates a much stronger effect of harmonic
consistency, with fully 85% of the four-voice sonorities being triadic. The
occasional use of diminished chords reinforces the sense that triads are syntactical
objects: it is as if the diminished chord’s triadic status (i.e. its transpositional
relatedness to major and minor triads in diatonic space) trumps the fact that it
contains a dissonance. Although it might be anachronistic to treat every sonority
in the piece as representing an underlying triad, there seems to have been a move
toward this way of thinking. Certainly, one gets the impression that the transition
toward conceiving of triads as harmonic things-in-themselves is well underway.
Macroharmony and centricity. The music makes use of a wider range of accidentals,
occasionally producing mild macroharmonic change. Cadences are often
articulated by speciﬁc melodic and harmonic formulas, some of which anticipate
the V–I progressions of later music (Figure 6.3.2). To a modern ear, there is more
sense of a “tonal center” than in the medieval style. However, the music continues
to have a somewhat “ﬂoating” quality, and many passages are only weakly centered.
Figure 6.3.2 In Josquin’s music, fourths typically resolve to thirds (a), diminished triads
sometimes appear in ﬁrst inversion (b), and cadences sometimes anticipate the functional
harmony of later centuries (c).

7 The ambiguous status of the fourth is addressed by early ﬁfteenth-century theorists such as
Prosdocimus de Beldemandis (see Kaye 1989 and Gut 1976).

201

202

history and analysis

In the rest of this section I want to look more carefully at these differences, with the
goal of understanding how they might relate to the music-theoretical constraints discussed earlier.

6.3.1 Harmonic Consistency and the Rise
of Triads
The triadic quality of Josquin’s music can be traced, in part, to simple combinatorial facts about the diatonic scale. To see this, notice that it is almost impossible to
write three-voice counterpoint using only perfect consonances. This is illustrated in
Figure 6.3.3, which locates the perfect consonances in three-note chord space; chords
here are quite far apart, and only a few are connected by lines representing stepwise
voice leading. (In fact, there are only three ways to connect three-note perfect consonances by stepwise voice leading, and two of these produce parallel octaves.8) Readers
who try to compose under these conditions will quickly develop a renewed appreciation for imperfect consonances, which are virtually necessary for creating elegant
three-voice counterpoint.9
Now suppose that you would like to use three-note chords containing only perfect and imperfect consonances—that is, thirds, fourths, ﬁfths, sixths, and their

Figure 6.3.3 There are only a few three-note chords containing only perfect consonances,
and they are spread throughout three-note chord space (a). (Note that we are viewing chord
space from above, looking down through the triangular faces; compare the side view in
Figure 3.8.2, where the triangular faces are on the top and bottom.) As a result, there are only
a few ways to connect them with stepwise voice leadings (b), particularly if one wants to avoid
parallel octaves.

8 If we relax the requirement of stepwise motion, we obtain a few more options, but not enough for
compositional comfort.
9 There is some medieval music in which only the perfect consonances are stable. However, this music
typically utilizes a large number of unstable sonorities in metrically weak positions.

The Extended Common Practice

compounds. It turns out there are only two
possibilities: doubled consonances, containing multiple copies of some note, and triads, containing no doublings at all (Figure
6.3.4). The chords in the second category
are sonically richer than those in the ﬁrst,
simply by virtue of containing three distinct
pitch classes. But they are also related in
another way as well: considered as unordered sets of pitch classes, they are all related
by diatonic transposition. It follows that a relatively weak notion of harmonic consistency—the mere preference for triads over doubled consonances—automatically
generates a much stronger kind of consistency. To my mind this is a profound fact,
suggesting that harmonic consistency might arise as the unbidden byproduct of more
basic musical preferences: composers who favor three-pitch-class consonances,
purely on the basis of their richer note content, will inevitably use chords related by
scalar transposition.
In fact, a fondness for triadic harmonies is already evident in the three-voice compositions of the late fourteenth century.10 Figure 6.3.5 traces the development of this
norm throughout the following decades.11 In Dufay’s music, complete triads account
for about 46% of the three-voice chords and 78% of the four-voice chords—numbers
Figure 6.3.4 Doubled consonances (a)
and triads (b).

Figure 6.3.5 The percentage of consonant sonorities that are complete triads rather than
“doubled” intervals, by composer date of birth. The percentage is reasonably high throughout
the Renaissance, and increases over time.
four-voice chords

three-voice chords

100

Percent of total

80

60

40
20

0

1400

1420

Dufay
Ockeghem

1440

1460

Josquin

1480

1500

1520

Tallis

Lassus

Palestrina

10 See Crocker 1962, Rivera 1979, Kaye 1989.
11 The data in this section come from more than 150 MIDI ﬁles of four-voice Renaissance vocal music.

203

history and analysis

that increase to 72% and 97% in the music of Lassus.12 The ratio of four-voice to
three-voice chords increases as well, with three-voice sonorities being more prevalent
in Dufay and Ockeghem, and four-voice sonorities predominating later. Indeed, it
is likely that the desire for triadic harmonies explains this gradual standardization
of four-voice textures, since it is very difﬁcult to write three-voice music that consistently articulates complete triads, particularly if one wants to avoid second-inversion chords. A fourth voice allows for signiﬁcantly greater compositional freedom,
permitting composers to use complete triads while still leaving enough ﬂexibility to
write interesting melodic lines.

6.3.2 “3 + 1” Voice Leading
Four-voice textures would seem to pose a challenge for our geometrical approach,
since they require a four-dimensional space in which doublings are not perspicuously represented.13 Happily, a sizable proportion of Josquin’s voice leadings involve
what I call the 3 + 1 schema: here, three voices articulate a strongly crossing-free
voice leading between complete triads (§4.9), while a fourth voice adds doublings.
This fourth voice is typically the bass, which often leaps from root to root; the other
three voices are typically in close position and often move as efﬁciently as possible.
(See Figure 6.3.1, bottom staff.) Figure 6.3.6 shows that these “3 + 1” voice leadings
account for a signiﬁcant portion of the four-voice triadic voice leadings in a broad
sample of Renaissance music. These ﬁgures suggest that the eighteenth-century ten-

Figure 6.3.6 The percentage of four-voice triadic voice leadings that are factorizable in a
“3 + 1” manner, with three voices articulating strongly crossing-free voice leadings between
complete triads, arranged by composer birth year.
100

80

Percent of total

204

60

40
20

0

1400

1420

Dufay
Ockeghem

1440

1460

Josquin

1480

1500

1520

Tallis

Lassus

Palestrina

12 Because there are many more doubled consonances than complete triads, even the 50:50 ratio for
three-note chords suggests a preference for complete sonorities.
13 For example, in four-note space the chord {C, C, E, G} is somewhat distant from {C, E, G, G} (§3.12).

The Extended Common Practice

dency to conceive of harmony as “a bass line plus some relatively homogenous upper
voices”—exempliﬁed most clearly by ﬁgured-bass notation—might actually originate in the Renaissance.
It follows that we can often use three-note chord space to analyze four-part
Renaissance music: we simply focus on three of the voices, treating the fourth as
an “odd man out” subject to its own rules. Figure 6.3.7 locates the diatonic triads
in three-note chord space, with the lines indicating single-step voice leading. The
seven diatonic triads form a crooked chain running through the center of the space,
with the top chord connected to the bottom as explained in Chapter 3. In §3.11,
we described this circle of triads as being analogous to the diatonic circle of ﬁfths,
since it links a series of structurally similar chords by single-step voice leadings.
We now see that we can use it to model many of the voice leadings in Renaissance
counterpoint.
Suppose, for example, you would like to move three voices from C major to F
major. The most efﬁcient way to do this is to take two clockwise steps along the circle,
producing the voice leading (C, E, G)®(C, E, A)®(C, F, A) or (C, E, G)®(C, F, A).
Each clockwise move raises a single voice by step: the ﬁrst moves G to A, while the
second moves E to F (Figure 6.3.8). Alternatively, however, we can move from C to F
by taking ﬁve counterclockwise steps, producing (C, E, G)®(B, E, G)®(B, D, G)®(B,
D, F)®(A, D, F)®(A, C, F), or (C, E, G)®(A, C, F). Each counterclockwise move lowers one voice by step, yielding a voice leading whose voices descend by a total of ﬁve
steps. By taking one or more complete turns around the circle, we can generate other
voice leadings between C major and F major, all of which are strongly crossing free. In

Figure 6.3.7 The diatonic triads form a chain that runs through the center of three-note
chord space, with adjacent triads linked by single-step voice leading. (b) This “circle of thirds”
is analogous to the familiar circle of ﬁfth-related diatonic scales, and can be used to represent
any three-voice, strongly crossing-free voice leading between triads.

205

206
Figure 6.3.8
Two strongly
crossing-free
voice leadings
between C and F,
represented on
the circle.

history and analysis

fact, the circle models all possible
strongly crossing-free voice leadings between any two triads in the
C diatonic scale.
Figure 6.3.9a plots the opening
phrase of “Tu pauperum refugium”
as a series of paths in three-note
chord space. Figure 6.3.9b shows
how these voice leadings would
be represented on the circle; in
both views, the music takes the
most direct path between successive triads. This is characteristic of
the excerpt: indeed, of the twelve
numbered voice leadings on Figure
6.3.1, all but one takes the shortest path along the triadic circle.14
To give a sense of the utility of the
circle—and of the ubiquity of the voice leadings it represents—Figure 6.3.10 turns
to a style worlds apart from Josquin. Here we see that many common guitar ﬁngerings also articulate strongly crossing-free voice leadings in their upper voices. (Of
course, in pop music, efﬁcient voice leading results more from guitarists’ attempts to

Figure 6.3.9
Four voice
leadings from
the opening
of Josquin’s
“Tu pauperum
refugium”
plotted in threenote chord space
(a) and on the
diatonic circle of
thirds (b).

14 The exception is (D, F, A)®(B, E, Gs), which is less efﬁcient than (D, F, A)®(E, Gs, B). However,
the latter voice leading is unusable because it creates both parallel ﬁfths and a melodic augmented second.
Furthermore, it is actually less efﬁcient when considered as a voice leading in chromatic space—involving
seven semitones of motion as opposed to ﬁve.

The Extended Common Practice
Figure 6.3.10 (a−b)
Two common chord
progressions, as they
are often played on a
guitar. (c−d) The notes
produced by these
ﬁngering patterns. The
top three voices articulate
strongly crossing-free
voice leadings that can
be represented on the
triadic circle.

minimize their physical motions than from an explicit concern for polyphony.) The
distance between these two examples—one representing the high art of the Renaissance, the other representing the vernacular of our own time—suggests that our
triadic voice leadings feature in a very broad range of music.

6.3.3 Fourth Progressions and Cadences
We now turn to a feature of Renaissance practice that is not altogether obvious in the
brief Josquin excerpt. Figure 6.3.11 shows that root progressions by perfect fourth
and ﬁfth become increasingly prevalent from Josquin on: where the root progressions in Dufay and Ockeghem are about evenly divided between steps, thirds, and
fourths, fourths account for more than 50% of the progressions in Josquin and
almost 60% in Palestrina.15 This trend continues into the eighteenth century, reaching more than 70% in the Bach chorales. One possible explanation lies in the fact

15 Note that I am using use “fourth” to mean “fourth or ﬁfth or any of their compounds.” In constructing the graph I also eliminated progressions such as (C4, C4, E4, G4)®(C4, C4, E4, A4), which could be
interpreted as resulting from linear motion in the top voice; third progressions were counted only when
at least two voices change.

207

history and analysis

that these progressions make it particularly easy to harmonize stepwise melodies.
Figure 6.3.12 shows that if we start with a C major chord, with any of its notes in the
soprano, we can harmonize any melodic step with either the progression C major®F
major or C major®G major. By contrast, steps and thirds are not nearly so useful:
third progressions from a ﬁxed triad can harmonize only two stepwise motions; while
step progressions can easily lead to parallel ﬁfths and octaves.16 (To avoid these parallels, composers typically use chord inversions, or move the upper voices inefﬁciently.)
Figure 6.3.11 Root progressions by composer, with S = second, T = third, and F = fourth.
Over the course of the Renaissance, there is an increasing preference for fourth progressions,
a trend that continues into the classical tradition.
descending

ascending

70
60
Percent of total

208

50
40
30
20
10
0

STF
Dufay

STF

STF

Ockeghem Josquin

STF

Tallis

STF

STF

Palestrina Lassus

STF

Bach

Figure 6.3.12 Fourth progressions allow a composer to harmonize a wide range of stepwise
melodies in a “3 + 1” fashion, with the upper voices moving by strongly crossing-free voice
leadings and the bass moving from root to root. Root motions by second and third are
comparatively less ﬂexible, either because they do not harmonize many stepwise melodies or
because they can create forbidden parallels.

16 Common tones may also be a factor: step-related triads have no common tones, fourth-related triads
have one, and third-related triads have two. The Goldilocks Principle perhaps favors the middle option.

The Extended Common Practice

From this point of view, fourth progressions are particularly handy tools, being easy
to use while also providing a wealth of melodic options.
Of course, fourth progressions play a critical role at cadences, too. Recall from
§6.2 that medieval cadences often feature two voices converging by stepwise contrary
motion onto a unison or octave (Figure 6.3.13). Suppose we want to add a third
voice to this cadence, ending on either a triple unison C, or the open ﬁfth C-G-C.
(In particular, suppose we want the bass to sound the pitch class on which the voices
converge, so that the acoustic root of the chord reinforces the converging melodies.17)
One possible harmonization is shown in Figure 6.3.13b: with the Fs, this is a standard
medieval double leading-tone cadence; with the Fn, it suggests a tonal vii°6–I progression. (Another variant, with Bf and Df, produces a “phrygian cadence,” common in
both Renaissance and classical music.) A second option, shown in Figure 6.3.13d,
very closely resembles the V–I progression. When we examine four-voice harmonizations, the situation is even more dramatic, as virtually all the available options evoke
familiar cadences.18 Rather than being arbitrary conventions, then, these cadential
formulas may arise as relatively obvious solutions to the basic problem of harmonizing two converging stepwise voices.
We see, then, that Renaissance music involves two different kinds of fourth progressions. Within-phrase progressions have little or no cadential function and do
not necessarily create the sense of tension and release. In particular, these progressions typically feature 3 + 1 voice leading rather than the converging stepwise voices
of the cadential formulas (cf. the ﬁrst voice leading in Figure 6.3.1). By contrast,
Figure 6.3.13 (a) A basic medieval two-voice cadential pattern, in which two voices converge
onto an octave by stepwise motion. (b−c) Three-voice harmonizations producing a common
medieval cadence (with the Fs), a vii°6–I cadence (with the Fn), or a phrygian cadence
(with Fn and Df). (d) A three-voice harmonization resembling a V–I cadence. (e) A failed
harmonization producing parallel ﬁfths. (f−h) Four-voice extensions of the preceding schemas.
The V–I form (g) cadences on a sonority containing only perfect consonances.

17 Not all medieval cadences are like this, of course: one sometimes ﬁnds progressions such as (G3, B3,
D4)®(F3, C4, C4), but it is reasonable to suppose that musicians would incline toward cadences in which
the pitch class in the bass is also the object of melodic convergence, as these would presumably create a
stronger sense of emphasis on a single pitch class.
18 These ideas derive from Randel (1971), who suggests that the increasing popularity of the V–I cadential
form is the result of two factors: ﬁrst, a preference for concluding on open ﬁfths rather than complete
triads, and second, an increasing preference for four-voice textures. See also Lowinsky 1961.

209

210

history and analysis

cadential fourth progressions do exhibit a clear pattern of tension and release, and
almost always employ converging melodic voices. One interesting possibility is that
functional tonality arose out of the gradual fusion between these two types of progression—in other words, the within-phrase fourth progressions gradually acquired
the tension-release quality of the cadential formulas, articulating the music into a
sequence of short “harmonic cycles,” each concluding with its own tension-resolving
V–I progression. We will return to this idea in the next chapter.

6.3.4 Parallel Perfect Intervals
Finally, a word about the prohibition on parallel perfect ﬁfths and octaves. Many
theorists have proposed that the prohibition is connected to the phenomenon of
auditory streaming: on this account, parallel motion by perfect ﬁfth or octave tends
to destroy the sense that the music is composed of independent musical voices,
since it leads us to “fuse” the voices into a single melody.19 While I am sympathetic
to this explanation, it seems to me that the prohibition might also reﬂect structural features of diatonic scale itself. Figure 6.3.14 shows that parallel diatonic ﬁfths
almost always produce parallel chromatic ﬁfths; by contrast, parallel diatonic thirds
do not produce the same degree of chromatic parallelism, since the diatonic scale
contains a more even distribution of major and minor thirds. To me, this difference
is at least as striking as the difference in the acoustic quality of the intervals. Figure
6.3.14 illustrates this point by comparing two sorts of parallel motion in Messiaen’s nine-note “mode 3.” Here three-step scalar intervals are always four semitones
large, while four-step scalar intervals alternate between six and seven semitones.
I ﬁnd that the passages exhibit a roughly similar degree of “voice independence,”

Figure 6.3.14 Parallel motion within the diatonic scale (a−c) and in Messiaen’s “Mode 3”
(d−e). Underneath each interval I have written its chromatic size in semitones. The brackets
identify chromatic motion that is not parallel.

(d)

19 See Huron 2001 and the references therein.

The Extended Common Practice

even though one of them contains parallel perfect ﬁfths and the other doesn’t. This
suggests scale structure plays at least some role in explaining the prohibition on
forbidden parallels.20

***
Let me conclude this discussion by reinforcing two general points. First, there are a
number of features of Renaissance practice that preﬁgure later styles, including triadic harmonies, the 3 + 1 arrangement of the voices, the avoidance of parallel perfect intervals, and the increasing use of root progressions by perfect ﬁfth. These facts
should perhaps make us hesitate before drawing too sharp a distinction between the
musical languages of Palestrina and Bach.21 Second, and perhaps more important,
several features of Renaissance syntax can be seen as relatively obvious solutions to
very basic compositional goals—ensuring voice independence, writing consonant
music using three-note sonorities, and harmonizing stepwise convergence onto a
unison. In hindsight, we can see these developments as exploiting relatively obvious
possibilities lying dormant in the diatonic system.
In saying this, I do not mean to propose a deterministic or Hegelian view of music
history according to which music was fated to develop as it actually did: one can certainly imagine alternate histories in which, say, Western composers never developed
an aversion to parallel perfect ﬁfths. But I do think that composers, like all artists,
are opportunists, quick to take advantage of whatever possibilities present themselves.
And the fundamental moral of Part I is that the ﬁve components of tonality impose
nontrivial constraints on composers’ choices, boxing them in on some sides while
allowing them to move freely in other directions. One might make an analogy here to
a mountaineer ascending a cliff: though the climber is in principle free to move in any
direction, the structure of the rock will naturally suggest certain routes, offering handholds and footholds that will guide any sensible person’s decisions. In much the same
way, we can sometimes tell reasonably compelling stories about why music might have
developed as it did. The trick for the historian is to make room for contingency while
also capturing the way in which music history sometimes follows the path of least
resistance, like a climber ascending a cliff by way of a particularly inviting chute.

20 One point in favor of the acoustic explanation is that parallel perfect fourths are permitted in classical three-voice counterpoint, whereas parallel perfect ﬁfths are not. (This marks an interesting difference
between ﬁfths and octaves: parallel octaves remain objectionable no matter how the octaves are arranged
in register, whereas ﬁfths can always be converted to unobjectionable fourths by a suitable transposition
of voices.) However, it is not clear whether we should try to ﬁnd principled explanations for every feature
of traditional practice. In fact, very occasional parallel perfect ﬁfths, embedded in complex contrapuntal
textures, may not signiﬁcantly weaken voice independence.
21 Well-meaning scholars have sometimes been overzealous in their attempts to complicate this picture. For example, Harold Powers (1992, pp. 11–12) denies each of the following claims: “the modal system
was displaced by the tonal system,” “modality evolved into tonality,” and “the ancestors of our major and
minor scales were the Ionian and Aeolian modes.” It seems to me that these three truisms are unobjectionable when properly understood; by rejecting them completely, Powers commits an error as egregious as the
oversimpliﬁcations he warns against.

211

212

history and analysis

6.4

functional harmony

Where our early medieval excerpt exhibited the basic two-dimensional coherence
of Western music, combining recognizable melodies with consonant harmonies, the
Renaissance passage added a much more robust notion of harmonic consistency. Our
next example features two further innovations. First, chords are now constrained to
move according to a small number of (“functional”) harmonic conventions. These
conventions go hand-in-hand with a much stronger emphasis on the tonic, so that
centricity is often signiﬁcantly clearer than in earlier music. Second, keys now participate in their own meaningful progressions, as modulation becomes more systematic
and encompasses a wider range of macroharmonic states. The result, as I have said,
is a musical style that is hierarchically self-similar, with the same fundamental procedures appearing on both the level of the scale and that of the chord.
Figure 6.4.1a presents the opening of one of J. S. Bach’s harmonizations of the
chorale melody “Herr Christ, der ein’ge Gott’s sohn.” Where the progressions in Josquin’s “Tu pauperum refugium” are extremely free, those in Bach’s chorale can be
summarized by the simple map in Figure 6.4.1b. Such maps embody the new conventions central to eighteenth-century harmony—for instance, that ii chords often move
to V chords, but not vice versa. The bottom staff of the ﬁgure shows that the music
again uses the 3 + 1 schema, with the upper three voices in close position and moving
in a strongly crossing-free manner, and with the bass obeying its own principles. The
Figure 6.4.1 (a) The ﬁrst phrase of Bach’s chorale “Herr Christ, der ein’ge Gott’ssohn”
(No. 303 in the Riemenschneider edition) and a reduction of the upper voice counterpoint.
(b) A simple model of the chord progressions it contains. Chords can move freely rightward,
but can move leftward only by following the arrows.

or: IV vii°@

&b c œ
œ

œ
œœ œœ œ œœ

? b c œœ

œ
œ

F: I

&b c œ
œœ

œœ

œœ œ œ œ
œ œ

U

˙œ # œ œ # œœ
œ
œ œœ œ œ
œ œ œ œ

IV I V 7 vi
d: i

ii# V 7 i

œœ œœ
œ œ

# œœœ

œœ
œ

œœ
œ

œœ n œ œœ œœ

œœ

U

˙˙ .
.

œ œ œœ œœ œ œ ˙ .
œ
œœ
˙.

g: V
i
F: ii

V2 I6

V 7

I

œœ
œ

œœœ œœœ

œœœ

˙˙ ..
˙.

œ
œœ # œœ
œ

..
..
..

The Extended Common Practice

213

similarity to Figure 6.3.1 suggests that functionally tonal music augments Renaissance
voice-leading practices with new and distinctive harmonic rules.22
This last observation is surprisingly controversial. A number of theorists, inﬂuenced
by Heinrich Schenker, seem to deny that functional tonality involves purely harmonic
conventions.23 Instead, they claim that what appear to be independent harmonic laws
can actually be derived from new voice-leading principles indigenous to the classical
era. We will consider this view more carefully in the next chapter. For now, though, let
us note that we have good historical reasons for claiming that functionally tonal music
obeys purely harmonic laws. To put it crudely: Renaissance music uses efﬁcient voice
leading, avoids parallel ﬁfths and octaves, and allows triads to progress in a very free
fashion; classical music observes many of the same voice-leading conventions, but also
requires chords to move in particular ways. Moreover, twentieth-century tonal music
often permits parallel ﬁfths and octaves while still conforming to the harmonic schemas
of the classical era. It seems exceedingly natural to represent this situation as shown in
Figure 6.4.2. Here, the so-called “common practice period” is depicted as lying at the
intersection of two separate common practices: a contrapuntal common practice that
includes the music of the Renaissance, and a harmonic common practice that includes
a good deal of twentieth-century music. Theorists who renounce harmonic laws risk
effacing these two common practices, and hence obscuring the connections between
Renaissance music, classical tonality, and more recent rock and jazz.
Functional harmony is also notable insofar as it charts coherent paths through
the space of possible keys. This can be seen in the opening phrases of one of Bach’s
settings of the hymn “Ein’ feste Burg,” shown in Figure 6.4.3. The music begins in
D major but modulates to A major at the end of the ﬁrst phrase; it then turns to B
minor to start the second phrase, returning to the tonic D major at the end. As discussed earlier, these modulations involve particular voice leadings between scales: the
ﬁrst raises G to Gs, the second raises A to As, and the last cancels these two changes
by returning to the opening collection. Figure 6.4.4 shows how these modulations
appear on the scale lattice of §4.6: the music begins by taking minimal steps between
adjacent collections, and ends by moving diagonally back to its starting point. Such
voice leadings represent a higher dimensional analogue to the contrapuntal processes
linking individual chords.
harmonic conventions
voice-leading conventions
1500

1600

1700

1800

1900

2000

the “common practice” period

22 To be fair, functionally tonal music may involve a few new rules, such as the requirement that the
leading tone resolve upward. Nevertheless, the vast majority of its contrapuntal rules are inherited from
earlier styles.
23 See, for example, Salzer 1982, Schenker 2001, and Beach 1974.

Figure 6.4.2
The “common
practice
period” as the
intersection of
two common
practices.

214

history and analysis
Figure 6.4.3 The ﬁrst two phrases of one of Bach’s harmonizations of “A Mighty Fortress is
Our God” (Riemenschneider No. 20).

Figure 6.4.4
The modulations
in Figure 6.4.3,
graphed on a
portion of the
scale lattice.

When I ﬁrst began to study
tonal harmony, the chord-by-chord
constraints seemed to be the most
important and distinctive feature
of the style. I thought the regular
ﬂow from tonic to subdominant to
dominant provided music with a
powerful and historically unprecedented level of structure—one that
differentiated it from the less principled harmonic languages of other
eras. Twenty-ﬁve years later, it now
seems to me that systematic modulation is at least as important, providing a powerful tool for producing large-scale
harmonic change while also creating a remarkable sort of self-similar musical texture. It is interesting, therefore, that modulation continues to feature prominently
in twentieth-century music, even in styles that have abandoned the chord-to-chord
constraints of the classical era. Indeed, one could even argue that systematic relations among macroharmonies are the most signiﬁcant and enduring legacy of the
functional tradition.

6.5

schumann’s chopin

We’ll approach our next style with a bit of musical analysis. Figure 6.5.1 summarizes the chords used in Schumann’s “Chopin,” a wonderful little piece of musical
portraiture. The harmony here is not radical: it opens in Af major, turns brieﬂy to
Bf minor, and immediately returns to Af major at the start of the example’s third
bar. Bar four moves to F minor, featuring a chromatic passage in which the tenor
and bass exchange the notes En and G. The major point of interest lies in the last
bar: beginning at F minor we move to a shocking A7 chord which then progresses
to Ef7, the dominant of Af. It is precisely the sort of daring harmonic gesture that

The Extended Common Practice

215
Figure 6.5.1
A harmonic
summary of
Schumann’s
“Chopin.” Each
whole note in
the summary
corresponds to
a measure in the
actual work.

characterizes Chopin’s music—at once willful and completely convincing to the ear.
One can well imagine the young Schumann playing the passage with a wink.
Now, what can we say about this A7 chord? Where does it come from and what
does it mean? It is, to begin with, a chord without a name. Without the Gn, one
might call it a “Neapolitan,” but according to harmony textbooks such chords typically behave rather differently. Were this a piece of contemporary jazz, we might call
the A7 a “tritone substitution” for the dominant Ef7, though the name seems more
than a little anachronistic here. We could perhaps invent a new term for the chord,
calling it a “Schumann seventh” or some such. Or we could name it with reference to
other keys, asserting that it has been “borrowed” from either D major or D minor. But
these descriptions merely serve as labels for our puzzle,
rather than solutions. What we want to know is why Figure 6.5.2 The last
Schumann might have written such a chord, and why measure of “Chopin” can be
interpreted as a four-voice
it sounds so shocking and so beautiful at one and the
passage in which each voice
same time.
moves by semitone.
The obvious answer is that the chord is connected by
efﬁcient chromatic voice leading to both the preceding
F minor and the following Ef7. Figure 6.5.2 shows that
we can model the music as having four distinct musical
voices, each moving by semitone. Our exotic A7 chord
is a chromatic passing chord—a moment of musical
liquidity that “ﬁlls the gaps” between the perfectly respectable diatonic sonorities surrounding it. But it would be wrong to dismiss it as a mere agglomeration of linear
passing tones with no vertical signiﬁcance, since the purported passing tones form a
familiar dominant seventh chord that has already occurred in the piece. (In m. 3 of the
ﬁgure, neighboring motion brieﬂy converts an E diminished seventh into an A dominant seventh.) To downplay the vertical signiﬁcance of the A7 chord is to miss the fact
that Schumann could have chosen any number of different passing or neighboring
chords, and that this particular sonority appears twice in a very short span of time.

216

history and analysis

What makes the chord interesting, therefore, is its twofold status. Contrapuntally,
we can think of it as a mere collection of passing tones. Harmonically, however, it has
its own individuality and signiﬁcance. Furthermore, the A7 chord suggests keys—D
major and D minor—that are intuitively quite “distant” from the tonic Af. Thus the
A7 is simultaneously close and not close to the chords surrounding it: it is melodically
close, since A7 can be connected by efﬁcient voice leading to both F minor and Ef7;
but it is tonally distant, since the keys of D major and D minor are in some sense “far”
from the tonic Af major. It is precisely this conﬂict that produces the feeling that the
A7 chord is both out of place and yet profoundly right.
Geometrically, both of these distances can be modeled with the voice-leading
spaces of Chapter 3. Key distances can be represented using the seven-dimensional
space depicting voice-leading relationships among familiar scales, as we will see
in the next chapter. Chord distances can be represented using the lower dimensional spaces containing triads and seventh chords. In four-note chromatic space,
for example, A7 is quite close both to Ef7 and the doubled triad F-Af-Af-C. In
more traditional tonal contexts, the proximity of A7 and Ef7 is not apparent, since
chords are restricted to a particular major or minor scale; thus, to move from A7 to
Ef7 one must not only change chords, but also change scales via modulation. The
essence of nineteenth-century harmony lies in the elimination of this modulatory
step: in “Chopin,” Schumann temporarily abandons the diatonic world in favor of a
direct manipulation of chromatic relationships. This involves replacing a relatively
simple diatonic geometry with the much more complex geometry of chromatic
possibilities—a shift that is illustrated, in the three-note case, by Figure 6.5.3. The
contrast between these ﬁgures shows at a glance why chromatic music can be so
hard to understand.

Figure 6.5.3 Voice leading relations among diatonic triads (a) are much less complex than
those among chromatic triads (b).

The Extended Common Practice

6.6

chromaticism

Schumann’s musical portrait could serve as the frontispiece to the entire tradition of nineteenth-century chromaticism, a genre that is characterized by the
increasing tendency to conceive of chords as objects in chromatic space. This
tendency manifests itself in two musical techniques, one pedestrian and the other
more radical. The pedestrian technique uses chromatic chords to embellish or decorate familiar tonal progressions without fundamentally unseating the conventions
of functional harmony. The more radical technique abandons functional norms in
favor of direct chromatic voice leading between triads and seventh chords. These
direct chromatic moves serve a variety of musical functions, acting as neighboring
chords, passing chords, bridges to distantly related keys, and motivic progressions
in their own right. It is this second technique that has led theorists to propose that
nineteenth-century musical syntax is fundamentally dual, combining a diatonic
“ﬁrst practice” inherited from the classical era, with a newer “second practice”
based on chromatic relationships.24
Figure 6.6.1 illustrates this fundamental change from diatonic to chromatic
frames of reference. Relative to the diatonic scale, each voice in Figure 6.6.1a moves
by a single step, so that there is no gap between successive notes. Relative to the chromatic scale, however, G moves to A by two chromatic steps. As nineteenth-century
composers began to think more chromatically, it became increasingly tempting to
try to ﬁll this gap. In Figure 6.6.1b, for example, the added note between G and A
produces two different sonorities, a C augmented triad on the way up and an F minor
triad on the way down.25 From this perspective, the two chords result from the Figure 6.6.1 (a) Relative to the diatonic scale
same fundamental musical process of each voice moves by the smallest possible
distance. (b) Relative to the chromatic
ﬁlling in gaps.
scale, there are gaps that can be ﬁlled in.
Contemporary terminology some- The resulting progression appears in the
times seems designed to obscure this fact, nineteenth-century song “You tell me your
describing the F minor chord as being dream, I’ll tell you mine.”
borrowed from the key of C minor. I am
somewhat suspicious of this metaphor of
“borrowing.” Musical keys are not lending libraries, and there are no borrower’s
cards that can be used to verify whether
the F minor chord is indeed on loan

24 This view has been defended by Mitchell (1962), Proctor (1978), and Cohn (1996, 1997, 1998a). See
also the essays in Kinderman and Krebs 1996. Antecedents can be found in Kurth 1920 and Weitzmann
1860.
25 In principle, of course, one could use the F minor chord on the way up, and the C augmented on the
way down, but this would be less effective. In C–f–F, the single-semitone shift Af®A occurs after the root
motion has already happened, and sounds like a “correction” of the ﬁnal chord. In C–C+ −F, the chromatic
alteration intensiﬁes the C chord, and makes the root change more dramatic when it happens.

217

218

history and analysis

from C minor. Moreover, the idea of “borrowing” potentially reinforces a compartmentalized approach to chromatic harmony, one that presents the style as a series of
disconnected idioms with no common structure. (For example, in one popular textbook “borrowed” chords appear eight chapters before augmented triads, thus making
it seem as if the chords in Figure 6.6.1 have no relationship.26) Rather than focusing on
assigning labels to chords (such as “borrowed chord” or “augmented sixth”), I would
prefer to focus on the underlying musical procedures relating them, which in many
cases is chromatic voice leading. Otherwise, it can be very difﬁcult to understand the
fundamental logic animating chromatic music.27
In the previous example, chromaticism decorates a familiar progression. Figure
6.6.2 exhibits the more radical kind of chromaticism as it operates in the middle
phrase of Chopin’s E major prelude. Almost all the unusual moves in this passage can
be interpreted in light of two different voice-leading “systems”: one connecting triads
whose roots relate by major third, and the other connecting seventh chords whose
roots relate by minor third or tritone. We begin with the major-third system, moving
from E major to C major by way of the voice leading (B, Ds, Fs)®(B, D, G); this connects V in E to V in C. The music then hints at dominants of F major, D minor, and
Af major, each expressed in a slightly different way: the dominant of F is a dominant
seventh chord, the dominant of D is both a triad and a diminished seventh, and the
dominant of Af is both a diminished and dominant seventh. Finally, we return to E
Figure 6.6.2 The second phrase of Chopin’s E major prelude. Beneath the excerpt I provide
simpliﬁed voice leadings that illustrate the major- and minor-third systems.

26 Aldwell and Schachter 2002. “Mode mixture” is not even included in the section on chromaticism,
but is considered a completely different procedure. Kostka and Payne (2003) treat modal mixture and
augmented triads in Chapters 21 and 26, respectively, but give little sense of the relation between them.
Perhaps the best pedagogical treatment is in Gauldin (1997), who treats mode mixture and augmented triads in different chapters, but who includes an introductory discussion that clariﬁes the similarities between
them.
27 I don’t wish to suggest that there is never any role for the notion of “borrowing” or modal mixture,
only that we should be careful not to invoke these ideas reﬂexively and without justiﬁcation.

The Extended Common Practice

by way of a single-semitone voice leading connecting Gs minor to an (incomplete)
B7 chord. Below the example I have provided a hypothetical “background” in which
the contrapuntal logic is easier to see. We can think of these voice leadings as basic
templates which Chopin has embellished in a relatively straightforward way.
A more involved example is given by the scherzo to Schubert’s C major String
Quintet (Figure 6.6.3).28 The piece is exuberantly simple and folksy, presenting the
same melodic material in a variety of distant keys. Five of Schubert’s eleven modulations involve the major-third system: three directly juxtapose major-third-related tonic
triads, while two more connect a tonic triad with what turns out to be the dominant
of the following key. Three of the remaining modulations involve minor-third-related
dominants: the initial feint to D minor connects V7/IV to the minor-third-related V/ii
(which here appears without its seventh), while the modulation from Af to G connects
C7 (itself obtained via a semitonally ascending sequence of seventh chords) directly
to Ef7, which is in turn reinterpreted as an augmented sixth of G. (This passage is
cleverly varied in the recap, where the ascending semitonal motion continues upward
to an Af7 which is then reinterpreted as the German sixth of C major; as a result, the
entire passage modulates down by minor third rather than down by semitone.29) Once
again, the majority of the modulations use efﬁcient chromatic voice leading among
triads and seventh chords. To the extent that we can familiarize ourselves with the
major- and minor-third systems, we can begin to see that Schubert’s kaleidoscopic key
changes reuse a small number of familiar contrapuntal moves.
Let me clarify that I am not claiming that Schubert and Chopin explicitly conceptualized these different chromatic systems; it is entirely possible that they simply sat at
the piano and exploited the most efﬁcient voice leadings that came to hand. My point
Figure 6.6.3 An outline of the modulations in the scherzo to Schubert’s C major String
Quintet. Local tonics are shown with open noteheads. Of the eleven modulations, nine involve
the major- and minor-third systems; only two employ traditional pivot chords.

28 Thanks to Andrew Jones, who made a number of the observations in this paragraph.
29 This compensates for the fact that the recap’s D minor moves up to Ef major rather than back to C
major, leaving Schubert in an inconvenient key.

219

220

history and analysis

is that the geometry of chord space ensures that this sort of intuitive exploration
will necessarily result in music that can be described using the major- and minorthird systems. It is useful here to revisit the analogy of the mountain climber, though
now representing an individual composer rather the development of Western music
as a whole. Chromatic composers, like mountaineers, will be constrained by the
environment in which they operate, and the geometrical spaces of Part I are literally
the terrain through which chromatic music moves. Insofar as we understand this
geometry, we will also understand why intuitive musical exploration produces the
results it does—in this case a plethora of major-third-related triads and minor-thirdor tritone-related seventh chords.
It seems to me that a deep appreciation of nineteenth-century music requires a systematic grasp of all the voice-leading possibilities between familiar sonorities. This, of
course, was a central theme of Part I. The notion of “near symmetry” (§2.9) allows us
to understand how a chord’s internal structure determines its contrapuntal capabilities:
thus, given a particular sonority such as the C dominant seventh, we can identify other
structurally similar chords that are nearby. This, in turn, leads us to notice that triads
can typically be connected smoothly to their major third transpositions while seventh
chords can be efﬁciently linked to their minor-third and tritone transpositions. The
geometrical spaces of Chapter 3 offer a convenient way to visualize these facts, allowing
us to draw “maps” in which the major-third and minor-third systems are clearly represented. Furthermore, by focusing on crossing-free voice leadings—treating voice crossings as embellishments of these more basic templates—we saw that we can reduce the
vast number of voice-leading possibilities to a much more manageable set of categories
(§4.9–10). Taken together, these tools allow us to evaluate composers’ choices in light of
a robust understanding of the options available to them. Or, to revert to the metaphor,
they allow us to understand the mountaineer’s decisions in light of a systematic knowledge of the rock face. If we can internalize these principles, understanding the logic of
chromatic voice leading, then chromatic music will start to seem much more coherent:
instead of describing Chopin or Schubert’s music as resulting from capricious acts of
musical fancy, Romantic lawbreaking that obeys no ﬁxed principles, we will instead see
a small collection of familiar paths through chromatic space.

6.7

twentieth-century scalar music

The ﬁrst half of the nineteenth century witnessed a tremendous expansion of harmonic options; new chords were permitted and new chromatic voice leadings were
used to connect formerly distant chords. But it saw relatively few extensions to music’s
scalar or modal vocabulary. This imbalance eventually led to a palpable compositional dilemma: what melodic notes should be used to accompany the chords of the
chromatic tradition?
This problem became particularly acute when composers required a large number of melodic notes to accompany a single chromatic sonority. To see why, consider
Figure 6.7.1. Suppose you would like to associate each chord with a complete scale—

The Extended Common Practice

say, a run that spans at least an octave. One option is simply to use the C major
scale, creating a clash with the chromatic notes of the altered harmonies. Another is
to incorporate the chordal alterations by inserting additional chromatic notes into
the passage. A third is to replace diatonic notes with their “altered” forms, fusing
the basic scale of the key (here, C diatonic) with alterations belonging to the chords
themselves. These three alternatives represent the main nineteenth-century solutions to the problem of associating chord and scale, as illustrated by Figure 6.7.2.
Twentieth-century tonality instead exploits the fact that the sonorities of chromatic harmony can all be embedded in a small number of familiar scales. (Recall
from §4.4 that just seven kinds of scale contain every “cluster-free” chord.) Twentiethcentury composers treat these scales as ready-to-hand accompaniments for particular
chromatic chords. Thus, for example, a composer might use the D and Bf acoustic
scales to harmonize the augmented and minor triads in Figure 6.7.3. This solution is
noteworthy for several reasons. First, the acoustic scales would traditionally be associated with the keys of A minor and F minor, keys that are quite distant from one
another. Second, though the acoustic scale is familiar from the classical tradition,
it is used here in unfamiliar modes (treating C as the tonic). And third, since the
acoustic scale has just seven notes, it creates a smallish macroharmony that is not
overwhelmingly chromatic. As a result, the passage has a kind of rigorous logic, even
while departing from the procedures of traditional tonality.
Figure 6.7.4 illustrates this technique in the context of Ravel’s String Quartet,
where a G9–Cf9–Fadd6 progression gives rise to three separate scales: the G9 chord
has a pronounced whole-tone ﬂavor; the Cf9 is accompanied by the octatonic scale,

Figure 6.7.1 Accompanying chromatic chords with scales. In (a), the scale does not contain
the chromatic chords; in (b−c) it does. The music in (b) augments the diatonic scale with the
altered notes, while the music in (c) replaces diatonic with altered notes.

221

222

history and analysis
Figure 6.7.2 (a) In Strauss’ Till Eulenspiegel (R7), the harmony Bf-Df-E-Gs serves as an
altered dominant chord resolving semitonally to the tonic F. The scale in the bass, however,
is a simple Af major that does not contain the En of the harmony, resulting in a ﬂeeting
dissonance. (b) In Wagner’s Parsifal (mm. 668–9, Schirmer vocal score p. 40), a diminished
seventh chord is harmonized with a melody touching on all the chromatic notes except Fs
and G. The effect is of a wash that creates a sense of motion, but does not clearly suggest any
familiar scale. (c) In m. 86 of the ﬁrst movement of Mozart’s Piano Sonata K. 533, a familiar
augmented sixth chord gives rise to an unusual (“gypsy”) scale. This scale is derived by
combining the notes of C diatonic with the alterations belonging to the German augmented
sixth.

Figure 6.7.3 Twentieth-century scalar composers might use acoustic scales to harmonize
altered chords. The result is a melodic texture without augmented seconds or consecutive
semitones.

and the F major chord is accompanied by F diatonic. The bottom staves of Figure
6.7.4 interpret the harmonies. Level (c) is purely diatonic, and depicts a relatively
standard ii9–V9–I6 progression. Level (b) includes chromatic embellishments of this
pattern: in the ﬁrst two chords, diatonic Bf becomes the applied leading tone Bn and
diatonic D becomes Cs, producing a Gs11 chord and a Cf9.30 Finally, level (a) embellishes this progression with whole-tone and octatonic scales. What is remarkable is
that each level suggests a different stage in our overarching historical narrative. Level
(c) is purely diatonic, and uses a functional chord progression inherited from classical tonality. Level (b) uses chromatic embellishments that evoke nineteenth-century
chromatic practice. Level (a) adds a distinctively twentieth-century contribution, as
30 Note that the Cs resolves upward by semitone to the D, so that the Cf9–Fadd6 progression combines
elements of a V–I progression in F major with a vii°7–i progression in D minor.

The Extended Common Practice
Figure 6.7.4 (a) Whole-tone and octatonic scales in Ravel’s String Quartet. (b) The
underlying progression, and its diatonic logic (c).

Figure 6.7.5 Bill Evans using the octatonic scale in his Town Hall recording of “Turn Out the
Stars.”

the altered chords give rise to additional scales that are neither diatonic nor chromatic. Chapters 9 and 10 will show that jazz musicians inherit and systematize these
techniques. Thus in Figure 6.7.5, Bill Evans uses the octatonic scale to accompany the
V chord, very much in the manner of Ravel’s String Quartet. Jazz theorists are both
systematic and explicit when describing these relations between chord and scale,
providing recipes that show students which scales to play over the altered chords of
jazz harmony. In this sense, jazz manages to standardize the intuitive scalar exploration of earlier decades.
The two examples we have considered represent a relatively traditional strain of
twentieth-century scalar thinking, in which nondiatonic scales are used to accompany functionally harmonic progressions. Chapter 9 will also present examples that
reject the ii–V–I paradigm, drawn from impressionist pieces by Debussy, Ravel, and
Janáček; minimalist and postminimalist works by Reich, Adams, and Nyman; and
nonfunctional jazz by the Miles Davis quintet. These examples, though stylistically
quite diverse, reuse the same basic scales and the same basic compositional techniques.
To my mind, this package of scalar procedures represents one of the most interesting recent developments in the thousand-year tradition that is Western tonality—a
thread of common practice linking a wide variety of recent tonal styles, equal in its
signiﬁcance to the other developments surveyed in this chapter.

223

224

history and analysis

6.8

the extended common practice

The eighteenth and nineteenth centuries are often called the “common practice
period” in Western music.31 The term suggests a compositional consensus transcending national and temporal boundaries: Italian music of 1720, it is claimed, is quite similar to the German music of the 1880s, and both styles are quite different from any of
the music composed prior to 1700 and subsequent to 1900. Other Western styles, such
as Renaissance polyphony or contemporary jazz, may involve shared musical practices
that are distantly related to those of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. But any
similarities are overwhelmed by the differences. Consequently, there is no substantive
sense in which Palestrina or Duke Ellington can be said to participate in the same
musical tradition as the musicians of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
The view sketched here is a different one. I have claimed that when we step back
far enough, we can see a much broader common practice that includes not just classical composers, but also jazz musicians like Ellington and Renaissance musicians like
Palestrina. Central to this extended common practice is the technique of connecting
harmonically signiﬁcant chords by efﬁcient voice leading. We have seen this in each
of our musical excerpts. In our simple medieval style, efﬁcient voice leading connects
consonant intervals; in later music, it connects structurally similar triads and seventh
chords. Classical music introduces modulation, applying efﬁcient voice leading to
scales as well as chords. Chromaticism shifts freely between the diatonic and chromatic realms. Finally, twentieth-century tonality develops a consistent technique of
associating chromatically altered chords with a small number of familiar scales. At
this level of abstraction, it looks like the tonal composers of the Western tradition are
all playing fundamentally the same game, creating music that is both melodically and
vertically coherent, and incorporating the various innovations of their predecessors.
I think there is something sublime about this. It is amazing that contemporary
rock guitar ﬁngerings are directly related to voice-leading practices more than half a
millennium old (Figures 6.3.9 and 6.3.10), or that Bill Evans’ improvisations develop
ideas found in Ravel’s carefully notated String Quartet (Figures 6.7.4 and 6.7.5). And
though I am mindful of the need to remain ever vigilant against the temptations of
Hegelian or Whiggish history, I am fascinated by the way certain stylistic developments in Western music seem to respond to, or arise out of, technical problems faced
by earlier composers—for example, the way nondiatonic scales provide a solution to
melodic challenges inherent in chromatic harmony (§6.7), or the way triads provide
a solution to the problem of writing consonant three-voice counterpoint (§6.3). By
focusing on the very general mechanisms of tonal coherence, by developing a bird’seye view of Western tonal practice, we can start to see these connections more clearly.
Geometry has helped us here, providing a different space for each of our ﬁve
styles. We used the two-dimensional Möbius strip to represent early medieval

31 The term seems to have originated with Walter Piston, who used it in his 1941 harmony textbook.
See Harrison (forthcoming) for perceptive comments on the notion of a “common practice period.”

The Extended Common Practice

two-note counterpoint. Later, the circle of diatonic thirds proved helpful in modeling Renaissance triadic voice leading. The turn to baroque music required us to
introduce the scale lattice, a three-dimensional region in seven-dimensional scale
space. The chromaticism of Schumann, Schubert, and Chopin led us to supplement
our earlier diatonic models with more complex chromatic spaces, in which we ﬁnd a
wealth of “shortcuts” between once-distant chords. Finally, Chapter 9 will show that
twentieth-century scalar music involves a much more complex sort of scalar voice
leading, involving a correspondingly sophisticated use of the scale lattice. Thus the
development of musical style can be represented, at least in part, as a process of
exploring an increasingly sophisticated array of musical spaces. Our earlier theoretical work allows us literally to visualize this process, giving us a uniﬁed set of geometrical models that help us comprehend the development of Western music.
Pedagogically, I ﬁnd this perspective to be extremely fruitful. My own musical
education was a traditional one, centered almost exclusively on a bifurcated diet of
musty Germanic classics and bracing twentieth-century atonality. The introductory music-theory class at my undergraduate institution devoted an entire year to
Bach chorales. Second-year theory was devoted exclusively to classical and very early
Romantic music, while subsequent classes discussed twelve-tone music, Schenkerian
analysis, and baroque counterpoint. Not once in my entire four years of undergraduate education did I hear a pedagogical word about jazz, rock, or minimalism—except
in an unguarded moment, when one of my professors, an atonal composer and theorist, let slip that he preferred Sgt. Pepper’s to any piece of atonality.
I believe we can do better. Part of what interests me about the narrative in this
chapter is the way it suggests a more inclusive pedagogy, more suited to the pluralism of contemporary culture. I teach a year-long, introductory music-theory class
based on the ﬁve musical styles we have just considered. Students begin by writing
faux-medieval two-voice counterpoint in which parallel ﬁfths are permitted. After a
brief detour into contemporary rock harmony, they progress to simpliﬁed four-voice
Renaissance music along the lines of Josquin’s “Tu pauperum refugium.” By the time
the common practice is introduced, they are already somewhat adept at the business
of connecting triads by efﬁcient voice leading while also avoiding forbidden parallels.
This makes the introduction of classical harmonic norms (including modulation)
considerably less painful than it usually is. The ﬁnal sections of the course provide
a systematic introduction to chromatic voice leading and twentieth-century scalar
techniques. At the end of the year, students have learned that musical styles change,
that tonality is a living tradition, and that when you dig deep enough, you can ﬁnd
nonobvious connections between very different musical styles. My hope is that these
lessons prepare them to confront today’s wide open, polystylistic, multicultural, syncretistic, and postmodern musical culture.

225

chapter 7

Functional Harmony
This chapter reconsiders four basic topics in tonal theory: chord progressions,
sequences, key distances, and the Schenkerian critique of Roman numeral analysis.
My aim here is not to provide a detailed restatement of tonal theory, a project that
would require a book in itself, but rather to indicate some points of intersection with
our theoretical work. In particular, I’ll show how we can use the ideas of Part I to
model the elementary harmonic and modulatory procedures of classical music.

7.1

the thirds-based grammar of
elementary tonal harmony

In many broadly tonal styles, chord progressions are relatively unconstrained: in
Renaissance music, contemporary popular music, and many folk styles, virtually
any diatonic triad can progress to any other. From this point of view, Western classical music is exceptional—here, a root position V chord is overwhelmingly likely to
progress to a root position I chord, whereas it moves to root position IV only rarely.
Chords thus seem to obey speciﬁcally harmonic laws, with some progressions being
common while others are rare. This is one of the features of Western music that is
most suggestively language-like. For just as in English, the subject normally precedes
the verb, which in turn precedes the object, so too does Western music seem to have
a harmonic “grammar” according to which subdominant chords precede dominants
that in turn precede tonics.1
Figure 7.1.1 models the major-mode version of this harmonic grammar.2 Here,
the diatonic chords other than iii are arranged as a chain of descending thirds, with
the mediant being omitted because it is rare. Chords can move rightward by any
number of steps along this chain from tonic to dominant; however, they can move
leftward only along one of the labeled arrows. (I will say that a sequence of rightward

1 Note that I am not claiming that music is a language, only that it involves recurring patterns somewhat
analogous to linguistic syntax. See Patel 2008 for more discussion. Gjerdingen 2007 offers a nice counterweight to the syntactical point of view, emphasizing idioms and schemas rather than abstract rules.
2 Here I am ignoring inversion; in actual music, vii° is almost always in ﬁrst inversion, and vi is almost
always in root position. The resulting model resembles that in Kostka and Payne 2003. The thirds-based
arrangement of diatonic triads also plays a role in Agmon 1995, Meeus 2000, Tymoczko 2003b, and Quinn
2005.

Functional Harmony
Figure 7.1.1 A simple model of the
allowable chord progressions in major-mode
functional harmony. Chords can move
rightward by any amount, but can move left
only along the arrows. “S” and “D” stand for
“subdominant” and “dominant,” respectively.

motions from the tonic, followed by a leftward return, constitutes a harmonic cycle.)
Each Roman numeral can represent either a pure triad or a seventh chord, with the
sevenths on ii and V being particularly common. The V chord can be preceded by I@,
and any chord other than vii° can be preceded by its own “applied dominant.”3
This model privileges certain chords by assigning them distinctive roles, with tonics typically beginning harmonic cycles, dominants (vii° and V) ending them by progressing back to I, and subdominants (ii and IV) preceding dominants.4 In addition,
the model privileges certain kinds of motion: descending thirds and ﬁfths are more
often permissible than ascending thirds and ﬁfths, while ascending steps are more
often permissible than descending steps. This asymmetry arises as a consequence of
the graph’s spatial layout. Since rightward motion is always permitted, every chord
except V can progress by descending third, every chord except vii° can progress by
descending ﬁfth, and every chord except ii can progress by ascending step. By contrast, only two chords (I and IV) can progress by ascending ﬁfth, only two (I and
vi) can progress by descending step, and only one can progress by ascending third.
Descending thirds, descending ﬁfths, and ascending steps are often called “strong”
progressions, with the remaining progressions said to be “weak.”5 Our model predicts
that chords closer to the dominant side of the spectrum should be more likely to
move “strongly”—a claim that is borne out by actual music (Figure 7.1.2).
For the most part, functionally tonal music cycles through the graph in a few stereotypical ways: classical pieces consist largely of progressions such as I–V–I, I–ii–V–I,
I–vii°–I, and I–IV–I. Occasionally, however, composers will employ more extended

3 Some theorists consider vii° to be a V7 with a missing root. However, this view cannot account for
the regular root motions in sequences such as C–G–a–e°–F- . . ., where diminished triads are on par with
major and minor triads (cf. Haydn’s Piano Sonata No. 49 in Ef major, I, 50, and Beethoven Piano Sonata
in D major, Op. 28, IV, 130ff). Other pedagogues disallow the progression vii°–V. However, in Mozart’s
piano sonatas, vii° is about nine times more likely to move to V than V is to move to vii°. Readers who
would prefer to disallow vii°–V can imagine placing the two chords on top of each other, so that neither
can progress rightward to the other.
4 Note that these functional labels (“subdominant,” “dominant”) provide only an approximate description of harmonic behavior, and do not explain why the progressions IV–ii and IV–I are more common
than ii–IV and ii–I. For more, see Tymoczko 2003b.
5 See Rameau 1722/1971, Schoenberg 1969, Sadai 1980, and Meeus 2000.

227

228

history and analysis
Figure 7.1.2 The relative tendency of major-mode triads to progress “strongly” (by
descending third or ﬁfth, or ascending step) in a sample of 70 Bach chorales (top line) and in
Mozart’s piano sonatas (bottom line). The asymmetry increases as one moves from tonic to
dominant by descending third.

I (53%) → vi (53%) → IV (76%) → ii (100%) → vii° (96%) → V (95%) (Bach)
I (32%) → vi (67%) → IV (66%) → ii (97%) → vii° (99%) → V (97%) (Mozart)

segments of the descending thirds cycle, as in Figure 7.1.3. The idea behind our model
is to portray these falling thirds progressions as the fundamental path from tonic to
dominant. Falling ﬁfths are “composite” progressions insofar as they can typically be
“factored” into a pair of falling thirds: I–IV can become I–vi–IV, vi–ii can become
vi–IV–ii, and so on. By contrast, thirds cannot generally be factored into ﬁfths. We
can conclude that falling thirds are more fundamental than falling ﬁfths, even though
falling ﬁfths may be more common.6 It is interesting here that tonal composers sometimes utilize the full circle of diatonic thirds, interposing a mediant triad between
dominant and tonic (Figure 7.1.4). In these passages, the engine of falling thirds harmony temporarily overcomes the V–I paradigm, blurring the expected resolution of
the dominant chord.
Minor-mode harmony is slightly more complicated, as it involves frequent
digressions to the relative major. However, if we treat these as brief changes of key, we
can use virtually the same graph for minor (Figure 7.1.5). This symmetry between

Figure 7.1.3 The chorale “Bach’s
chorale “Auf, auf, mein Herz,
und du mein ganzer Sinn”
(Riemenschneider No. 124).

Figure 7.1.4 Bach’s duet (BWV 803, mm. 22–26) interposes iii between V and I.

6 It is important here to distinguish the permissible from the probable. Root progressions by descending
ﬁfth are more common than root progressions by third; however, when describing the permissible progressions, it is useful to treat falling-thirds progressions as basic.

Functional Harmony

major and minor is quite remarkable, particularly when one reﬂects that in other tonal
styles modes often have their own distinctive harmonic repertoires. (For instance, the
natural minor progression i–VII–VI–VII–i
is quite common in contemporary popular music, while its major-mode analogue,
I–vii°–vi–vii°–I, is virtually unknown.7) This
sort of modal asymmetry would seem to be
the default situation: after all, there is no reason to expect that progressions as dissimilar
as VII–VI and vii°–vi should function in the
same way. Classical harmony is from this
point of view atypical, imposing a rigorous
consistency on all its modes and keys. The
payoff, of course, is that composers can present “the same” musical material in two dramatically different emotional contexts.
To evaluate the thirds-based model, we need a substantial collection of harmonic
analyses of traditional tonal works. There are, to my knowledge, only two: a collection of 70 Bach chorales, and a much larger collection of the complete Mozart piano
sonatas, both produced in conjunction with the writing of this book.8 Figure 7.1.6
identiﬁes the probability of each two-chord diatonic progression in the two repertoires, while Figure 7.1.7 identiﬁes the most common harmonic cycles. The results
are quite consistent with the descending thirds model: in Bach, 95% of roughly 3000
two-chord diatonic progressions conform to our predictions, as do 97–99% of all
Mozart’s roughly 10,000 diatonic progressions; furthermore, every one of our allowable progressions appears reasonably frequently.9 Almost all the exceptions belong
to familiar categories: sequences (discussed shortly), chromatic chords, and other
common tonal devices. Given the simplicity of the model, the accuracy of ﬁt is quite
remarkable. One geometrical picture, which can be explained to students in a single
hour, accounts for the vast majority of the chord progressions they will ordinarily
encounter.10
Figure 7.1.5 The allowable progressions
in minor are largely the same as the
allowable progressions in major. Again,
chords can move rightward by any
amount, but can move left only along
the arrows.

7 See also van der Merwe (1989, ch. 11).
8 Earlier databases, such as those of Craig Sapp and Philip Norman, do not attempt to indicate key
changes, and hence are of limited utility: a G major ii–V–I is labeled vi–V/V–V if the overall key of the
piece is C major. My analyses, which were produced with the help of more than thirty theorists, do show
modulations, and will hopefully be published soon.
9 The slightly lower number (95% in Bach, rather than 97–99% in Mozart) reﬂects Bach’s somewhat
broader diatonic vocabulary.
10 To be sure, the model is just a ﬁrst approximation to actual tonal procedures: it does not incorporate
chromatic chords like augmented sixths; it makes no attempt to model variation across musical styles; and
it ignores a number of important tonal “idioms,” including sequences, motion by parallel stepwise ﬁrstinversion triads, and three-chord idioms such as the progression vi–I6–(IV/ii6).

229

230

history and analysis
Figure 7.1.6 Two-chord progressions in Mozart’s major-key passages (a), Mozart’s minorkey passages (b), Bach’s major-key passages (c), and Bach’s minor-key passages (d). Values
represent the probability that, given the row-label chord, it will move to the column-label
chord (expressed as a percentage). Sequences, passages in parallel triads, and I@ chords
have been omitted. Of the vi–I progressions, the large majority terminate in I6; of the V–IV
progressions, the large majority terminate in IV6.

I
I
vi
IV
ii
o
vii
V
iii

*
9
50
1
82
94
67

I
I
vi
IV
ii
o
vii
V
iii

*
12
22
1
91
82
3

Figure 7.1.7
(a) The most
popular majormode harmonic
cycles in a
selection of 70
Bach chorales.
All of them
conform to the
thirds-based
model. (b) The
most popular
major-mode
harmonic cycles
in the Mozart
piano sonatas.
Once again, all
conform to the
thirds-based
model.

o

vi
5
*
0
1
0
4
33

IV
15
14
*
1
1
1
0

ii
13
52
19
*
0
0
0

vii
5
4
10
18
*
1
0

V
62
21
21
77
16
*
0

iii
0
0
0
0
1
0
*

vi
9
*
2
1
3
9
32

IV
28
11
*
0
2
7
52

ii
15
30
13
*
0
1
3

vii
6
9
23
25
*
0
3

o

V
41
33
39
71
4
*
6

iii
1
5
0
0
1
0
*

VI
5
*
0
0
0
8
0

iv
8
19
*
0
1
5
100

o

ii
9
58
10
*
1
0
0

o

i
VI
iv
o
ii
o
vii
V
III

i
*
3
43
2
74
81
0

vii
11
13
9
27
*
5
0

V
67
6
39
71
25
*
0

III
0
0
0
0
0
0
*

VI
9
*
0
0
0
10
31

iv
20
14
*
0
3
6
25

o

ii
18
54
14
*
0
0
6

o

i
VI
iv
o
ii
o
vii
V
III

i
*
3
22
1
81
80
6

vii
12
8
15
7
*
2
13

V
41
19
48
89
15
*
19

III
1
3
0
3
1
2
*

Functional Harmony

7.2

voice leading in functional tonality

In Part I, we saw that triads and seventh chords divide the octave nearly evenly, and
hence can be linked to all their transpositions by reasonably efﬁcient voice leading.
It follows that virtually any collection of purely harmonic rules (such as “IV can go
to ii but not iii”) can be realized by progressions exhibiting efﬁcient voice leading. By
contrast, “clustered” chords such as {B, C, Df} are not so close to all of their transpositions, and would require harmonic laws speciﬁcally tailored to their voice-leading
capabilities. In this sense, the internal structure of the triad underwrites the independence of traditional harmonic laws.
However, attentive readers will have noticed that there is an interesting connection between the two domains. In §6.3 we saw that the circle of thirds can be used to
represent single-step voice leadings among diatonic triads. Here the circle is purely
contrapuntal, describing minimal voice-leading relationships among chords. But we
have just seen that the chain of third-related chords can also be used to model harmonic successions in functionally tonal music. Thus the passage shown in Figure 7.2.1
has a double signiﬁcance: its upper voices are at once a sequence of triads linked by
maximally efﬁcient voice leading, as well as a complete statement of all the potential
intermediaries between tonic and dominant. Harmony and counterpoint here work
hand in hand, creating a uniﬁed structure in which horizontal and vertical forces are
in delicate balance.
One reason for this is that common tones and efﬁcient voice leading together
produce a kind of harmonic similarity.11 As shown in Figure 7.2.2, a root position F
major triad is very similar to a ﬁrst-inversion D minor triad, since the chords can be
linked by single-step voice leading.12 It follows that a ﬁrst-inversion D minor triad can
replace a root position F major triad without much disrupting the music’s harmonic
or contrapuntal fabric: the “substitute” chord will share the bass note and upper third
(F and A), substituting a consonant sixth for a perfect ﬁfth (D for C; Figure 7.2.2b).
This may help explain how the circle of thirds comes to play its two different roles: by
linking chords according to efﬁcient voice leading, the circle deﬁnes a psychologically

Figure 7.2.1 Here, the upper voices are connected by single-step voice leading, while the
harmonies move along the descending circle of thirds from tonic to dominant.

11 This notion of similarity is explored in Callender, Quinn, and Tymoczko 2008.
12 The F major triad is also very similar to a second-inversion A minor triad, but second-inversion
triads play only a very small role in functional tonality.

231

232

history and analysis
Figure 7.2.2 (a) Third-related triads sound similar, since they share two of their three notes
and can be connected by single-step voice leading. (b) One can often replace a diatonic chord
with a third-related chord, without much disrupting the harmonic or contrapuntal fabric of
a passage.

robust notion of similarity, one that in turn inﬂuenced the developing conventions
of functional harmony.
We can therefore say that functional tonality permits two different kinds of substitution. In bass-line substitution, the same chord progression appears over different bass notes, as in Figure 7.2.3a. (Traditional Roman numeral analysis was in fact
developed to capture the similarity between such progressions.) In third substitution,
a root position chord is replaced with a ﬁrst-inversion chord on the same bass, or
vice versa (Figure 7.2.3b). Here the bass stays the same while the content of the harmony is subtly altered. (The potential for this sort of substitution might be thought
to be implicit in ﬁgured-bass notation, in which the bass is fundamental to a chord’s
identity.) Third substitution explains why there are so many third-related chords
that can play similar musical roles: I/vi6, vi/IV6, IV/ii6, vii°/V6, and even V/III+6.13 The
challenge in describing functional harmony is to make room for both perspectives,
combining the advantages of the root-functional and ﬁgured-bass approaches. Our
model does so by way of geometry: by placing third-related triads adjacent to one
another, it asserts that these chords can typically substitute for one another in the
rightward progression from tonic to dominant.

13 Riemannian “function theory” (Riemann 1893) allows all third-related triads other than ii and vii° to
represent the same “harmonic function.” Contemporary anglophone pedagogues do not typically endorse
full-blown function theory, though many incorporate some of its features. Aldwell and Schachter (2002,
ch. 11), for example, emphasize the similarity of vi and IV6.

Functional Harmony
Figure 7.2.3 Bass-line and third substitution. In (a) a same I–IV–V–I chord progression
appears over two different bass lines. In (b), root position and ﬁrst-inversion chords (over the
same bass note) play similar harmonic roles.

Figure 7.2.4 rewrites the circle of thirds so as to identify the pitch classes in each
chord. It is clear that short rightward motions (i.e. “strong” progressions) will produce pitch classes that descend by third. For example, the triadic progression I–ii–V–I
can be articulated by the pitch-class sequence (G, E, C)-(A, F, D)-(D, B, G)-(G, E, C),
in which each new note is a third below its predecessor; other familiar progressions,
such as I–IV–V–I, can be analyzed similarly. Tonal composers often exploit this fact
by writing descending melodic thirds over familiar progressions—a device that was
a particular favorite of Bach’s (Figure 7.2.5). Sometimes, as in Figure 7.2.6, we even
ﬁnd bare sequences of falling thirds that do not articulate individual chords. Such
passages present the raw material of functional harmony in an unusually pure manner, revealing a falling thirds essence that is typically encountered in only a reﬁned or
processed form.
Note that strong triadic progressions are most efﬁciently realized by ascending voice
leading: in voice leadings like (C, E, G)®(C, E, A) or (C, E, G)®(C, F, A) notes move up by
step. Since descending melodic steps
are somewhat more common than
Figure 7.2.4 Short motions along the
descending-thirds sequence of triads can produce
ascending steps, harmonic cycles will
descending-thirds sequences of pitch classes.
often contain at least one voice leading in which efﬁciency is sacriﬁced
GEC ECA
CAF AFD FDB DBG for the sake of descending motion.
I – vi – IV – ii – vii°6 – V
This is illustrated by Figure 7.2.7.

233

234

history and analysis
Figure 7.2.5 Bach’s music often features descending-thirds sequences of pitch classes.
(a) The third movement of the third Brandenburg Concerto, mm. 11–12. (b) The F major
two-part invention, mm. 21–23.

Figure 7.2.6 Two passages in which melodic descending thirds do not clearly determine
harmonies. (a) Bach’s fourteenth Goldberg Variation, mm. 9–10. (b) The opening of Brahms’
Op. 119 No. 1.

Functional Harmony

Seventh chords are very different in this regard. Figure 7.2.8 shows that diatonic
sevenths can be arranged in a circle of thirds very similar to the triadic circle, but
with descending-thirds progressions producing descending voice leading: to move the
seventh chord Cmaj7 down by third to Amin7 we lower the note B to A; by contrast, to
move the C major triad down by third to A minor, we need to raise G to A. It follows
that any “strong” seventh-chord progression can be realized by stepwise descending
voice leading (Figure 7.2.9). (In this sense, seventh-chord harmony is somewhat more
straightforward than the triadic version taught in harmony textbooks.14) The association between seventh chords, strong progressions, and descending stepwise voice leading plays an increasingly important role in late nineteenth-century harmony, and is
fundamental to pieces like Chopin’s E minor prelude and Wagner’s Tristan. As we will
see, it also provides the nucleus of jazz voice leading.

Figure 7.2.7 Ascending motion provides the most efﬁcient voice leading between strongly
related triads (top three voices of a). Since tonal phrases often feature descending melodic
lines, composers typically have to use at least one non-minimal voice leading per harmonic
cycle (b−c).

Figure 7.2.8 Voice-leading
relations among diatonic seventh
chords can be modeled with a
circle of thirds. Here descendingthird progressions are articulated
by descending stepwise voice
leading.

14 Mathieu 1997 (cited in Ricci 2004) makes similar points.

235

236

history and analysis
Figure 7.2.9 Efﬁcient voice
leading between strongly related
seventh chords descends (top
four voices of a). Harmonic cycles
and descending-ﬁfths sequences
can therefore be realized with
maximally efﬁcient, descending
voice leading (b−c).

Finally, a word about four-voice voice leading among triads. In Chapter 6, we
encountered the 3 + 1 schema, in which three voices move between complete triads in
a strongly crossing-free way. But Figure 7.2.10 shows that we can also connect triads by
nonfactorizable voice leadings, in which no voice
Figure 7.2.10 These voice leadings
can be eliminated without creating an incomplete
are nonfactorizable, because
chord. Clearly, a four-voice triadic voice leading
eliminating any voice creates an
incomplete triad.
will be nonfactorizable only when it has the general form of Figure 7.2.11: a note in the ﬁrst chord
“splits” into two adjacent notes in the second, while
two notes in the ﬁrst “merge” onto the remaining
note in the second.15 There are 3 × 3 = 9 basic possibilities, depending on whether the splitting and
merged-upon notes are the root, third, or ﬁfth of
their respective triads. For example, the ﬁrst voice leading in Figure 7.2.10 maps a
chord with doubled root to a chord with doubled root, while the second maps a chord
with doubled root to a chord with doubled third. Remarkably, the various forms of
the nonfactorizable schema exploit a variety of triadic near symmetries, including the
triad’s proximity to the tritone and diminished seventh chord; readers who are interested in exploring this issue should attempt the exercises in Appendix F.16
Figure 7.2.11 A nonfactorizable, strongly
crossing-free, four-voice triadic voice leading
embodies this basic schema: two notes in the
ﬁrst chord “merge” onto a note in the second,
while the third note of the ﬁrst chord “splits”
into the remaining two notes of the second
chord. Here, time progresses radially from the
inner circle toward the outer.

second chord
time
first chord

15 Proof: if the merged-onto note were a destination of the splitting note, the voice leading would be
factorizable.
16 In particular, nonfactorizable voice leadings of the form (r, r, t, f)®(t, f, r, r), which map a chord with
doubled root to a chord with doubled root, exploit the chord’s closeness to the tritone; voice leadings of
the form (r, r, t, f)®(r, t, f, f) exploit its closeness to the quadruple unison; while voice leadings of the form

Functional Harmony

Figure 7.2.12 shows that these nonfactorizable voice leadings, combined with the
3 + 1 schema discussed earlier, account for a substantial proportion of the four-voice
triadic voice leadings in the music of composers from Dufay to Bach.17 At ﬁrst blush,
this might seem shocking, as if all the glories of the Renaissance could be reduced to
just two basic contrapuntal tricks. But on reﬂection it is not terribly surprising: after
all, there are only so many ways to connect triads, and our two schemas together
produce all the strongly crossing-free four-voice triadic voice leadings—including all
of those in which each note in the ﬁrst chord moves to its nearest (upper or lower)
neighbor in the second. Insofar as composers are interested in efﬁcient voice leading,
then we should expect them to make heavy use of these two basic techniques. This
reinforces the claim that there are important continuities between contrapuntal practices in Renaissance modality and functional tonality: on the basic chord-to-chord
level, we ﬁnd virtually the same voice-leading schemas dominating the two repertoires. Rather than a broad difference between styles, we instead see an interesting
sort of composer-by-composer variation: for example, nonfactorizable voice leadings
account for more than 20% of the voice leadings in Palestrina, but only about 5% of
those in Lassus. This seems less like a matter of large-scale historical change than of
individual composerly preference.
Figure 7.2.13 shows how the nonfactorizable pattern might appear in keyboardstyle passages: in each case, a close position triad in the right hand moves to an

Figure 7.2.12 The 3 + 1 and nonfactorizable schemas together account for a very large
proportion of the four-voice triadic voice leadings in a wide range of music. There are,
however, some individual differences between composers.
nonfactorizable

3+1

100

Percent of total

80

60

40

20

0
Dufay

Josquin

Ockeghem

Goudimel
Tallis

Lassus

Palestrina

Bach

(r, r, t, f)®(f, r, t, t) exploit its closeness to the diminished seventh. These three categories exhaust all the
possibilities up to permutation of the labels “r,” “t,” and “f.”
17 The Goudimel pieces, from 1564, are four-voice harmonizations of the complete Geneva Psalter.
These chorales are highly stereotypical and very homophonic.

237

238

history and analysis

incomplete chord—either an octave enclosing another note or an interval with one
doubling—while the bass voice completes the second triad.18 This means that our
voice-leading formulas are associated with simple physical gestures that can easily
be taught to young musicians: when using the 3 + 1 schema, a keyboardist moves
the right hand between complete triads, while allowing the bass to move independently; to use the nonfactorizable schema, the keyboardist switches from complete to
incomplete triads with the right hand, while completing the second chord with the
left. In fact, these two gestures are embedded, with varying degrees of explicitness, in
traditional ﬁgured-bass pedagogy: early theorists such as Heinichen discuss the 3 + 1
schema, while later writers (including C. P. E. Bach) provide numerous examples of
the nonfactorizable alternative.19 (Two centuries later, the techniques are still taught
in universities, and I learned both as a college freshman.) This, I think, is a wonderful example of the practical pedagogical
tradition solving a relatively complex
Figure 7.2.13 Nonfactorizable voice
mathematical problem. More than three
leadings in keyboard style. In each case, a
centuries ago, ﬁgured-bass theorists had
complete triad in the right hand moves to an
devised a simple set of physical gestures
incomplete chord.
that produce all the strongly crossingfree voice leadings between triads—
gestures that are straightforward enough
to use improvisationally, yet powerful
enough to generate an extraordinary
degree of contrapuntal variety.

7.3

sequences

So far we have no reason to believe that functional tonality involves short motions
along the descending circle of thirds: our thirds-based model permits arbitrary rightward motions on Figure 7.1.1 and does not privilege short steps over longer leaps.20
However, tonal music also involves sequences, in which the same musical material is
repeated at multiple pitch levels.21 Here there is a notable bias toward small motions
along the descending circle of thirds. The most compact sequence, when represented
on the circle of thirds, is (of course) a repeating series of descending thirds itself—a

18 This simple physical schema (along with its retrograde) can be used to produce any nonfactorizable
voice leading that exempliﬁes the basic pattern in Figure 7.2.11. However, not every voice leading that
moves from a close triad to an incomplete triad in the right hand will be nonfactorizable: for example,
(C3, E4, G4, C5)®(F3, C4, A4, C5) is factorizable.
19 Heinichen’s 1728 ﬁgured-bass treatise always recommends a complete triad in the right hand (see
Buelow 1992, p. 28). C. P. E. Bach’s Essay on the True Art of Playing Keyboard Instruments (Bach 1949, pp.
202ff, originally published in 1753 and 1762) discusses a wider range of right-hand possibilities, including
the nonfactorizable schema.
20 For example, the progression vi–V involves a four-step rightward motion, with the triads vi and V
being maximally distant from the standpoint of voice leading.
21 See Caplin 1998, ch. 2, Harrison 2003, and Ricci 2004.

Functional Harmony

progression that appears periodically in the literature, though it is not extremely common (Figure 7.3.1a). (Note that sequences frequently use the iii chord, which is rare
in nonsequential harmony.) The second-most compact sequence alternates descending thirds with ascending fourths, and is widespread (Figure 7.3.1b). The ubiquitous
descending ﬁfth sequence is the third-most compact sequence (Figure 7.3.1c), consisting of a series of two-step motions along the circle. The pattern in Figure 7.3.1d is a
close variant, in which a single descending third alternates with an ascending second,
moving successively by one and three steps along the circle of thirds. (We will discuss
this sequence in a moment.) Another variant is shown in Figure 7.3.1e, consisting
of two descending thirds followed by a descending ﬁfth. The resemblances between
Figures 7.3.1c–e are particularly striking: in each case, a series of short motions along
the circle of thirds produces a sequential pattern that repeats at the interval of a
descending second, yielding slight variations on the same fundamental paradigm.
Figure 7.3.2 provides some examples of these sequences in actual music.
Figure 7.3.3 lists all 18 diatonic sequences whose repeating unit contains at most
two chords; the list is ordered by compactness on the descending circle of thirds, with
inversionally related sequences sharing the same line. (Thus if a sequence on the left
features short descending motions along the circle of thirds, its partner on the right
features short ascending motions along the circle.) In each of the ﬁrst ﬁve rows, the
sequence on the left is considerably more common than that on the right, suggesting that descending thirds are indeed preferred.22 The sixth and seventh rows feature

Figure 7.3.1 Five
tonal sequences
represented on
the circle of
thirds.

22 One possible explanation for this is that tonal harmony involves a fundamental preference for
descending ﬁfths progressions; third substitution could then transform descending ﬁfths into either
descending thirds or ascending steps.

239

240

history and analysis
Figure 7.3.2 (a) Haydn’s E minor Piano Sonata, Hob. XVI/34, mm. 72–75. (b−c) The “down
a third, up a step” sequence in Fauré’s Pavane, mm. 2–5 and Bach’s Bf two-part invention,
mm. 15–16 (bottom). (d) The “down a third, down a third, down a ﬁfth” sequence in the D
major fugue from Book I of Bach’s Well-Tempered Clavier, mm. 9–10.

sequences that combine ascending and descending motion: though all four of these
appear, there is a notable preference for those on the left, which repeat at the interval
of a descending third. (Here the descending thirds motion appears between successive
units of the sequence, rather than between adjacent chords.) The sequences in the
eighth row are virtually unknown. (The stepwise progressions in the last row are common, but play a unique rhetorical role in tonal harmony; they typically appear in the
context of brief “fauxbourdon”-style gestures, rather than sequences proper.) Figure
7.3.4 shows the distribution of sequences in the Mozart piano sonatas; the asymmetry
between columns is quite striking.
Thus there is a subtle connection between what François-Joseph Fétis identiﬁed as
the two basic components of tonal practice: in “harmonic tonality” the music moves

Functional Harmony
Figure 7.3.3 The eighteen diatonic sequences whose unit of repetition contains at most
two chords. The (a) columns describe the sequence, the (b) columns estimate its frequency
in the baroque and classical literature. Sequences featuring only “strong” progressions are
considerably more common than their counterparts. Among those that mix strong and weak
motions, sequences that repeat at the interval of a descending third are more common than
those that repeat at the interval of the ascending third. The starred sequences in the last row,
moving by parallel step, are common in both ascending and descending forms; however, they
tend to play a slightly different role in the literature.

Sequence

a

Inverted Form

↓third
↓third

b
exists
(C-a-F-d-)

↑third
↑third

b
very rare
(C-e-G-b°-)

↓third
↓fifth

very common ↑third
(C-a-d-b°-) ↑fifth

very rare
(C-e-b°-d-)

↓fifth
↓fifth
↓third
↑ step

very common ↑fifth
(C-F-b°-e-) ↑fifth
exists
↑third
(C-a-b°-G-) ↓step
common
↓step
7
7
(C-D -G-A -) ↑fifth
common
↓third,
(C-E7-a-C7-) ↑fifth
common
↓step,
(C-G-a-e-) ↓fifth
very rare
↓step,
(C-d-F-G-) ↓third
exists*
↓step
(C-d-e-F-)
↓step

exists
(C-G-d-a-)
very rare
(C-e-d-F-)
very rare
(C-b°-F-e-)

↑step
↓fifth
↑third,
↓fifth
↑fifth,
↑step
↑step,
↑third
↑step
↑step

a

exists
(C-G-e-b°-)
exists
(a-G7-C-B7-e-)
very rare
(C-b°-G-F-)
exists*
(C-b°-a-G-)

from tonic to dominant along the circle of descending thirds, often forming “strong”
progressions along the way. However, the gravitational attraction of tonic, subdominant, and dominant is strong enough to obscure this descending thirds structure:
progressions such as I–V–I and I–IV–I move symmetrically along the circle and
betray no preference for strong progressions. In “sequential tonality” the tonic and
dominant lose their attractive power as a single musical pattern is whirled through
diatonic space. Here the preference for strong progressions shines forth more clearly.
What is interesting is that the descending circle of thirds plays a distinctive role in each
of these two kinds of tonality: harmonic tonality uses the circle to organize motion
from tonic to dominant, while sequential tonality emphasizes short steps along it.
To see how we might use these ideas in analysis, consider the fetching sequence
from the last movement of Mozart’s ﬁrst piano sonata (Figure 7.3.5). I interpret this
passage as a version of the “down a third, up a step” sequence in Figure 7.3.1; however, since the melodic pattern repeats after four chords, the sequence sounds to the

241

242
Figure 7.3.4
Two-unit
sequences, of at
least six chords
in length, in the
Mozart piano
sonatas.

history and analysis

Sequence

Inverted Form

↓third
↓third

2

↑third
↑third

0

↓third
↓fifth

6

↑third
↑fifth

0

↓fifth 33
↓fifth
8
↓third
↑step
↑step 22
↓fifth
↑third, 1
↓fifth
9
↑fifth,
↑step
0
↑step,
↑third

↑fifth
↑fifth
↑third
↓step
↓step
↑fifth
↓third,
↑fifth
↓step,
↓fifth
↓step,
↓third

0
0
0
0
0
0

casual listener like it descends by third. When the
sequence returns to start the development section, Mozart makes an intriguing substitution:
the music now begins D–G–csø7 rather D–e–cs°,
moving down by ﬁfths rather than down by
third and up by step. (This alteration is retained
throughout the sequence.) Figure 7.3.5c represents Mozart’s variation on the descending circle
of thirds, showing that he has simply moved the
second chord leftward by one unit. The two versions, in other words, are related by third substitution, represented geometrically by replacing a
diatonic triad with its nearest neighbor.
Something rather similar occurs in the Af
major fugue from the second book of Bach’s
Well-Tempered Clavier. The fugue theme, an
embellished sequence of ﬁfths, is typically

Figure 7.3.5 (a) The “down a third, up a step” sequence in the third movement of Mozart’s
ﬁrst Piano Sonata, K. 279. (b) When the sequence returns at the start of the development,
Mozart alters it so that it begins with a pair of descending ﬁfths. (c) This change is a minimal
perturbation when represented along the circle of thirds.

Functional Harmony

accompanied by a chromatically descending countersubject. The ﬁrst two harmonizations feature the “down a third, up a step” sequence and are illustrated in Figure 7.3.6a;
the remaining harmonizations use descending ﬁfths, as in Figure 7.3.6b. The ﬁgure
shows that the two versions are related by third substitution: the countersubject’s
initial Af is simply repeated, transforming all the ﬁrst-inversion triads into seventh
chords. However, this transformation is rather cleverly disguised by the sixteenth-note
ﬁguration (not shown in the example), which moves from the middle voice to the
soprano. As a result, the middle voice takes over the role of chromatically descending
countersubject, appearing an octave rather than an eleventh above the subject’s initial
note. (This is double counterpoint on the cheap: since the upper voices both feature
descending stepwise voice leading, the difference between the two countersubjects is
largely a matter of ﬁguration.) The interesting point, from our perspective, is the ﬂuidity with which Bach moves between the “descending ﬁfths” and “down a third, up a
step” sequences. Like Mozart, he seems to view them as fundamentally similar.
For a ﬁnal example, consider the “sequence” in mm. 16–18 of the F minor fugue in
the ﬁrst book of the Well-Tempered Clavier (Figure 7.3.7). The scare quotes acknowledge that the passage is not truly sequential: although the stuttering, descending
melodic lines are always related by transposition, the interval is not uniform. (The
descending passage begins ﬁrst on, then a third above, then a third below the root
of the preceding harmony; as a result, the chords within each measure are related
by descending ﬁfth, descending third, and ascending step.) Across bar lines the passage always articulates a V7–I progression, so that the resulting harmonic sequence is
entirely composed of strong progressions: descending twice by ﬁfth (f–Bf7–Ef), by
third (Ef–C7), by ﬁfth (C7–f), ascending by step (f–G7), and descending once again

Figure 7.3.6 An interpretation of two passages from Bach’s Af major fugue from WTC II.
(a) Measures 6–7 involve the “down a third, up a step” sequence, while mm. 13–15 involve
the descending ﬁfths sequence (b). In the original music, the middle voice of (a) and the
top voice of (b) involve sixteenth-note ﬁguration; thus the chromatic descent moves from
soprano (a) to middle voice (b).

243

244

history and analysis
Figure 7.3.7 A sequence-like passage from the F minor fugue in book I of Bach’s WellTempered Clavier, mm. 16–18. Harmonically, the passage involves an unsystematic collection
of “strong” progressions.

by ﬁfth (G7–C). This succession of strong progressions, articulated by descendingthirds melodies, creates a strong sense that the passage is both functionally tonal and
sequence-like. (Indeed, I played it for years before noticing that it was not an exact
sequence.) One hears the omnipresent engine of descending thirds—typical of tonal
sequences in general and of Bach’s sequences in particular—and fails to notice the
subtle deviations from exact transposition.

Figure 7.3.8 (a) The “down a third, up a step” sequence can be derived from more familiar
sequences by exchanging root position and ﬁrst-inversion chords. Here, the four forms on
the bottom staff are derived from the descending-ﬁfth and descending-step sequences in the
upper staff. (b) Measures 62–66 from Contrapunctus X in Bach’s Art of the Fugue. Here, root
substitution over a sequential bass line changes the “down a third, up a step” progression into
the descending ﬁfths progression.

Functional Harmony

These examples suggest that it might be worth reconsidering the role of the “down
a third, up a step” sequence in functional tonality. Although rare, the sequence does
appear sporadically throughout the literature. Yet in my experience, theorists are
reluctant to acknowledge its existence—as if it were an anomaly so inexplicable that
its very presence threatened to undermine the solid foundations of classical theory.
From my point of view the sequence is anything but inexplicable: it results from a
simple thirds substitution for the more common descending-ﬁfths sequence (Figure
7.3.8). Figure 7.3.9 shows that it can appear in four basic forms, depending on which
of its chords are in inversion. Our theoretical approach, by providing a home for this
sequence, may help us learn to hear it, and thus to resist the almost overwhelming
temptation to deny its existence.

Figure 7.3.9 (a−d) There are four basic forms of the “down a third, up a step” sequence,
depending on which inversions are used. An example of each is provided. (e) Haydn’s D
major Piano Sonata Hob. XVI/42, II, mm. 11–12. (f ) The opening of the “Cruciﬁxus,” from
Bach’s B minor Mass (BWV 232). (g) Brahms’ F minor Piano Quintet, Op. 34, I, mm. 8–9.
(Note that the dynamics and musical context all suggest that the sevenths should not be
understood as suspensions.) (h) Bach’s G major fugue, Book II of the Well-Tempered Clavier,
mm. 66–69.

245

246

history and analysis

7.4

modulation and key distance

Functional tonality employs conventionalized motions on both the level of the chord
and the key: just as a V chord is overwhelmingly likely to progress to I, so too is a classical-style major-key piece overwhelmingly likely to modulate to its dominant. However, it is much harder to describe the syntax of key changes than of chord-to-chord
progressions. The ﬁrst problem is cross-stylistic variability: where harmonic grammar
remains relatively constant over time, there is considerably more variation in modulations.23 For example, much jazz obeys classical ii–V–I harmonic norms, though its key
changes are anything but classical. (To take an extreme case, John Coltrane’s “Giant
Steps” involves a series of ii–V–I progressions that modulate by major third.) The second problem is that we continue to ﬁnd signiﬁcant variation even if we narrow our
focus to the tonality of the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. Indeed, sonatas,
fugues, and rondos all involve slightly different modulatory norms.
That said, it is still possible to identify some basic modulatory principles that
are common to multiple genres: most obviously, pieces typically start and end in
the same key; the ﬁrst modulatory destination in major is the dominant key, while
in minor it is either the dominant or relative major; and the subdominant key area
often appears toward the end of the piece (Figure 7.4.1). Furthermore, theorists
generally agree that tonal pieces often modulate between “closely related” keys. The
most widely accepted model of key distance is the “chart of the regions” usually
attributed to Gottfried Weber, though actually originating with F. G. Vial.24 Figure
7.4.2 shows an equal-tempered version of the chart: motion along the SW/NE diagonal links modally matched ﬁfth-related keys; motion along the SE/NW diagonal
changes mode, alternating between the “parallel” (or tonic-preserving) and “relative” (or diatonic-scale-preserving) relationships. Though more than 200 years old,
the Vial/Weber model continues to play a role in contemporary theory, particularly
in the work of Carol Krumhansl and Fred Lerdahl. In fact, both of these theorists
have attempted to derive the model from more basic principles: Krumhansl from the
results of psychological experiments, and Lerdahl from the deeper postulates of his
theoretical system.25

Figure 7.4.1
Common
sequences of keys
in functionally
tonal music.

First Key
I
Major
i
Minor

Second Key
V
III or v

Third Key
often ii, v, or vi
often VII, iv, VI

Other Keys
various
various

Often Found
Near the End
IV
iv

Last Key
I
i

23 Stein 2002 argues that the chordal syntax of classical harmony antedates the modulatory syntax.
24 See Lester 1992, p. 230.
25 See Krumhansl 1990, ch. 7 and Lerdahl 2001, ch. 2. Both theorists derive the Weber model from a
combination of experimental data and theoretical assumptions. In this sense, the model is (partially) a
theoretical construct, rather than the simple output of psychological experiments. As far as I know, there
are no experiments that directly test key distances, or even establish their perceptual reality.

Functional Harmony
Figure 7.4.2 The “chart of the regions” in its equal-tempered form. Major keys are
capitalized, minor keys are shown in small letters. Fifth-related keys are on the SW/NE
diagonal lines, while “parallel” and “relative” keys are on the SE/NW diagonals. The ﬁgure is a
torus whose top edge should be glued to the bottom, and whose left edge should be glued to
the right.

Weber’s chart suggests that ﬁfth-related major keys are particularly close, but it
does not explain why this is so. One possibility is that ﬁfth-related tonic notes or tonic
chords are themselves close—in other words, C major pieces modulate to G major
because the G major chord (or the note G) has a particular afﬁnity for the C major
chord (or note C). (This in turn may be due to the acoustic relationship between
perfect ﬁfths.) Another possibility, however, is that ﬁfth-related major keys are close
because their associated scales are close. From this point of view, what links the keys
of C and G major is the fact that the single-semitone shift F®Fs transforms the C
diatonic scale into G diatonic. Similarly, C major and A minor are close because the C
major scale shares the same notes as A natural minor, and because a single-semitone
shift (G®Gs) transforms C major into A harmonic minor. Thus we have two plausible but distinct theories of key distance, one based on chords (or notes), the other
on scales.
Let’s see if we can use our geometrical models to investigate this issue. Recall from
§4.6 that the familiar seven-note scales of the Western tradition are contained on a
three-dimensional cubic lattice, reproduced here as Figure 7.4.3. According to the
scalar model of key distance, keys are close if their associated scales are near each
other on this lattice. If we limit our attention to major keys, then the lattice simply
reduces to the familiar circle of ﬁfths. Minor tonalities present a challenge, however,
as they can use any of three distinct scale forms. How should we measure the distance
from C major to E minor? Should we, for example, choose the E minor scale that
is closest to C major? Or should we choose the farthest scale instead? One sensible
solution is to take the average of the distances between the scales belonging to each
key. This means that the distance from C major to E minor would be (1 + 2 + 3)/3 = 2

247

248

history and analysis
Figure 7.4.3 The three-dimensional lattice showing voice-leading relations between familiar
scales. The three A minor scales lie along the solid dark line, while the three E minor scales lie
along the dotted dark line.

(Figure 7.4.4).26 When measuring the distance between minor keys, we can average the
distances in the most efﬁcient pairing between their scales, as illustrated by the ﬁgure.27
Figure 7.4.5 lists the resulting distances. According to this model, major keys are
particularly close to their dominant major (V), subdominant major (IV), and relative minor keys (vi), with the supertonic minor (ii) being just a little farther away.
A minor key is maximally close to its relative major. In second place is the subtonic
major (VII), with the subdominant minor (iv), dominant minor (v), submediant
major (VI), and parallel major (I) being slightly farther. While these key distances
are broadly similar to Weber’s, there are some intriguing differences: notably, the scalar model helps explain why minor keys would be more likely to modulate to the
relative major than to the dominant. Note also that from the scalar perspective, the
keys of C major and D minor are particularly close, since two of the D minor scales
can be linked to C major by single-semitone voice leading (Figure 7.4.6). Compared
to the Weberian model, then, the scalar perspective would lead us to expect more

26 For simplicity, I am adopting the “smoothness” metric, which counts the total number of semitones
moved by all voices (Appendix A).
27 Alternatives tend to produce counterintuitive results. For instance, one might try to measure key
distances using the smallest distance between two sets of minor scales, but this means that C minor and Ef
minor are maximally close, since C natural minor is one semitone away from Ef melodic minor ascending.
Similarly, one might try to take the average of all nine distances between two sets of minor scales, but this
means that a minor key is not distance zero from itself.

Functional Harmony
Figure 7.4.4 Using voice leading to calculate distances between keys. (a) For major keys, the
distances are simply the voice-leading distances between the relevant diatonic collections.
(b) For distances between major and minor, we calculate the size of the voice leadings from
the major scale to each minor scale, and take the average. Here, the average distance between C
major and the three A minor scales is 1. (c) For minor scales, we take the average of the three
voice leadings in the most efﬁcient pairing of the scales in one key with those in the other.
Here, the average distance for the best pairing between A minor and E minor scales is 2.3.3.

modulations between a major key and its supertonic minor (or conversely, a minor
key and its subtonic major), and less ﬁfth motion among minor keys.
To evaluate these competing models of key distances, we can compare them to
actual modulation frequencies in baroque and classical music. (The assumption here
is that composers modulate more frequently to nearby keys.) To this end, Figure 7.4.7
shows the results of a crude statistical survey of a large number of pieces by Bach,
Haydn, Mozart, and Beethoven.28 The results are quite interesting. First, there
28 The analysis was simplistic but hopefully unbiased: I simply programmed a computer to look
through MIDI ﬁles to ﬁnd moderately long sections (15 notes or more) belonging to a single diatonic, harmonic minor, or melodic minor ascending scale. (I assumed that minor keys do not normally reside in the
diatonic collection.) Each successive modulation was then categorized according to root relationship and
mode: thus a modulation from G major to A minor was treated as “root moves up by two semitones, mode
changes from major to minor,” regardless of the global tonic of the piece. To test the data, I correlated the
resulting modulation frequencies with those in human analyses of Mozart’s piano sonatas. The correlation
was very high (.96) for modulations beginning in major keys, and somewhat lower (.86) for those beginning with minor keys, in part because the computer stayed in minor keys longer than the humans did.

249

250

history and analysis
Figure 7.4.5 Key distances, calculated using
voice-leading distance between scales. The
smallest distances are shown in boldface.

Figure 7.4.6 A major key is particularly close to its supertonic minor, just as a minor key is
very close to its subtonic major.

#œ

#œ
distance = 1

distance = 1

distance = 2

is a marked asymmetry between major and minor: for all four composers, the four
most common major-key destinations are V, IV, vi, and ii. (Note that these numbers
are calculated relative to the immediately preceding key: a modulation from C major
to G major is treated as I®V, no matter what the global key of the piece.) For minor
keys, however, the two most common modulatory destinations are III and VII, often
by a wide margin. This represents a striking deviation from the Weber model, which

Functional Harmony
Figure 7.4.7 Estimated modulation frequencies in Bach’s Well-Tempered Clavier and the
piano sonatas of Haydn, Mozart, and Beethoven. The left column indicates the directed
chromatic interval of root motion from source key to target key. (For example, a modulation
from F major to G major or B minor to Cs major is represented by the number 2.) Under
each composer’s name, the “min” and “maj” columns refer to the modality of the target key.
The two or three largest values in each column are in boldface.

(a) from major keys
Root
Motion
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

Bach
maj. min.
2.3
0
0
3.3
8.8
0.8
0
0
4.9
0.1
26
0
0.1
2.9
26.8
0.5
0
0.4
20.2
2
0
0.3
0.4

Haydn
maj. min.
4.5
0.2
0.1
1.8
7
1.3
0
0.5
3.2
1.4
29.8
0
0
2.1
28.4
0.6
0
0.8
15.7
1.9
0.1
0
0.5

Mozart
maj. min.
4.7
0.3
0
5.3
7.1
1.8
0.3
1.2
2.1
1.5
24.6
0
0
2.1
28.2
0.9
0
2.1
13.1
3.6
0.3
0
0.9

Beethoven
maj. min.
4.1
0.3
0.1
1.9
12.7
1.7
0.2
0.6
6.7
1.8
23.3
0.2
0.2
2.5
20.8
1.1
0.5
1.2
14.6
2.8
0.3
0.5
1.7

(b) from minor keys
Root
Motion
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

Bach
min. maj.
1.9
0
1.4
0.8
0
0.8 31.1
0.3
0
3.8
12.3
0
0
1.9
9.8
0.3 10.7
0
0
1.9
23
0
0

Haydn
min. maj.
11.2
0
1
2.4
1.2
2.1
28.3
0.3
0
4
8.6
0
0.2
2.9
6.6
0
6.4
1.2
0
1.8
21.4
0.3
0.2

Mozart
min. maj.
6.9
0
2.8
0.7
0
0.7
21.5
1.4
0
4.9
7.6
0
0.7
4.2
9.7
2.1
8.3
2.1
0
2.1
24.3
0
0

Beethoven
min. maj.
9.2
0.6
2
2.2
1
1.3 20.3
0.7
0.3
2.2
9
0.2
0.6
2.5
10.1
0.9
10
0.6
0.3
3.8 21.5
0.6
0.2

predicts that the two modes should modulate in essentially similar ways. Furthermore, our data conﬁrm that there is a particularly close relation between a major key
and the minor key two semitones above it: major keys modulate to their supertonic
minor more often than to the parallel minor, with minor keys modulating to their
subtonic major more frequently than to any key except the relative major. All of

251

252

history and analysis

these results are more consistent with the scalar model than the Weberian chart of
the regions.29
Let me be clear that I do not take this to show that the scalar approach explains
everything about tonal modulation. First, the statistical tests I have conducted are
relatively simplistic and need to be conﬁrmed by more careful investigation. Second,
other musical factors no doubt play a role: the close relation between parallel keys,
such as C major and C minor, surely has something to do with the fact that they share
the same tonic note. And third, we need to recognize the role of individual preferences, since distance alone will not explain the fact that Mozart modulates to the
parallel minor more frequently than Bach. That said, however, I think it is interesting
that simple scale-based voice-leading models work as well as they do. Their success
does seem to show that eighteenth- and nineteenth-century composers were sensitive
to the twisted three-dimensional geometry shown in Figure 7.4.3.
It’s worth saying a word or two about why this is important. We have seen that
there are two fundamentally different ways to understand the “closeness” of ﬁfthrelated keys: one based on the acoustic relation between their tonic notes, the other
based on the voice-leading relationships between their associated scales. These theories suggest very different generalizations to unfamiliar musical contexts. For example, in Chapter 9, we will ﬁnd composers such as Debussy, Ravel, Shostakovich, and
Reich exploiting efﬁcient voice leading between a wide range of scales and modes.
If we neglect the role of scale-to-scale voice leadings in classical music, then we will
miss the way in which these twentieth-century composers are generalizing traditional
modulatory practices. And this in turn could lead us to think that they had somehow
gone wrong, for instance, by abandoning the use of ﬁfth-related keys. This shows that
both historians and composers have an interest in understanding the mechanisms
underlying traditional modulation: the former, because they need to understand the
connections between twentieth-century tonality and earlier styles; the latter, because
they may want to develop analogues to modulation in as-yet-unexplored musical
situations.

7.5

the two lattices

We’ve now used two different circles to model functional tonality: the circle of thirds,
which identiﬁes single-step voice leading among triads, and the circle of ﬁfths, which
represents single-semitone voice leading among diatonic scales. There is of course a
very close structural analogy between them, arising from the fact that both depict

29 More sophisticated quantitative tests conﬁrm the intuition that modulation frequencies are closely
related to voice-leading distance between scales. For example, I constructed quantitative models based
on the assumption that keys are most likely to modulate to their n nearest neighbors on either the Weber
model or the scale lattice. Scalar models consistently outperformed the Weberian models, achieving correlations in the range of .91–.96, for the repertoire in Figure 7.4.7, compared to .77–.84 for the best Weberian
models.

Functional Harmony
Figure 7.5.1 The diatonic triad and the major scale both divide the octave nearly (but
not precisely) evenly. The circle of thirds arises from changing the position of the three-step
interval; the circle of ﬁfths arises from shifting the position of the six-semitone interval.

voice leading among “near interval cycles”: the triad trisects the diatonic octave into
two, two, and three scale steps, while the major scale divides four chromatic octaves
into six perfect ﬁfths and one “near ﬁfth” (Figure 7.5.1). As explained in §3.11, the circle of thirds and the circle of ﬁfths are formed by shifting the position of the unusual
interval—a process that links transpositionally related collections by single-step voice
leading. Geometrically, the resulting circles lie near the center of their respective
chord spaces, as described back in Figure 3.11.6.
From this, there follows a remarkable consequence: voice-leading relations among
nearly even three-note diatonic chords are fundamentally analogous to those among
nearly even seven-note scales. Recall from §3.11 that we can scramble the voice leadings on a generalized circle of ﬁfths to produce higher dimensional voice-leading
lattices. If we scramble adjacent voice leadings on the circle of thirds, we obtain the
two-dimensional structure shown in Figure 7.5.2—a lattice of squares each sharing
an edge with its neighbors. This two-dimensional lattice contains triads and fourth
chords, and is analogous to the “scale lattice” containing diatonic and acoustic scales
(Figure 3.11.8b). Here the fourth chord plays the role of the acoustic scale, since it
is generated by reversing a pair of adjacent voice leadings on the triadic circle. This
means that the progression from C to G by way of the suspension {C, D, G} is structurally similar to the shift from D major to C major by way of the D melodic minor
scale (Figure 7.5.3).
Pressing on, we note that it takes three single-step motions to move from C
major to D minor on the circle of thirds. By scrambling these we obtain “incomplete seventh chords” such as {D, F, G} and {D, E, G}—the structural analogues
of the harmonic major and minor collections (Figure 7.5.4).30 Proceeding in this
way, we arrive at the three-dimensional structure in Figure 7.5.5, which has the

30 Observe that the incomplete seventh chords are related by diatonic inversion, just as the harmonic
major and minor scales are related by chromatic inversion; the diatonic triad and diatonic fourth chord
are symmetrical under diatonic inversion, just as the diatonic and acoustic scales are symmetrical under
chromatic inversion.

253

254

history and analysis
Figure 7.5.2 (a) On the circle of thirds, we move from C to G by way of E minor. (b) If we
reverse the order of the voice leadings C®B and E®D, we can move from C to G by way of
the “suspension chord” C-D-G. By scrambling every adjacent pair of voice leadings on the
circle of thirds, we produce a lattice of squares each sharing an edge with their neighbors.

same basic form as our scale lattice: the circle of diatonic thirds
is analogous to the diatonic circle
of ﬁfths and runs through the
center of the ﬁgure in a zigzag
fashion; nontriadic chords form a
second circle, which winds its way
around the triads as described in
Figure 4.6.1. This lattice contains
all the three-note diatonic sonorities that can resolve to a triad by one or two descending steps—in other words, the
chords that can be formed by either a single or double suspension (Figure 7.5.6).31
Figure 7.5.7 shows how these chords can act as waystations between the genuinely harmonic triads on the lattice’s central spine, allowing composers to break
large melodic motions into smaller steps. By enabling us to visualize these possibilities, the chord lattice can help us conceptualize them. For example, Figure 7.5.8
identiﬁes four ways in which suspensions can be used to embellish a sequence of
descending ﬁrst-inversion triads: in each case, a single voice alternates with a pair of
simultaneous descents. Figure 7.5.9 shows two passages in which composers exploit
these pathways: in the ﬁrst, the eighteenth-century composer (and chess master)
François-André Danican Philidor alternates standard 7–6 suspensions with more
Figure 7.5.3 The move from C major to G major
by way of the suspension chord C-D-G is precisely
analogous to the shift from D major to C major by
way of D melodic minor.

31 The chord lattice does not include diatonic clusters (such as {C, D, E}) or multisets (such as {C, C,
D}). It is of course possible to create a larger three-dimensional lattice that contains these chords.

Functional Harmony
Figure 7.5.4 (a) On the circle of thirds, we move from C major to D minor by way of A
minor and F major. (b) If we scramble the order of the voice leadings G®A, E®F, and C®D,
we obtain a cube containing four triads (on C, A, F, and D), two fourth chords (CFG and
DEA) and two incomplete seventh chords (DFG and DEG).

Figure 7.5.5 We can stack the cubes in Figure 7.5.4 to create a diatonic “chord lattice”
precisely analogous to the scale lattice we investigated earlier (e.g. Figure 7.4.3). The triadic
circle of thirds runs through the center of the space, taking a right-angled turn at each step.
(From the lower left, we have CEG®CEA®CFA®etc.) The nontriadic chords are contained
on a second circle, which winds around the ﬁrst: from the lower right front we have
CFG®DFG®DEG®DEA® . . . , a sequence that repeats every three chords at the interval of
a descending third.

255

256

history and analysis
Figure 7.5.6
The diatonic chord cube
contains all the sonorities that
can resolve to CEG by either a
single or double suspension.

Figure 7.5.7 The sonorities on the chord lattice provide waystations allowing composers to
break large movements into smaller steps. Instead of moving directly from DGB to CEG, as
in (b), a composer can use nonharmonic tones to smooth out the journey (c). The path in (a)
depicts the music in (c). Historically, the F in the bass voice of (c) originated as a nonharmonic
passing tone, but was eventually granted harmonic status as part of the seventh chord on G.

Functional Harmony
Figure 7.5.8 Four ways to use suspensions to decorate a series of descending ﬁrst-inversion
triads, represented on the chord cube. The ﬁrst produces the ubiquitous 7–6 suspension,
while those in (b) and (c) interpose an additional (root position or second-inversion) triad
between consecutive ﬁrst-inversion triads; the path in (d) creates a double suspension that
sounds like an incomplete seventh chord.

Figure 7.5.9 (a) Philidor’s “Art of Modulation” (Sinfonia V, Fuga, mm. 36–38) alternates
between 7–6 and 4–3 suspensions, utilizing paths a and b in Figure 7.5.8. (b) The Prelude
to Grieg’s suite “From Holberg’s Time” uses the unusual double suspension represented by
path (d).

257

258

history and analysis

unusual ¢ ﬂ– £ suspensions, exploiting paths (a) and (b) on the cube in Figure 7.5.8; in
the second, Grieg uses the path in (d).32
Earlier, I observed that tonal music is hierarchically self-similar, combining harmonic consistency and efﬁcient voice leading at both the level of the chord and the
level of the scale. We can now sharpen this observation considerably. Not only is there
a loose analogy between the techniques composers use to relate chords and scales,
but there is in fact a very precise structural similarity between the underlying voiceleading graphs. Indeed, chords and scales can be represented by essentially the same
geometry. This extraordinary degree of self-similarity evokes fractals, mathematical
shapes that exhibit the same structure no matter how they are magniﬁed.33 In much
the same way, functional harmony exempliﬁes the same contrapuntal relationships
whether we zoom out to the level of key relations, or zoom in to the level of chords.

7.6

a challenge from schenker

The ideas in this chapter have been inspired by traditional tonal theorists such as
Rameau, Weber, and Riemann. On my view, tonal music obeys purely harmonic
principles that specify how chords can move, while modulations involve voice leadings between scales. Insofar as we can specify something like a “grammar” or “syntax” of functional tonality, it is largely concerned with local rules that tell us how
to connect adjacent scales and chords. There are, however, a number of contemporary theorists who would object to these ideas: many followers of Heinrich Schenker
seem to deny that functional tonality involves harmonic rules, asserting instead that
its putative “harmonic grammar” can be explained contrapuntally.34 (As Schenker
wrote, the horizontal domain takes “precedence” over the vertical, and is the “only
generator of musical content.”35) Since Schenker’s theories are highly inﬂuential, it
will be worth considering them more closely, with the goal of understanding whether
they do indeed conﬂict with the ideas we have been investigating.
Schenker is a highly complex ﬁgure who by every account made enormous contributions to music theory: in particular, he made a compelling case that there is more
to musical coherence than the simple chord-to-chord constraints discussed in §7.1.
Much of his work was devoted to elucidating these additional mechanisms of tonal

32 Thanks to Hank Knox and David Feurzeig for these examples.
33 True fractals are inﬁnitely self-similar, no matter how far we zoom in or out, whereas tonal music is
self-similar only on two levels. Nevertheless, there is something compelling, and even beautiful, about the
symmetry between scale and chord.
34 The locus classicus of Schenker’s antagonism to traditional harmonic theory is his essay “Rameau
oder Beethoven?” (Schenker 1930 and 1997). More moderate critiques of traditional harmonic theory
can be found throughout the Schenkerian literature, including Salzer 1982 and Schenker 2001. See also
Rothstein 1992: “[early] Schenker conceived of tonal music as a kind of battleground on which the forces
of harmony, voice leading, rhythm, and motivic repetition contest with each other. . . . The notion of semiindependent musical forces, in perpetual conﬂict with each other, seems to have been largely abandoned
by Schenker as he developed his theory. I believe this was a serious mistake.”
35 Schenker 1930, p. 20 (“Vorrecht”) and p. 12 (“allein den musicalischen Inhalt hervorbringt”). For an
English translation, see Schenker 1997, p. 7 (“prerogative”) and p. 2.

Functional Harmony

259

organization, ranging from simple idioms (including progressions such as I–vii° 6–I6),
to recurring melodic patterns (such as voice exchanges and linear progressions), to
larger phenomena (such as the centrality of the return to V in the development section of a classical sonata). All of this is important and welcome. But in the course of
making these arguments, he ended up advocating a radical model of musical organization according to which entire pieces were massively recursive structures, analogous
to unimaginably complex sentences. The complexity of these hierarchical structures
far outstrips those found in natural language, and seems incompatible with what we
know about human cognitive limitations.36 Further, and more directly relevant to our
present concerns, the recursive model has an uncertain relationship to the chord-tochord constraints that play an indisputable role in classical harmony.
Let’s consider this point in the context of an elementary example of Schenkerian
practice. Figure 7.6.1 analyzes the opening phrase of Mozart’s variations on “Ah,
vous dirai-je, Maman” better known in English as “Twinkle, Twinkle Little Star.” The
analysis is taken from Cadwallader and Gagné’s undergraduate textbook Analysis
of Tonal Music: A Schenkerian Approach. Beneath their example, I have provided
a standard Roman numeral description. My chord-by-chord analysis includes two
chords that Cadwallader and Gagné omit: where I interpret the opening measures as

Figure 7.6.1
Mozart’s
variations
on “Ah, vous
dirai-je, Maman,”
(K. 265), along
with Cadwallader
and Gagné’s
Schenkerian
analysis.

36 By drawing an analogy to sentences, I mean to be registering the fact that Schenker conceives of
musical passages as being nested within one another, much like linguistic clauses (§7.6.3). Picking up on
this analogy, Lerdahl (2001) uses linguistic tree structures to express essentially Schenkerian ideas. Schenker himself periodically made comparisons to language, as at the opening of “Further Considerations of
the Urlinie: II,” where he decries the simpliﬁcation of German syntax, associating it with a degradation of
musical comprehension (Schenker 1996, p. 1). (See also Schenker’s analogy to linguistic grammar, quoted
below.) Ultimately, however, the analogy is a suspicious one: spoken English contains sentential units that
are about 13 words long, as compared to written English, in which the units are 22 words long (O’donnell
1974). (Cf. Miller 1956, which emphasizes the “7 ± 2” limits on human short-term memory.) This contrasts dramatically with the length of classical pieces, which can be 20 minutes long, and can contain
hundreds of measures and tens of thousands of notes. Given the centrality of language to human survival,
it is evolutionarily reasonable to take the limits on hierarchical linguistic cognition as a rough guide to the
limits on hierarchical musical cognition.

260

history and analysis

a I–IV@–I–V#–I progression, Cadwallader and Gagné label the ﬁrst ﬁve measures “I.”
Thus, they describe my “IV@ chord” as a “neighboring chord” (indicated by the label
“N”) and my “V# chord” as “passing.” The implication seems to be that these chords
are produced by contrapuntal rather than harmonic forces. In Schenkerian analysis,
this process of identifying (and removing) “merely contrapuntal” harmonies produces ever-more abstract summaries of a piece, until entire movements, no matter
how large, resemble simple I–V–I progressions.
There is room to debate whether traditional harmonic theorists need to recognize
the notion of a “passing chord,” as opposed to simply acknowledging the existence of
a few harmonic idioms. But insofar as they do, the term “passing chord” will presumably describe those rare sonorities that violate the harmonic syntax of §7.1. (Figure 7.6.2
provides a potential example.) By contrast, Cadwallader and Gagné’s “neighboring”
and “passing” chords participate in perfectly well-formed harmonic cycles. That is, if we
simply place Roman numerals under each and every chord, as shown at the bottom
of Figure 7.6.1, we ﬁnd a series of harmonies conforming to conventions described
in §7.1. We therefore need to understand what it means to assert that some of these
apparently syntactical harmonies are the “byproducts” of contrapuntal motion. In
particular, we need to understand how this description relates to that provided by
traditional harmonic theory.
Figure 7.6.2 The ﬁrst movement of Mozart’s Piano Sonata K. 279, mm. 25–30. A traditional
theorist might consider the I@ to be a “passing chord,” since it violates the expectation that
I@ goes to V. By treating it as the product of linear motion (as shown in b), we obtain a
syntactical progression from an apparently nonsyntactical surface.

Functional Harmony

It seems to me that there are essentially four options here:
1.
2.

3.

4.

Nihilism. Harmonic nihilists simply deny that harmonies in functionally tonal
music exhibit regularities of the sort described in §7.1.
Monism. Monists acknowledge that tonal harmonies appear to obey
harmonic rules, but assert that these regularities can be explained
contrapuntally. The traditional theorist is therefore wrong to ﬁnd a
harmonic grammar in Mozart’s music; the deeper and more correct
explanation invokes the melodic processes described by Schenker.
Holism. The holist asserts that it is impossible to separate harmony and
counterpoint, because the very distinction is ill-deﬁned. Traditional harmonic
theory, by postulating purely harmonic principles, illicitly tries to treat the
harmonic realm on its own, without adequately considering counterpoint.
Pluralism. The pluralist believes that independent harmonic laws govern
functionally tonal music. On this view, Schenkerian theory adds additional
information to, but does not replace, traditional harmonic analysis. The
traditional harmonic theorist correctly observes that Mozart’s music obeys
independent harmonic laws; the Schenkerian augments this observation by
pointing out that the notes also have additional contrapuntal functions.

We can discount the ﬁrst of these, as it is inconsistent with the evidence presented in
§7.1. Each of the remaining views is worth considering in more detail.

7.6.1 Monism
According to the monist, the ﬁrst ﬁve measures of Mozart’s “Twinkle, Twinkle”
should be explained contrapuntally rather than harmonically. Figure 7.6.3 attempts
to test this theory by replacing Mozart’s initial I–IV–I progression with a I–vi–I, and
by eliminating the leading tone from the ﬁfth measure. The resulting chord progressions are very rarely found in tonal music, even though they are perfectly legitimate
contrapuntally: the I–vi6–I progression is produced by neighboring motion in the
upper voice, while the I–ii–I6 motion can be understood as a passing chord. The awkwardness of the resulting progressions strongly suggests that Mozart’s compositional
choices are indeed motivated by harmonic considerations. Absent harmonic laws, we
simply have no way of explaining why I–vi–I and I–ii–I6 should be so much less common than I–IV–I and I–V–I.37
Figure 7.6.4 presents a number of contrapuntally unobjectionable progressions
that are quite rare in functionally tonal music. All feature efﬁcient melodic motion,
avoid forbidden parallel ﬁfths and octaves, and resolve the leading tone upward by
step; all would be perfectly acceptable in sixteenth- or twentieth-century music. Yet
Figure 7.6.5 shows that they are virtually absent in Mozart’s piano sonatas. The challenge for the monist is to explain this using recognizably contrapuntal principles.
37 This point has been made by numerous commentators, including Smith (1986), Rothstein (1992),
and Agmon (1996).

261

262

history and analysis
Figure 7.6.3 These “neighboring” and “passing” chords are contrapuntally unobjectionable,
though the resulting chord progressions are harmonically unusual.

Figure 7.6.4 Three progressions that are contrapuntally unobjectionable, but which rarely
appear in baroque or classical music: a root position V–IV (a), a major-key I–iii–V–I
(b), and the analogous progression in minor (c).

Figure 7.6.5 Chord progressions in Mozart’s sonatas. Starred
progressions occur across phrase boundaries (e.g. K. 311,
third movement, mm. 71–72). Schenkerians have asserted that
the last two progressions are basic to tonal music, whereas
traditional tonal theory claims that they are rare.

V-vi
I-I6-V
V-IV6
i-i6-V
V-IV-I
I-iii-V
i-III-V

103
56
48
10
2*
0
0

To my knowledge, no theorist has ever even attempted to do so—at least not in clear,
principled language that would be comprehensible to students or scientists. It seems
reasonable to conclude that we cannot replace harmonic principles with purely contrapuntal laws. In the words of the noted Schenkerian (and pluralist) William Rothstein,
[H]ow is it that all those passing and neighboring tones time and again just happen to
dispose themselves in ways that produce what appear to be tonics, dominants, and other
familiar chords, often moving in exactly the ways predicted by the harmony books? . . . It
takes a very large leap of faith to believe that so many chordal structures and successions,
exhibiting so many regular patterns are to be ascribed to contrapuntal happenstance.38

38 Rothstein (1992) is paraphrasing Smith (1986).

Functional Harmony

7.6.2 Holism
Let’s now turn to the claim that traditional harmonic theory imposes an illegitimate separation between harmony and counterpoint. The idea is that, in actual
music, harmony and counterpoint are so intimately intertwined that we must
always consider both together. One obvious response is that there currently exists
an accurate theory of functional harmony, one that is largely independent of contrapuntal considerations. Taken literally, holism would seem to imply that we
cannot produce a purely harmonic theory such as that in §7.1. The holist therefore needs some explanation of how traditional theory manages to achieve the
impossible. Furthermore, this explanation will need to explain how it is that very
similar harmonic laws govern tonal styles with very different contrapuntal norms,
including baroque music, classical music, and many varieties of jazz, rock, and
pop. (This fact alone would seem to imply that harmonic principles can indeed
be separated from counterpoint.) To my knowledge, no such explanation has ever
been offered.
More generally, it seems likely that the holist fails to distinguish three separate
questions:
1.
2.
3.

Is it the case that composers’ choices are guided at every point both by
harmonic and contrapuntal considerations?
When analyzing a piece of music, does the dutiful analyst typically consider
both harmony and counterpoint?
Can we provide an informative theory of the harmonic progressions found
in tonal music that is largely independent of counterpoint?

The key point is that a traditional harmonic theorist is perfectly free to answer
“yes” to all three. Yes, actual composers, in the heat of the creative process, invariably think about both harmony and counterpoint; and yes, a responsible analyst
typically considers both factors together. But despite this in-practice entanglement
of harmony and counterpoint, we can still provide an enlightening and largely
harmonic theory of tonal chord progressions. This is because the theoretical project of characterizing the grammar of elementary tonal harmony is completely distinct from the analytical project of saying interesting things about particular pieces.
Just as the grammarian of the English language can remain resolutely neutral on
the proper method of interpreting Romantic poetry, so too can the supporter of
traditional harmonic theory remain completely agnostic about how to analyze
speciﬁc works. In particular, harmonic theorists need not assert that composers
think ﬁrst about harmony before thinking about counterpoint, nor that one has
said all there is to say about a piece simply by placing Roman numerals under
its chords. (Indeed, Schenkerian theory has provided an important corrective to
these very tendencies.) To my mind, the point cannot be emphasized strongly
enough: the project of constructing a harmonic grammar is totally independent

263

264

history and analysis

of the enterprise of musical analysis—as independent as linguistics is from literary
criticism.39

7.6.3 Pluralism
Pluralist Schenkerians believe that traditional harmonic theory is correct as far as
it goes. Thus when the pluralist declares that the IV@ and V# chords in Figure 7.6.1
are “passing” or “neighboring,” she does not thereby deny that these chords are also
genuinely harmonic objects that participate in syntactic harmonic cycles; instead, she
means to assert that there is another level of description in which these chords can be
discounted. It follows that, for pluralists, harmony and counterpoint will often suggest very different ways of organizing a single passage of music. Harmonically, music
is organized into a series of concatenated cycles like beads on a string. Contrapuntally,
however, it is organized hierarchically, nested like a series of Russian “matryoshka”
dolls (Figure 7.6.6).40 The result is a fundamentally disuniﬁed conception of musical
structure, in which harmony and counterpoint work against each other, providing
very different ways of organizing one and the same piece.41
I will not consider this view in much detail, as it is largely irrelevant to our present
concerns. The important point is that traditional theorists and pluralist Schenkerians
can agree about many things: that functionally tonal music involves distinctively harmonic laws; that the local voice-leading moves in Renaissance and classical music are
quite similar; that modulations involve, among other things, voice leadings between
scales; that nineteenth-century harmony often exploits efﬁcient voice leading in chromatic space; that harmonic consistency, efﬁcient voice leading, acoustic consonance,
macroharmony, and centricity all contribute to our sense of tonality; and so on. Ultimately, the question is whether a theory emphasizing these facts will be embedded
into a larger theory incorporating insights from Schenker. For the purposes of this
book I am happy to remain agnostic about this larger issue. There is plenty of work
to do, even if we restrict ourselves to matters about which traditional theorists and
(pluralist) Schenkerians agree.
However, I would like to close with two general observations. First, it is unclear
whether pluralist Schenkerianism is supposed to provide a grammar-like theory
describing music’s objective structure or a psychological theory about listeners’ sub-

39 Imagine someone who objected to linguistics as follows: “your claim that English has a normal subject–verb–object ordering suggests that we have said everything there is to say about a sentence by labeling
its constituents, but this leaves us unable to distinguish beautiful sentences from horriﬁc ones.” As far as
I can see, this obviously silly argument is exactly analogous to the suggestion that traditional harmonic
theory implies an impoverished analytical method.
40 The analysis in Figure 7.6.6 is taken from an article by David Beach (1983). In traditional Schenkerian theory, it is linear patterns—rather than chords—that are the focus of attention, and are understood
to be recursively nested. Nevertheless, this has the effect of creating nested patterns of Roman numerals.
41 One important task for the pluralist is to re-examine Schenker’s emphasis on musical unity in light
of this manifest disunity. Is it the case that different musical parameters—not just harmony and counterpoint, but also form, theme, and motive—might in general suggest different ways of parsing a piece? And
if so, does this reduce the importance of the “unity” that Schenker identiﬁed? See Cohn 1992a for related
discussion.

Functional Harmony
Figure 7.6.6 The opening of the slow movement of Beethoven’s Sonata in C minor, Op. 10
No. 1, along with two ways of parsing its structure. In the traditional tonal analysis (top) ﬁve
harmonic cycles are concatenated like beads on a string. In the Schenkerian reading (bottom)
harmonies are nested recursively. (For example, the progression IV–IV6–V#–I, which belongs
to the fourth harmonic cycle, is taken to represent a single IV chord on level 2.) Schenkerians
believe that these sorts of recursive structures, which cut across the articulation into harmonic
cycles, can be reliably inferred from a piece’s contrapuntal structure. Ultimately, the recursive
embedding proceeds until entire pieces are reduced to one of just a few basic templates, each
resembling a I–V–I progression.

jective (and possibly variable) responses.42 I have stressed that traditional harmonic
theory is more like a grammar than a theory of phenomenological introspection.
In analyzing Figure 7.6.7, for example, you do not need to ask yourself whether the
D5 in the second beat sounds like a passing tone: if you know that tonal harmony is
fundamentally triadic then you know enough to say that the D5 is indeed passing;
and if experience tells you otherwise, then so much the worse for experience.43 (In
much the same way, a traditional theorist can describe the I@ chord in Figure 7.6.2 as
a “passing chord” without implying anything about how it sounds.) If Schenkerians
mean to be making similarly objective claims about musical organization, then they
need to spell out explicit procedures for making their recursive analyses—procedures
that will allow us to test the theory in something like the way we tested the simple

42 Among contemporary theorists inspired by Schenker, Lerdahl (2001) models listeners’ subjective
responses, while Brown (2005) models objective musical organization. Schenker himself wrote “my teaching
describes for the ﬁrst time a genuine grammar of tones, similar to the linguistic grammar that is presented in
schools” (Schenker 1956, p. 37; the sentence is translated only very loosely in Oster’s English edition).
43 This is not to say that we never need to appeal to our psychology in resolving very difﬁcult, ambiguous
passages. In general, however, I think the goal of constructing Roman numeral analyses is to show how a
particular passage relates to existing harmonic conventions; if so, then statements about how we hear it may
be beside the point. This is one reason why it is possible to train a deaf person, or a computer, to become
reasonably proﬁcient at traditional harmonic analysis (Taube 1999 and Raphael and Stoddard 2004).

265

266

history and analysis
Figure 7.6.7 If we were to consider every note to be harmonic, we would confront an array
of unusual sonorities, such as the A-D-E on beat 2. By eliminating nonharmonic tones, we
reveal a “deeper level” of musical structure, in which triadic harmonies progress in familiar
ways. The violation of our expectations (e.g. that harmonies should be triadic) is what
motivates our reductive analysis.

harmonic grammar of §7.1.44 If, on the other hand, pluralist Schenkerians mean to be
making purely phenomenological claims, then their appropriation of the traditional
terms like “passing” and “neighboring” is misleading at best. For the (psychological,
subjective) Schenkerian “passing chord” is a different animal from the (grammatical,
and more objective) passing tones of traditional theory. Furthermore, there are some
delicate and as-yet-unexplored questions about the reliability and normative status
of this sort of phenomenological introspection.45
Second, I want to remind you that there is an alternative way to formulate broadly
Schenkerian claims about tonal unity. One of the primary attractions of Schenkerian theory, at least to my mind, is that it promises to show that classical music has
a kind of hierarchical self-similarity, with its large-scale procedures mirroring the
local details of chord-to-chord voice leading. This chapter has identiﬁed another
route to a rather similar conclusion: for as we have seen, modulation involves scaleto-scale voice leadings that do indeed echo the contrapuntal techniques on the
chordal level. To establish this analogy, we do not need to resort to musical reduction, nor to the analogy between musical pieces and enormous sentences, nor again
to the claim that composers have cognitive capacities far exceeding those of ordinary
listeners. Scale-to-scale voice leadings are right there in the score, transparent even

44 Temperley (2007, p. 172) makes a similar point.
45 It is quite possible to be deceived about what one hears. In part, this is because it can be difﬁcult,
introspectively, to distinguish hearing as from hearing plus thinking. It is one thing to have certain thoughts
while listening to music (such as “aha, we’re returning to the tonic key!”), but it is quite another for those
thoughts to be embodied within the perceptual experience itself. See Wittgenstein 1953 (IIxi) for discussion of the analogous distinction between “looking plus thinking” and “seeing as.”

Functional Harmony

to casual observation. Furthermore, it is not at all implausible to suggest that tonal
composers might have sensed that F moves to Fs, when modulating from C major to
G major, or that this is somewhat analogous to the way C moves to B as the C major
triad changes to E minor. Our inquiry into voice leading thus provides a minimalist
alternative to the more robust hierarchies of Schenkerianism proper. No doubt true
Schenkerians will feel that this approach pales in comparison to the richly imbricated structure of an authentic Schenker graph. But there may be some readers who
prefer the more modest—and perhaps empirically grounded—approach that I have
outlined here.

267

chapter 8

Chromaticism
We’ll now consider some of the ways in which nineteenth-century composers
exploited efﬁcient voice leading, both as a tool for embellishing traditional progressions and as an alternative to these same routines. We’ll begin with chromatic progressions that decorate a functionally tonal substrate: augmented sixths, Neapolitans,
and examples of “modal mixture.” We then turn to more exotic instances of chromaticism, comparing short pieces by Brahms and Schoenberg, and examining a few
passages from Schubert. This sets the stage for a more in-depth discussion of two
nineteenth-century warhorses: Chopin’s E minor Prelude, Op. 28 No. 4, and Wagner’s
Tristan prelude.
My goal here is to present chromaticism as an orderly phenomenon rather than
an unsystematic exercise in compositional rule breaking. Lacking a comprehensive
understanding of voice leading, it is easy to become overwhelmed by the variety of
nineteenth-century chromatic practices—a bewildering collection of techniques that
do not display any obvious organization. From here it is just a small step to deciding
that chromaticism is a matter of the Romantic Composer’s Unexplainable Whim. If,
on the other hand, we have absorbed the theoretical lessons of Part I, then we can
adopt a more systematic attitude: once we can determine for ourselves the various
contrapuntal paths from chord to chord, once we feel at home with the geometrical
perspective of Chapter 3, we can begin to see that chromatic music reuses, over and
over again, a relatively small number of musical tricks. This allows us to recognize
the complex voice-leading relationships that bind together individual pieces while
connecting them to one another.

8.1

decorative chromaticism

Figure 8.1.1a contains a trio of dominant−tonic progressions in the key of C major.
To a composer with a diatonic frame of reference, the voice leading is as small as
it can be: each voice is either held constant or moves to its destination by a single
step. But to composers who think chromatically, the counterpoint is not maximally
efﬁcient since notes sometimes move by two semitones. It is therefore tempting
to use chromatic alterations to “ﬁll in the gaps,” perhaps in the hope that this will
create an increased yearning for the tonic chord. Figure 8.1.1 shows that chromatic
alterations produce a variety of familiar tonal chords, including the diminished

Chromaticism

269
Figure 8.1.1
Intensifying
diatonic
dominanttonic chord
progressions
with chromatic
notes.

seventh, the dominant seventh with an augmented ﬁfth, and the dominant seventh
“ﬂat ﬁve” chord.1
The chords (d)−( f ) require special comment. Here, the chromatically altered note
creates an augmented sixth that resolves outward to an octave. Each of these chords
has a ﬂattened second scale degree, and can be labeled only awkwardly with traditional
Roman numerals.2 But as secondary dominants they are very familiar, having long
ago acquired picturesque names: the Italian, French, and German augmented sixth
chords. One curious feature of Western music history is that these altered sonorities
ﬁrst appear as applied dominant (V-of-V) chords. It was only during the ﬁrst few
decades of the nineteenth century that they begin to appear as dominant sonorities
in their own right. (Figure 8.1.2 provides a pair of representative examples.) This tendency reaches its apogee in twentieth-century jazz, where these altered dominants—
conceived as “tritone substitutions” for the V7—become virtually mandatory.3

1 This table is similar to Table 2 in Smith 1986. Smith’s approach to chromaticism is in general very
congenial to my own.
2 The chord {Df4, F4, G4, B4} is often labeled “G$f5,” with the numbers “$” referring to intervals above
the bass Df4 and the symbol “f5” referring to the interval above the root G.
3 Biamonte (2008) contrasts the voice-leading behavior of classical augmented sixths and jazz tritone
substitutes. To my mind, however, these differences arise from the fact that classical music is largely triadic,
whereas jazz makes heavier use of seventh chords. Modulo these differences, there is a clear connection
between the two kinds of chords.

270

history and analysis
Figure 8.1.2 Chromatically altered dominants at the ﬁnal
cadence of Schubert’s C major String Quintet (a) and at the
opening of Chopin’s Cs minor Nocturne, Op. 27 No. 1 (b).

This historical contingency creates something of a pedagogical conundrum:
most harmony textbooks, mirroring the historical development of Western music,
introduce these sonorities ﬁrst as secondary dominant chords, alterations of iv or
V-of-V, rather than as dominants in their own right. (In fact, theorists sometimes
debate whether augmented sixth chords have “secondary dominant” or “predominant” function.4) As a result, many textbooks pay relatively short shrift to the underlying similarity between the chords in Figure 8.1.1. This is symptomatic of a more
general tendency to depict chromatic harmony as a series of disconnected idioms,
often presented in a “one chord per chapter” format. This “object-based” (or harmonic) approach to chromaticism is diametrically opposed to the “process-based”
(or contrapuntal) approach I am advocating. From my point of view, what is important is that the progressions in Figure 8.1.1 can all be obtained by a fundamentally
similar process of chromatic embellishment.
One advantage of my approach can be seen by considering the chords in Figure
8.1.1g−h. These altered dominant sonorities do not have standard theoretical names,
and appear only rarely in nineteenth century music. Figure 8.1.1g is the central progression of Strauss’ Till Eulenspiegel, and is sometimes called the “Till Sixth.” Figure
8.1.1h appears in the upper voices of the ﬁnal progression of Scriabin’s Poem of Ecstasy,

4 I think of augmented sixths as being secondary dominants for two reasons: ﬁrst, in sequences they
often alternate with ordinary dominants (see Mozart’s C minor fantasy, K. 475, mm. 1–3, as well as Figure
8.3.4); second, in recapitulations they often replace the exposition’s secondary dominants (cf. Beethoven’s
F minor piano sonata, Op. 2 No. 1, I, mm. 41 and 140; Mozart’s D major sonata, K. 311, II, mm. 14 and 50).
They only rarely substitute for genuine predominants in these contexts.

Chromaticism

and has probably been given a silly name at some point (the “Ecstatic Sixth?”). Students who have learned chromatic harmony as a series of idioms tend to panic when
they ﬁrst confront such chords. (“What is that and why wasn’t it in my textbook?”)
What they need, I think, is not an extensive list of chords to memorize, but rather a
sense of how to think for themselves chromatically—a sense, in other words, for the
cognitive processes that might lead composers to invent sonorities of this kind. Students who realize that there are countless chromatic alterations in nineteenth-century
music, only some of which have standard names, are more capable of confronting the
harmonic unknown, both analytically and in their own music.
Of course, chromatic techniques can be applied to other progressions as well.
Figure 8.1.3 presents a few standard embellishments of ii and IV. As discussed in
Chapter 6, the I–IV–I progression is often decorated by interposing an augmented
triad between I and IV and a minor triad between IV and I. (A very similar alteration,
when applied to a V–I@–V progression, intensiﬁes the dominant by way of the minor
tonic triad.) Other changes transform ii# into a half-diminished chord and ii°6 into
the Neapolitan sixth. As a teacher, I try to emphasize the general structural principle
that links all these progressions: in nearly every case, diatonic tones are modiﬁed
to create efﬁcient chromatic voice leading, smoothing the transition from chord to
chord. Although students must still be introduced to these chords individually, and
coached in their various voice-leading particularities, I ﬁnd that it is much easier to
teach this material when the deeper musical principles are explained.
In fact, it can even be interesting to ask whether there are chromatic alterations
that do not commonly appear in nineteenth-century music. For example, the standard
V$–i progression can be embellished by lowering the second and fourth scale degrees
as shown in Figure 8.1.4. This chord is extremely rare, perhaps because Romantic
composers regarded the minor mode as the dual or shadow of the major. (That is:
since the lowered fourth scale degree is not available in major, composers may have
shied away from it in minor.) However, it does occasionally appear in later music—

Figure 8.1.3
Other chromatic
embellishments.

271

272

history and analysis
Figure 8.1.4 In the nineteenth century, the
lowered fourth scale degree is extremely rare.
However, it does appear in later music.

8.2

for instance, at the end of the slow movement of Shostakovich’s G minor Piano
Quintet.5 This, then, is an example of the
continued development of chromatic
tonality in twentieth-century music:
just as the dominant seventh “ﬂat-ﬁve”
chord was rare in the eighteenth century,
becoming common only later, so too is
lowered scale-degree four uncommon in
Romantic music—coming into its own
only in the extended tonality of the more
recent past.

generalized augmented sixths

So far, we have examined chromaticism that decorates or embellishes traditional tonally functional progressions. Let’s now turn to music in which chromaticism provides an alternative language, a kind of “second practice,” distinct from the routines
of ordinary functional tonality. Figure 8.2.1 shows ﬁve passages in which a seventh
chord moves by stepwise motion to a triad. The ﬁrst, from the opening of Schubert’s “Am Meer” uses what theory books would call a “German augmented sixth,”
here acting as an incomplete neighbor to a root position tonic. Next is the opening
of Schoenberg’s song “Erwartung,” Op. 2 No. 1 (not to be confused with the atonal
monodrama of the same name), which presents a less familiar progression: a sounding B minor seventh acting as a neighbor to the tonic Ef major, all over a pedal Ef.6
The third is derived from the penultimate progression of Wagner’s Tristan, with a
(sounding) F half-diminished seventh moving semitonally to E minor.7 The fourth,
from Act III, Scene 4 of Debussy’s Pelléas et Mélisande, presents a very similar progression, in which G¤[s5] again resolves to E minor. The ﬁnal passage, from the opening of the last movement of Brahms’ Second Piano Concerto, has D7 resolving to Ef,
the subdominant of the underlying key; it can be understood tonally as a deceptive
resolution of an applied dominant. From a traditional point of view, some of these
are “normal” progressions with familiar names (“German sixth,” “deceptive resolution”), while others are nameless and unusual. However, from our perspective they
are all quite closely related: in each case, the seventh chord is dissonant, unstable, and
neighboring, resolving efﬁciently to a more stable triad. Our goal is to think systematically about how these progressions relate.

5 The lowered fourth scale degree sometimes appears in heavy metal, as in the second part of the Black
Sabbath song “Sabbath, Bloody Sabbath.” This alteration is probably derived from the blues, though here
it takes on a more sinister character.
6 The adjective “sounding” indicates that I am ignoring spelling.
7 Here I remove Tristan’s characteristic voice crossing, as discussed in §8.6.

Chromaticism

273

Figure 8.2.1 Chromatic voice leading in Schubert’s “Am Meer” (a), Schoenberg’s
“Erwartung,” Op. 2 No. 1 (b), Wagner’s Tristan (c), Debussy’s Pélleas et Mélisande (d), and the
last movement of Brahms’ Second Piano Concerto, Op. 83 (e).

second chord
To this end, it helps to begin with a more
general theoretical problem. Suppose we
time
would like to ﬁnd an efﬁcient (four-voice)
first chord
voice leading from a seventh chord to a triad.
The principle of avoiding crossings tells us
that we should map ascending steps in the
seventh chord to either unisons or ascending
steps in the triad. This means that the voice
leading can be represented schematically as
shown in Figure 8.2.2: two adjacent notes in
the seventh chord converge on a single note
in the triad, while the other two voices connect the remaining notes. It is therefore possible to categorize such voice leadings
based on two pieces of information: the converging notes in the seventh chord and
the converged-upon note in the triad. This is illustrated by Figure 8.2.3, which shows
that there are twelve abstract possibilities to consider—four pairs of converging notes
times three possible targets. Figure 8.2.4 provides concrete examples of these voiceleading schemas, in the particular case where the ﬁrst chord is a dominant seventh
and the second is a triad. (Of course, not all of these voice leadings are equally useful; they are shown merely to illustrate the possibilities.) Voice leadings in the same
square of the table are individually T-related (§2.6).

Figure 8.2.2
A four-voice
crossing-free
voice leading
from a fournote chord to a
three-note chord.
Two notes in the
four-note chord
converge on a
single note in the
three-note chord.

274

history and analysis
Figure 8.2.3 In a crossing-free voice leading from a four-note to a three-note chord, there are
twelve abstract possibilities to consider. The converging pair of voices is listed at the top of
each column, while the note converged upon is listed to the left of each row.

Figure 8.2.4 Instances of the twelve schemas in Figure 8.2.3. In each case, a dominant
seventh chord moves to a major triad. Voice leadings separated by a dotted line are
individually T-related.

Chromaticism

Augmented sixth chords are a special subset of these voice leadings—those in
which the converging notes are separated by two semitones, and they converge on the
note that lies between them.8 These voice leadings are important because they permit
all four voices to move semitonally to the subsequent triad, as in the ﬁrst four progressions of Figure 8.2.1. Augmented sixths, understood in this general sense, need
not have dominant function: where the chords in Figure 8.2.5a–c contain a leading
tone that resolves upward, and clearly sound “dominant-like,” those in ( f –g) do not.
From this point of view, the familiar augmented sixths are simply a noteworthy species within the genus of efﬁcient voice leadings from four-note to three-note chords.
Such chords can be expected to occur frequently in chromatic music, and need not
be conceptualized as modiﬁcations of the Italian, French, and German sixths of introductory tonal theory.
Now back to our musical examples (Figure 8.2.1). The ﬁrst four are all augmented sixths in which the voices move semitonally to their destinations. Figure
8.2.6 shows that Schubert and Schoenberg’s progressions exemplify the abstract
schema (r, t, f, s)®(f, r, t, f)—that is, the seventh chord’s (sounding) root moves
to the triad’s ﬁfth, its third moves to the triad’s root, the ﬁfth moves to the third,
and the seventh moves to the ﬁfth. (Schoenberg simply lowers the third of the
German sixth, lending the chord a dominant quality.) Wagner’s progression exhibits the schema (r, t, f, s)®(r, t, f, r), resolving the root and seventh to the root of
the following triad. The very similar passage from Pélleas, meanwhile, reimagines
this augmented sixth as the raised ﬁfth and seventh of a G 7 chord; this is a rare
example in which a generalized augmented sixth occurs between notes other than
the sounding root and seventh. (Note that Wagner and Debussy’s progressions are
quite closely related, just as Schubert and Schoenberg’s are.) Finally, the opening
of Brahms’ movement does not feature augmented-sixth voice leading; here the

Figure 8.2.5 In an “augmented sixth” resolution, two voices are separated by ten semitones,
and converge semitonally to an octave, doubling one of the notes in a major or minor triad;
typically, the augmented sixth lies between what sound like the ﬁrst chord’s root and seventh,
though in (c) this is not the case. If the resolution contains a leading tone resolving upward to
the tonic, then the chord can typically function as an altered dominant.

8 See Harrison 1995 for an alternative perspective that emphasizes tonal function.

275

276

history and analysis
Figure 8.2.6 The voice leadings at the start of Schubert’s “Am Meer” (a) and Schoenberg’s
“Erwartung” (b) both exemplify the abstract schema (r, t, f, s)®(f, r, t, f). The voice
leading in Tristan is (r, t, f, s)®(r, t, f, r) (c), while in Pélleas it is (s, r, t, f)®(r, t, f, r)
(d). All four of these voice leadings are generalized “augmented sixth” resolutions. The
voice leading in the last movement of Brahms’ Second Piano Concerto (e) employs
the schema (f, s, r, t)®(t, f, r, t), in which the converging voices are separated by nine
semitones. This is not a generalized augmented sixth.

seventh chord’s third and ﬁfth are separated by nine semitones, and converge on the
triad’s third. Our theoretical ideas thus provide a precise vocabulary for specifying
how the ﬁrst four progressions relate, while differing from the last.
As I said earlier, to be initiated into the mysteries of chromatic tonality one needs
to develop an understanding of all the voice-leading possibilities between familiar
chords. This requires sorting through the analogues to the voice leadings in Figure
8.2.3 for any pair of chords we might encounter—identifying in the process the most
useful possibilities. Furthermore, we need to be able to deploy this knowledge relatively quickly, so that we immediately recognize the relationships between various
voice leadings. Nineteenth-century composers no doubt developed this sort of knowledge intuitively, through hours and hours of hands-on experimentation at the piano
keyboard. Twenty-ﬁrst-century musicians need to experiment as well, but we have
the advantage of theoretical tools that allow us to conceptualize more abstract voiceleading relationships—grouping musical possibilities into more manageable categories and revealing structural principles linking superﬁcially different progressions.

8.3

brahms and schoenberg

For a more complex artifact of the nineteenth-century “second practice,” we turn
to Brahms’ Intermezzo, Op. 76 No. 4, a teasing piece that begins on a dominant
seventh chord that resolves only at the end. My reduction, shown in Figure 8.3.1,
tries to separate the two “systems” of nineteenth-century tonality, using open noteheads for chords that behave in functionally harmonic ways, and closed noteheads
for instances of chromatic voice leading. The piece opens by oscillating between
F7 and what I will call the “Tristan chord” {F, Gs, B, Ef}.9 The two chords are con9 Some of you may prefer to think of the Ef as a pedal tone, in which case the relevant sonority is {F,
Gs, B, D}. Others may prefer to postulate a ﬁve-note sonority containing both D and Ef. Brahms’ piece
proceeds by exploiting alternate resolutions of this chord, however it may be understood.

Chromaticism
Figure 8.3.1 A reduction of Brahms’ Intermezzo, Op. 76 No. 4. Resolutions of the Tristan
chord {F, Af, Cf, Ef} and Ef minor triad are identiﬁed with the letters “a” and “b”
respectively.

nected by the voice leading (F, Gs, B, Ef)®(F, A, C, Ef), which moves two notes by
semitone. At a2, Brahms resolves the same Tristan chord in a different way: here, F
and Ef collapse onto Ef, and Bn rises to C, producing an Af major triad.10 Immediately thereafter, the V7 of Af major gets reinterpreted as an augmented sixth of
G minor, resolving directly to a ﬁrst-inversion tonic. (Note that the “augmentedsixth resolution,” though it has a familiar name, can be interpreted as just another

10 Abstractly, this involves the schema (r, t, f, s)®(f, r, t, f).

277

278

Figure 8.3.2
Individual T
relatedness in
Op. 76 No. 4.

history and analysis

chromatic voice leading.) Brahms thus modulates from Bf major to G minor by
way of the more distant key of Af major, deliberately taking a scenic detour in
tonal space.
The opening of the middle section, shown in Figure 8.3.2, provides a nice illustration of individually T-related voice leadings: here, Brahms takes a voice leading
from the ﬁrst ending and transposes the second chord up by semitone, leading to
a contrasting passage in Cf major.11 (Of course, the root position tonic triad never
appears: the middle section is “in the dominant of Cf,” just as the opening is “in
the dominant of Bf.”) The section starts with a long dominant pedal, discharged
(in my reading) by the “down by third, up by step” sequence of §7.3. The third section begins much as the ﬁrst did, alternating between the Tristan chord and the F7.
Once again, the piece moves away from the tonic by resolving the Tristan chord to
Af major; however, Brahms immediately follows this resolution with yet another
resolution of the Tristan chord, this time to Ef major. (The voice leading here has
the root and seventh converging on Ef, reinterpreting the Tristan chord as iiø7 of
Ef.) This Ef major triad initiates a descending sequence of chromatically embellished harmonies, culminating in a iiø7–fII7–I progression. (Jazz musicians would
call the fII7 a “tritone substitution” for the dominant, while classical theorists would
say it is an augmented sixth resolving directly to I.) Given Brahms’ prominent use of
the Tristan chord, it is amusing to note that the
iiø7–fII7 voice leading evokes the very opening
of Wagner’s opera.
Brahms’ piece thus progresses by exploiting multiple resolutions of a few basic sonorities, including the Tristan chord and the Ef
minor triad (marked on the reduction as “a”
and “b”). The multivalence of these chords
propels the music while also endowing it with
a kind of harmonic unity, allowing the composer to return again and again to the same basic chords. A very similar technique
appears in Schoenberg’s “Erwartung,” whose opening progression was discussed
in the previous section. In Figure 8.3.3, I have provided a reduction, once again
using black stemless noteheads for nonfunctional chromatic chords. A glance at
the reduction shows that Schoenberg’s song, like Brahms’ piece, is delicately balanced between two musical worlds. Once again, it explores a variety of ways to
resolve a few chromatic sonorities—in particular, the “augmented sixth” at the
opening (enharmonically, {B, D, Fs, A} over an Ef pedal), which resolves semitonally as a neighboring chord to Ef major while also acting as a passing chord to IV7.
And once again, we ﬁnd a mix of familiar and unfamiliar progressions: Af7, the
third chord of the piece, resolves as a German sixth to {Ef, G, C}, while {Cf, Ef,

11 As in Mozart’s C minor fantasy, K. 475, the individual transposition changes iv6–V7 into iii6–V7
(§2.6).

Chromaticism

Gf, A} in third system—a standard German sixth in Ef—“normalizes” the song’s
unusual second sonority. (Both of these German sixths are denoted by asterisks on
the example.) Curiously, the end of the piece once again contains a progression
that evokes the opening measures of Wagner’s Tristan (Csø7–Bf7, bracketed on the
reduction).
The middle section of Schoenberg’s song, shown on the second line of Figure
8.3.3, is an embellished ascending-ﬁfths sequence of dominant seventh chords.
Each sequential unit hints at a I@–Vf9 progression, with the Vf9 chord becoming
the subsequent I@. (For instance, Gf9 leads to G@, which is then reinterpreted as I@
of the subsequent dominant.) This sequence exploits a technique ﬁrst discussed
in §3.8, whereby stepwise descending voice leading produces ascending-ﬁfths root
progressions. Figure 8.3.4 identiﬁes the basic voice-leading pattern, and compares
Schoenberg’s sequence to a rather similar sequence in one of Haydn’s late piano
sonatas. Although the two passages are separated by almost a century, they arguably make use of the same basic underlying relationships—testifying to the way
music theory can help us understand hidden roads connecting superﬁcially different styles.

Figure 8.3.3 A reduction of Schoenberg’s song “Erwartung,” Op. 2 No. 1.

279

280

history and analysis
Figure 8.3.4 (a) An ascending ﬁfths sequence that uses descending stepwise voice leading.
(b) A sequence from the development of the ﬁrst movement of Haydn’s Piano Sonata
Hob. XVI/49 in Ef major, mm. 117–122, which decorates this basic voice-leading pattern.
(c) Schoenberg’s sequence, transposed up by semitone for ease of comparison with the earlier
examples. In Haydn’s sequence, explicit i@–v resolutions ascend by ﬁfth, linked by secondary
dominants; Schoenberg’s progression only hints at the i@ harmonies, subsuming them within
extended dominants. Here the dotted line signiﬁes that the G5 in the ﬁrst measure can be
considered “the same” as the G4 in the second measure—or in Schenkerian terms, a “voice
transfer.”

8.4

schubert and the major-third system

In a moment, we’ll examine two pieces that make sophisticated use of seventh chords’
four-dimensional geometry, exploiting what I have called the “minor-third system.”
Before doing so, however, it will be useful to warm up with some triadic music, where
the relevant geometry is three-dimensional and hence easier to grasp. Having honed
our skills on the simpler “major-third system,” we can then turn to the more complex
relationships among seventh chords.
Figure 8.4.1 outlines the opening of Schubert’s D major Piano Sonata, D. 850,
Op. 53. The ﬁrst phrase is intense but traditional, touching brieﬂy on the subdominant before cadencing in the tonic D major. The second phrase switches abruptly
to the parallel minor, but otherwise begins as the ﬁrst. Having reached F major (the
relative major of the parallel minor of the tonic key), Schubert then leaves traditional tonality in favor of the major-third system: a pair of efﬁcient chromatic voice

Chromaticism

281
Figure 8.4.1
A reduction of
the opening of
Schubert’s D
major Piano
Sonata, D. 850,
Op. 53.

Figure 8.4.2
A geometrical
representation of
the voice leadings
(F, A, C)®(Es,
Gs, Cs) and (Es,
Gs, Gs, Cs)®(E,
G, A, Cs), which
exploit the near
major-third
symmetry of the
triad.

leadings connecting F major to Cs major to A7, which in turn leads back to the tonic.
We can think of this passage as exploiting the fundamental geometry of three-note
chord space, in which the major triads F, Cs, and A are all adjacent (Figure 3.10.2b).
From this point of view the seventh is inessential—an embellishment that merely
decorates the more basic triadic relationship. (An alternative interpretation, shown in
Figure 8.4.2, uses the pitch-class circle and retains the seventh.12) No matter how we
conceptualize it, the progression represents a dazzling, gratuitous, and over-the-top
transition from F major to A7—“gratuitous” since F major and A7 are harmonically
quite close, and do not require the intermediation of a Cs chord.13
There is, in fact, an interesting precedent for these sorts of major-third juxtapositions: in both baroque and classical music, one occasionally ﬁnds major-third-related
triads across phrase boundaries (Figure 8.4.3). Typically, the earlier phrase ends with
a half cadence on the dominant of the relative minor, while the next phrase begins

12 Note that the progression from Cs to A7 uses the standard German-sixth resolution in retrograde.
13 A classical composer would have no problem moving directly from F major to A7, the dominant of
the relative minor.

282

history and analysis

Figure 8.4.3
Cross-phrase
mediant
progressions in
Bach (Riemenschneider chorale
163) (a) and
Mozart (K280,
III, 104) (b).

directly with a tonic.14 We can understand these progressions as exhibiting an attenuated dominant-tonic functionality: the ﬁfth of the dominant is the leading tone of
the relative major, rising by semitone to the root of the subsequent tonic triad, while
the third of the dominant acts enharmonically as f^6, falling semitonally to the ﬁfth
of the subsequent tonic. Schubert in effect liberates these major-third juxtapositions
from their traditional role, allowing them to occur within phrases rather than across
phrase boundaries, and weakening their status as pseudo-dominants. (In particular,
the speed of the sonata’s juxtapositions make it hard to hear the chords as tonally
functional.) Here, as elsewhere, the boundaries between musical styles are somewhat
porous: it is not so much that Schubert uses absolutely new progressions, never used
by his predecessors, but rather that he uses familiar progressions in unfamiliar ways.
Figure 8.4.4 contains two sequences from Schubert’s Quartett-Satz in C minor,
D. 703, which make a more subtle use of the major-third system. In both cases,
descending stepwise voice leading articulates unusual triadic progressions: the ﬁrst
is a sequence of I–V progressions that descend by major second, while the second
moves upward by ﬁfths from G major to G minor to D major to D minor, and so
on.15 (This latter sequence is somewhat reminiscent of the central section of Schoenberg’s “Erwartung” in Figure 8.3.3.) Geometrically, the two sequences present different ways of moving downward, level by level, along the cubic lattice in three-note
chord space (Figure 8.4.5). Using only major chords, there are six possible sequences
that can be formed in this way, each of which can be derived by applying major-third

14 This gesture is particularly common at the beginning of sonata-form recapitulations, though it can
be found elsewhere as well. See, among many examples, the end of the development of Clementi’s G major
sonata, Op. 25 No. 2, I, and the opening of Beethoven’s F major sonata, Op. 10 No. 2, I, mm. 17–18. The
Decemberists’ song “The Legionnaire’s Lament” includes two cross-phrase mediants: the verse, d–F–g7–A,
ends on a V that progresses directly to the relative major, while the chorus, F–C–g–Bf–bf, ends on a iv that
progresses back to the relative minor.
15 A number of other passages in the piece involve stepwise descending voice leading, including the
opening measures, the accompaniment to the second theme, and the ascending step sequence at m. 70ff.

Chromaticism
Figure 8.4.4 Descending triadic sequences in Schubert’s Quartett-Satz, D. 703, m. 173ff
(a) and m. 105ff (b). (The second has been transposed up by minor third to facilitate
comparison.) The sequences can be derived by applying “major-third substitution” to a
chromatic descending sequence.

substitution to a sequence of semitonally descending triads.16 (Cf. the right side of
Figure 8.4.4, where the semitonal sequences are in the top row, and the various third
substitutes are contained on the lower lines.) If we allow minor chords, there are nine
possible two-chord sequences, which can again be derived by applying major-third
substitution to a more straightforward chromatic sequence.
The underlying principle here is related to an idea that we encountered in §7.2:
since major-third-related triads can be connected by efﬁcient voice leading, they can
substitute for one another without much disrupting the music’s contrapuntal or harmonic fabric.17 In other words, we are concerned here with the chromatic analogue to
the diatonic third substitutions found in functional harmony. When compared to the
diatonic version, chromatic third substitution is of course signiﬁcantly more disruptive: C major and E major are nowhere near as similar as IV6 and vi, and the resulting
sequences are harmonically quite distinct. Nevertheless, the descending voice leading
does create a clear sense of family resemblance—a palpable sinking feeling that contrasts with the buoyant harmony. This quality can be used to great effect, particularly in
passages that try to convey a melancholic or gloomy mood. For example, in Goffin and
King’s “Natural Woman” (made famous by Aretha Franklin) the “up a fifth, up a minor
third” sequence represents the narrator’s psychic anomie, while in “Hey Joe” (asso-

16 Here I am considering only sequences whose repeating unit is one or two chords long.
17 Diatonic third substitution has a less dramatic effect on harmony than chromatic major-third
substitution. In replacing Fs major with Ds minor (or replacing IV with ii6), we preserve two of the original chord’s notes; in replacing Fs major with D major (as in the sequence we are considering), we preserve
fewer notes, creating a much more dramatic harmonic change.

283

284
Figure 8.4.5
Schubert’s
sequences as
they move along
the lattice at the
center of threenote chord space.
The solid line is
the sequence in
Figure 8.4.4a, the
dashed line is
the sequence in
Figure 8.4.4b.

history and analysis

ciated with Jimi Hendrix, and possibly
written by Billy Roberts) the progression C maj–G maj–D maj–A maj–E maj
implies descending voice leading that
elegantly mirrors the narrator’s descent
into murderous depravity.

8.5

chopin’s tesseract

Figure 8.5.1 shows the opening of
Chopin’s F minor Mazurka, Op. 68
No. 4 (1849?), perhaps the last piece
he ever composed.18 The music is
blurred and chromatic, moving
through a series of dominant seventh
chords without articulating a clear
tonal center. Beneath the music, I have
provided a reduction of its basic harmonies. In constructing this analysis, I
considered the left-hand notes on the
third beat of each measure to sound
through the following ﬁrst-beat rest—
thus, for example, I imagine that {G,
Df, F} still sounds at the downbeat of
measure 3.
My analysis portrays the piece as moving through a series of numbered “cycles”
that transpose a dominant seventh chord by a staggered series of single-semitone
descents. For example, the third cycle, shown on the third staff, moves F7 to E7 by
lowering the ﬁfth (C®Cf), third (A®Af), seventh (Ef®D), and root (F®E) in turn.
The music thus exhibits an interesting combination of freedom and constraint. If
we look only at the ﬁrst chord in each cycle, we see a straightforward sequence of
semitonally descending chords: G7, Gf7, F7, and E7. However, if we look at the voiceleading motions within each cycle, we do not recognize a regular pattern: sometimes
the third moves ﬁrst (as in Cycles 1 and 3), and sometimes the ﬁfth moves ﬁrst (Cycle
4). In other cases, Chopin moves two voices at the same time—as in Cycle 2, where
the ﬁfth and seventh descend simultaneously.
Furthermore, in the second phrase of the piece, shown on the bottom staff of the
example, Chopin repeats the basic sequence of dominant sevenths, but embellishes

18 Kallberg (1985) presents some interesting but circumstantial evidence that the piece was composed
earlier.

Chromaticism
Figure 8.5.1 An analysis of Chopin’s Mazurka, Op. 68 No. 4. The harmonies form a series
of cycles which are labeled numerically: chords 1a, 1b, and 1c belong to the ﬁrst cycle,
chords 2a, 2c, and 2d belong to the second, and so on.

them slightly differently. The music thus seems to embody what twentieth-century
composers would call an “open form”—a set of rules that only partially determine the
musical result, of the sort that might be used as the basis for improvisation. This combination of freedom and constraint challenges the formal categories that we typically
use to describe nineteenth-century music: the harmonic progression here is neither
an exact sequence, in which the same music is repeated verbatim, nor free composition. Instead, it resembles the kind of open-ended musical game more commonly
associated with recent music.
To describe the game’s rules, we need to recognize that the piece exhibits a rather
subtle kind of harmonic consistency: throughout, we hear only dominant sevenths,
diminished sevenths, minor sevenths, half-diminished sevenths, and French sixth
chords. In particular, there are no nontertian sonorities such as {Gf, A, C, F} and no
chords with major sevenths. This harmonic consistency results in turn from a subtle
contrapuntal regularity: within each cycle, the root is always the last note to descend.
(Were Chopin to violate this rule he would generate strange harmonies, such as
those in Figure 8.5.2.) We can thus imagine Chopin creating the piece by following
the instructions in Figure 8.5.3. What is ﬁxed is the descending chromatic sequence
of dominant sevenths, along with the injunction that the bass voice descends last;
what is free is the precise order of the semitonal motions in the other voices. Since
Chopin was in fact an improvising composer, it is quite possible that these rules
capture something about how he was thinking: indeed, it is easy to imagine him sitting at the piano, exploring the various ways of sliding between semitonally related
dominant seventh chords.19
Figure 8.5.4 uses a cube to represent Chopin’s “open form.” The G dominant seventh appears at the apex, while the next level contains minor sevenths on G and E

19 A daring performer might choose to reﬂect this by departing from the written notes in favor of an
improvisatory tour through Chopin’s musical space—a performance that would be unfaithful to the written notation while also capturing something about his musical concerns.

285

286

history and analysis
Figure 8.5.2 In Chopin’s piece, the root of
the chord always descends after the other
voices. If this rule were violated, unusual
harmonies would result. These chords
cannot be conceived as stacks of thirds, and
are very rare in nineteenth-century music.

Figure 8.5.3 The “directions
for improvisation” that might
produce Chopin’s F minor
Mazurka.

Figure 8.5.4
A geometrical
representation
of Chopin’s
“directions for
improvisation.”

F Minor Mazurka
1. Begin with a dominant seventh chord.
2. Successively lower the third, fifth, and seventh of
the chord by semitone, in any order, eventually
producing a diminished seventh chord.
3. Lower the note of diminished seventh chord that
was the root of the initial dominant seventh,
producing a new dominant seventh chord a
semitone lower than the original.
4. Repeat.
Bonus rule: it is possible to eliminate one or more
chords in the resulting sequence, lowering multiple
notes by semitone at the same time.

and a French sixth on G/Cs (labeled “gFr” on the ﬁgure). Each of these chords can be
reached by semitonally lowering a note of the initial G7. Level 1c contains half-diminished seventh chords on Cs, E, and G. (Again, these chords can be reached by lowering a note in a chord on level 1b.) The G diminished seventh appears at the bottom of
the cube and is the only chord on level 1d. Finally, there is a line leading from the
base of the cube to Gf7, signifying that the process begins again,
a semitone below the original G7
chord. (Hence the label “2a.”) A
musician improvising according to Chopin’s directions must
follow the edges of the cube in
a descending manner, from level
1a to 1b to 1c and 1d: at the
apex of the cube there are three
choices, since one can lower the
third, ﬁfth, or seventh. Having
made that choice, there are two
remaining options, corresponding to the two voices that have yet
to descend. Finally, there is just a
single possibility, which takes us
to the diminished seventh chord
at the bottom of the cube. Here

Chromaticism

287

again, the improviser’s hand is forced, since there is only one semitonal descent that
transforms the G diminished seventh into the Gf dominant seventh. This cubic
geometry thus encapsulates in a single image rules that would otherwise require careful verbal speciﬁcation—presenting a kind of musical “game board” whose internal
structure mirrors Chopin’s presumed compositional process.
So far, we have been treating the F minor Mazurka as an object in itself, unconnected to the rest of Chopin’s oeuvre. Things get more interesting when we observe
that the mazurka is a virtual rewriting of one of Chopin’s most famous pieces—the
E minor Prelude, Op. 28 No. 4. Remarkably, the two pieces use virtually the same
voice-leading procedures to embellish very different harmonic sequences. To see how
this works, consider Figure 8.5.5, which presents the chords in the prelude’s opening
phrase. Here again, the music is organized in a sequence of cycles, each transforming
one dominant seventh into another by way of a diminished seventh.20 Chopin again
lowers third, ﬁfth, and seventh of the initial dominant seventh until he has created
a diminished seventh on the same root; this time, however, he joins the successive
cycles by lowering the voice that contained the ﬁfth of the original dominant seventh
chord, so that the resulting dominant sevenths descend by ﬁfth rather than by semitone. As in the F minor Mazurka, we ﬁnd a recognizable progression when we consider only the ﬁrst chord in each cycle. But between these harmonic pillars the piece
freely interpolates descending semitones, resulting in a liquid, Romantic texture that
utterly disguises its sequential skeleton.21
Figure 8.5.5
The opening
of Chopin’s E
minor Prelude,
Op. 28 No. 4.

20 In making this reduction, I have eliminated the upper neighbor tones in the right hand on the fourth
beat of each measure, as well as the En suspension in the alto voice of measure 2; otherwise, I have simply
transcribed every vertical sonority that appears in the passage.
21 The interpretation I present here is similar to that in Marciej Golab’s Chopins Harmonik: Chromatik in ihrer Beziehung zur Tonalität (Golab 1995). (See also Callender 2007 for some brief but suggestive
remarks and Russ 2007 for an extensive discussion of semitonal voice leading between half-diminished and
dominant sevenths, including references to several of the pieces discussed here.) Many published analyses interpret the E minor Prelude as a chain of parallel, ﬁrst-inversion triads in the left hand, decorated
with suspensions (Parks 1976, Schachter 1994). Sometimes it is implied that the harmonic content of the
opening phrase is insigniﬁcant—a long chromatic series of passing tones from the “structural” opening
tonic chord to the “structural” dominant that closes the phrase. By contrast I interpret the piece as a fourvoice texture exemplifying one of the most basic progressions in all of tonal music—the descending-ﬁfths
sequence, albeit freely embellished by chromatic passing tones.

288

history and analysis
Figure 8.5.6 A comparison between the two “directions for improvisation.”

F M i n o r M a zu r k a
1. Begin with a dominant seventh chord.
2. Successively lower the third, fifth, and seventh of
the chord by semitone, in any order, eventually
producing a diminished seventh chord.
3. Lower the note of the diminished seventh chord
that was the root of the initial dominant seventh,
producing a new dominant seventh chord a
semitone lower than the original.
4. Repeat.
Bonus rule: it is possible to eliminate one or more
chords in the resulting sequence, lowering multiple
notes by semitone at the same time.

E Minor Prelude
1. Begin with a dominant seventh chord.
2. Successively lower the third, fifth, and seventh of
the chord by semitone, in any order, eventually
producing a diminished seventh chord.
3. Lower the note of the diminished seventh chord
a semitone below the fifth of the initial dominant
seventh, producing a new dominant seventh chord
a perfect fifth lower than the original.
4. Repeat.
Bonus rule: it is possible to eliminate one or more
chords in the resulting sequence, lowering multiple
notes by semitone at the same time.

Figure 8.5.6 contrasts the directions for improvisation that might produce the prelude and the mazurka. The similarities are striking: in both cases, the third, ﬁfth, and
seventh of the dominant seventh chord move down by semitone until they produce a
diminished seventh chord. At this point, one of the notes of the diminished seventh
moves down to produce another dominant seventh. The chief difference lies here: in
the F minor Mazurka, Chopin always lowers the note in the voice that contained the
root of the original dominant seventh chord, producing a semitonally descending
sequence; in the E minor Prelude, Chopin lowers the note that is in the voice that
contained the ﬁfth of the dominant seventh chord. This small change is enough to
make the difference between descending semitones and descending ﬁfths.
Of course, the diminished seventh chord is completely symmetrical, so we can
lower any of its four notes to produce a dominant seventh. Thus, there are two other
possibilities beyond those we have already considered: we could lower the voice that
contained the third of the original dominant seventh, producing a sequence that
ascends by major second; or we could lower the voice that contained the seventh of
the dominant seventh chord, producing a sequence that descends by major third.
The four possibilities are illustrated musically and geometrically in Figures 8.5.7 and
8.5.8. Once we have sensitized ourselves these possibilities, we start to ﬁnd them again
and again throughout Chopin’s music; indeed, they are a familiar “lick” to which he
repeatedly returned. Figure 8.5.9 shows a few of the many passages in which the lick
appears: the ﬁrst, from the A minor Mazurka, Op. 7 No. 2, combines the ascending
second and descending semitone versions of the sequence; the second, from the Fs
minor Mazurka, Op. 6 No. 1, largely descends by ﬁfths but ends with a descending
semitone; the third, from the Df major nocturne, Op. 27 No. 2, again mixes descending ﬁfths and descending semitones.
Although it is not completely obvious, the graph in Figure 8.5.8 is contained
within a structure that we encountered in §3.11: the tesseract, or four-dimensional
cube, lying at the center of four-note chromatic chord space (Figure 8.5.10). This
hypercube has four horizontal layers, as indicated by the labels “1a,” “1b,” “1c,” and
“1d,” and shares a vertex with the hypercube immediately below it, whose layers are

Chromaticism

289

Figure 8.5.7 There are four
fundamentally similar sequences
that can be formed using these
“directions for improvisation,”
depending on which of the
diminished seventh chord’s notes is
lowered.

labeled “2a,” “2b,” “2c,” and “2d.”
Essentially, Chopin’s two pieces
move down this hypercubic lattice by taking one or two steps
at a time. The resulting progressions are constrained by
the basic geometry of the space,
and in particular by the fact that
minor-third- and tritone-related
sevenths are near each another.
Thus Chopin’s descending semitonal motion will produce harmonic progressions that can be
obtained by applying minor-third
substitution to a descending semitonal sequence: this gives root
motions by descending semitone,
descending major third, descending ﬁfth, and ascending major
second. (By contrast, stepwise descending motion between triads produces root progressions by descending semitone, ascending ﬁfth, or ascending minor third, as we
saw in the previous section.22) The similarities between the Prelude and the Mazurka
therefore testify to a more fundamental similarity between descending-semitone and
descending-ﬁfth progressions—a relationship that lies at the root of the jazz “tritone
substitution,” illustrated here by Figure 8.5.11 and discussed further in Chapter 10.

22 The root progressions (−1, −5, and −9 semitones for triads; −1, −4, −7, and −10 semitones for seventh chords) are determined by the formula −1 (mod 12/n), where n is the size of the chord.

Figure 8.5.8 A
geometrical
representation
of the four
possibilities in
Figure 8.5.7.

290

history and analysis
Figure 8.5.9 The sequence as it appears in Chopin’s A minor Mazurka (a), Fs minor
Mazurka (b), and Df major Nocturne. In each analysis, the letters “a,” “b,” “c,” refer to levels
on the cubic structure shown in Figure 8.5.8; the numbers refer to adjacent cubes in the
lattice.

Since there is nothing particularly radical about the idea of using descending
voice leading to connect familiar seventh chords, we should not be too surprised
to ﬁnd similar passages in other composers’ music as well. Figure 8.5.12a shows a
sequence from the development of the ﬁrst movement of Mozart’s Symphony No.
40, in which seventh chords descend by ﬁfths. The harmonies, though more conventional than Chopin’s, can be generated by a series of one- and two-step motions

Chromaticism
Figure 8.5.10 The musical
possibilities we have been
exploring can be represented
using the four-dimensional
cubic lattice at the center of
four-note chord space. This
lattice is another (and more
complete) way of looking
at the possibilities in Figure
8.5.8.

Figure 8.5.11 Chopin’s F minor Mazurka and E minor
Prelude are related by way of a tritone substitution.
The mazurka is based on a semitonally descending
sequence of seventh chords (top line), while the
prelude uses a descending-ﬁfths sequence. One can
transform each sequence into the other by replacing
every other chord with its tritone transposition.

along the same tesseract.23 The passage in Figure 8.5.12b, from the second movement of Beethoven’s Piano Sonata in F major, Op. 54, is nicely intermediate between
Mozart and Chopin: here the dominant seventh chords descend once by semitone
and ﬁve times by perfect ﬁfth, returning to the initial Af7 after six complete cycles.
(Note the alternation between mazurka-like semitones and prelude-like ﬁfths, characteristic of jazz harmonic practice and tritone substitution more generally.) And
while Beethoven typically precedes each dominant seventh with a iiø7 chord, he also
interposes some additional chords, including a fully diminished seventh and a French
augmented sixth. Figure 8.5.13 collects a few related passages from early twentiethcentury American music, hinting at some of the connections between nineteenthcentury chromaticism and twentieth-century jazz.24
23 The pianist Al Tinney, one of the pioneers of bebop, suggested that dominant seventh chords resolving to predominant sevenths was a hallmark of the bebop harmonic style (Patrick 1983). It is interesting
to ﬁnd this bebop hallmark in Mozart!
24 For some other related passages, consider the “Cruciﬁxus” from Bach’s B minor Mass; Mozart’s Piano
Sonata K. 576, I, mm. 84ff and 137ff, which use the descending-ﬁfth and ascending-major-second versions
of the pattern; the opening of the second movement of Schubert’s “Rosamunde” Quartet (D. 804, Op. 29
No. 1, mm. 13–14); Schubert’s Quartett-Satz (D. 703, mm. 72–75), which uses a slightly disguised version
of the ascending-major-second pattern; and Wagner’s Tristan prelude, to be discussed below.

291

292

history and analysis
Figure 8.5.12 Precursors to Chopin’s procedures in (a) Mozart’s Symphony No. 40,
movement 1, start of the development section; and (b) Beethoven’s Piano Sonata Op. 54,
movement 2, mm. 64ff.

Figure 8.5.13 (a−c) In his 1898 operetta “The Serenade,” Victor Herbert uses chromatic
voice leading to connect dominant sevenths by way of various intermediaries. The examples
are from nos. 3a (Schuberth vocal score, p. 35), 4 (p. 46), and 5b (p. 59). (d) In “Shreveport
Stomp,” Jelly Roll Morton uses descending stepwise voice leading to connect dominant
sevenths.

Chromaticism

So did Chopin understand four-dimensional geometry? In one sense, the answer is
clearly “no”: certainly, he lacked the mathematical concepts we have used to dissect his
pieces, and he might have struggled to describe what he was doing in precise musictheoretical language. (Something similar could be said of Chopin’s mathematical contemporaries, as the study of higher dimensional geometry was in its infancy in the
1830s.) But at the same time, he clearly had a sophisticated intuitive understanding of
the musical possibilities in Figure 8.5.10, and hence had knowledge that can be usefully
described geometrically. (He may not have conceived of these possibilities as constituting a geometry, but they in fact do so, and his knowledge of the possibilities is in some
sense a geometrical knowledge.) I ﬁnd it marvelous to reﬂect that there was a period
in human history in which music provided the most powerful language for expressing this kind of higher dimensional understanding: though nobody in 1840 could
have written a treatise on four-dimensional quotient spaces, Chopin could express his
understanding of one particular quotient space by writing beautiful Romantic piano
music. Here there is something particularly compelling about the fact that Chopin
recomposed the E minor Prelude at the very end of his life, as if the earlier piece did
not say everything he had wanted to say. And in a sense, it could not, for the E minor
Prelude displays just one of many routes through the hypercubic lattice: ultimately, the
F minor Mazurka and E minor Prelude together demonstrate a much more profound
understanding of musical space than does either piece on its own.

8.6

the tristan prelude

Suppose you would like to ﬁnd efﬁcient (four-voice) voice leadings between halfdiminished and dominant seventh chords. The principle of avoiding voice crossings says that you can organize the relevant possibilities according to whether they
move the root of the half-diminished chord to the root, third, ﬁfth, or seventh of the
dominant seventh (§4.10). Figure 8.6.1 identiﬁes the most efﬁcient (four-voice) voice
leading from Fø7 to each of the twelve dominant sevenths: seven of the voice leadings involve just two semitones of total motion, one involves four single-semitone
motions, and the rest involve six total semitones. Putting these last voice leadings
aside, we see that the remaining eight can be grouped into pairs: two move root to
root, two move root to third, two move root to ﬁfth, and two move root to seventh. In
each case, one voice leading in the pair involves predominantly descending motion,
while the other involves predominantly ascending motion.
Figure 8.6.2 shows how these eight voice leadings are located in four-dimensional
chord space. Chords on the same vertical line participate in similar voice leadings: for
example, E7 and F7 lie directly above each other, and the minimal voice leading from
Fø7 to both chords moves root to root. Similarly, Df7 and D7 lie directly above each
other and in both cases the minimal voice leading from Fø7 maps root to third.25 Note
25 Or to put the point the other way around: the four chords E7, G7, Bf7, and Df7, all of which lie on the
same horizontal plane on Figure 8.6.2, are most directly reached by different kinds of voice leadings: to transform Fø7 into E7, one moves root to root; to transform Fø7 into Df7, one moves root to third; and so on.

293

294

history and analysis
Figure 8.6.1 (a) Suppose you want to move from a Tristan chord to a dominant seventh by
efﬁcient voice leading. Which voice leading would you choose? (b) The most efﬁcient (fourvoice) voice leadings from the Fø7 chord to each of the twelve dominant sevenths.

that when moving from Fø7 to any of the lower four dominant seventh chords (E7, G7,
Bf7, and Df7) we can pass through F diminished along the way, but when moving to
the upper four dominant seventh chords (F7, Af7, B7, and D7) it is instead possible to
pass through minor sevenths and French sixths. Figure 8.6.3 presents two excerpts
from Wagner’s Tristan where these intervening sonorities appear.
Turning now to the opera’s prelude, we are dismayed to ﬁnd that its voice leadings
are not maximally efﬁcient. For example in Figure 8.6.4, the melody climbs yearningly
from Gs to B, while the tenor voice swoons from B down to Gs. Were each voice to
remain stationary, as in Figure 8.6.4b, we would have a two-semitone voice leading
between Fø7 and E7, one that is nicely modeled by our hypercube. But Wagner deliberately rejects this option in favor of an alternative in which the voices take the long
way to their destinations—suggesting that all our work on efﬁcient voice leadings has
been wasted!
Well, when confronting lemons, one should study the feasibility of lemonade.
Suppose we hypothesize that Wagner’s voice crossings decorate a deeper structure
in which efﬁcient voice leading is important. (This may seem like a stubborn refusal

Chromaticism

to face facts, but let’s see where
it takes us.) As we look through
the Tristan prelude, and indeed
through the rest of the opera, we
see that this perspective sheds
light on a number of passages:
for example, each of the progressions in Figure 8.6.5 can be
represented as an extremely efﬁcient voice leading that has been
embellished with a voice crossing.
(Note that the crossing always
involves three- or four-semitone
motion in two separate voices.26)
In other words, these examples
suggest that Wagner’s harmonic
choices are inﬂuenced by voiceleading relationships not directly
manifested by the surface of his
music. In particular, he seems to
avoid the four most distant dominant sevenths,
which require six-semitone voice leadings, in
favor of those that are
closer to the initial halfdiminished seventh.
Thinking a little
more about this, we
realize that the opera’s
omnipresent ascending
third motive is most
effectively realized as
an embellishment of an
efﬁcient “background”
voice leading. For suppose we would like
to ﬁnd a voice leading from Fø7 to E7 in
which at least one voice ascends chromatically by minor third. One possibility is to

26 The idea that these voice crossings are surface events is a relatively old one. For example, both William Mitchell (1973) and Robert Gauldin (1997) analyze the prelude’s opening voice leading by removing
crossings. See also Boretz 1972.

295
Figure 8.6.2 The
eight most
efﬁcient voice
leadings in
Figure 8.6.1
connect Fø7 to
the eight nearest
dominant
sevenths in
four-note chord
space. The two
voice leadings
represented by
the dotted lines
both map root to
root.

Figure 8.6.3 In
moving from
a Tristan to
half-diminished
seventh, Wagner
often passes
through one of
the intervening
chords in fournote chord space.

296
Figure 8.6.4
Unfortunately,
the actual voice
leadings in
Tristan often
have crossings.

history and analysis

use an interscalar transposition by
ascending step, in which case each of
the voices ascends (Figure 8.6.6). But
this is somewhat unsatisfactory, both
because it is inefﬁcient and because
the pervasive melodic motion distracts
from the ascending melody we would
like to highlight. It is more sensible to
begin with a voice leading in which
all the voices remain roughly ﬁxed in
register, embellishing it with a crossing
that yields the desired ascending third
motion. (Since we are using tertian sonorities it will typically be possible to ﬁnd such
a crossing.) Thus we arrive at the original “Tristan” voice leading, in which two voices

Figure 8.6.5 Other passages in Tristan that seem to embellish a crossing-free substrate: mm.
10–11 (a), mm. 22–23 (b), and m. 81 (c).

Figure 8.6.6 Suppose we would like to combine an Fø7–E7 progression with melody that
ascends chromatically by minor third. One possibility is to use an interscalar transposition by
ascending step (a), producing ascending motion in all four voices. Another possibility is to
begin with an efﬁcient voice leading (b), which is then embellished by a voice crossing (c).

Chromaticism

move efﬁciently, one falls discretely by third, and the ﬁnal voice presents the ascending chromatic leitmotif. In this sense, Wagner’s voice leadings, though not themselves
maximally efﬁcient, can be derived from more basic voice leadings that are crossing
free.
Figure 8.6.7 presents ﬁve voice leadings from the opening 20 measures of the
prelude, omitting the voice crossings as just discussed. The ﬁrst two are related by
(uniform) transposition at the minor third, and map the root of the Tristan chord
to the root of the succeeding dominant seventh. The third and fourth map the root
of the half-diminished to the third of the dominant seventh: the third sends Dø7 to
B7, moving each of the four voices by semitone; the fourth sends Fsø7 to D7, holding
three common tones ﬁxed.27 (We can also perhaps hear a ﬁfth voice leading from Fsø7
directly to G7, treating the D in the melody as an anticipation.) These examples suggest that Tristan begins with a relatively systematic exploration of the voice leadings
between half-diminished and dominant sevenths. In the opening measures of the
prelude, Wagner systematically shows us what his chord can do—rather like a traveling salesman eagerly demonstrating the capabilities of his new vacuum cleaner.

Figure 8.6.7 When we remove
Wagner’s voice crossings, we
typically end up with a highly
efﬁcient voice leading.

These opening voice leadings reappear throughout the opera, often without their
voice crossings. In Figure 8.6.8a, the root and seventh of the B half-diminished chord
move down by semitone, forming a Bf dominant seventh; this is the opening voice
leading, reregistered, shorn of its crossings, and transposed by tritone. In (b), which
occurs just prior to the preceding example, we ﬁnd the root, third, and ﬁfth of a Dø7
chord moving up by semitone, while the seventh moves down by way of a descending scalar run; this is the third voice leading in the prelude, using the very same pitch
classes. Finally, in (c), which occurs between the two previous examples, we see the
prelude’s fourth voice leading, where the seventh of the half-diminished chord moves
down by two semitones. (Note that the pitches here are those of the opera’s opening chord.) If we have sensitized ourselves to these voice-leading schemas, then the
resemblance to the start of the prelude will be quite striking, particularly since all
these later examples occur in short succession.

27 Some of you may consider the E to be a nonharmonic tone, but I would caution against an uncritical
use of the term. Throughout the prelude, nonharmonic tones conspire to produce a sounding half-diminished seventh chord; this conspiracy is what needs to be explained. Furthermore, later passages—such
as the beginning of Act I, Scene IV—emphasize this particular voice leading to the point where the halfdiminished seventh seems more clearly “harmonic.”

297

298

history and analysis
Figure 8.6.8 The voice-leading schemas in the Prelude return many times throughout the
opera. These three passages are taken from Act I, scene iii: (a) p. 51/98, (b) p. 49/96, (c) p. 49/95.
(Page numbers refer to the Schirmer vocal score and Dover full score, respectively.)

Note that in the beginning of the prelude it is the half-diminished chords, rather
than the dominant sevenths, that are harmonically anomalous: we expect E7, G7,
and B7 in an A minor context, but not Fø7, Gsø7, or Dø7. This might lead us to wonder whether these chords result from a process of “substitution,” whereby one halfdiminished seventh replaces another (cf. the major-third substitutions of §8.4). For
example, we might propose that Wagner applies a tritone substitution to the standard
Bø7–E7 progression, giving us the more remarkable Fø7–E7.28 The effect is to replace an
efﬁcient but traditional voice leading with an unfamiliar but equally efﬁcient alternative. In much the same way, the progression Dø7–B7 perhaps results from a majorthird substitution whereby a Dø7 appears in place of Fsø7. (Note that the geometry of
four-note space allows for both major-third and minor-third substitutions in this
context: given Fsø7–B7, one can obtain an efﬁcient voice leading by replacing Fsø7 with
either Dsø7 or Dø7.29) In fact, there are places in the opera where Wagner explicitly
engages in this sort of substitution: for example, Figure 8.6.9 shows a pair of passages

28 Hansen 1996 makes this observation.
29 This is because the dominant seventh chords in Figure 8.6.2 lie between two different “layers” of
half-diminished sevenths. The voice leading (Ds, Fs, A, Cs)®(Ds, Fs, A, B) involves more common tones
while (D, F, Af, C)®(Ds, Fs, A, B) involves smaller motions in the voices. Cook (2005) calls this latter voice
leading “extravagant,” since it moves every voice by semitone.

Chromaticism
Figure 8.6.9 “Tritone substitution” applied to Tristan chords in Wagner’s opera.

from the prelude, along with variants from the end of Act I, Scene III; in the variants,
the half-diminished seventh chords have been replaced by their tritone transpositions, exchanging a “Tristan progression” for a more prototypical iiø7–V7.
Formally, the prelude’s opening uses an AAB schema (“bar form”), with the A
and B sections featuring different resolutions of the Tristan chord: the progression
Fø7®E7 (A) is transposed up by minor third to produce Afø7®G7 (A), which is then
followed by the contrasting Dø7®B7 (B). Figure 8.6.10 shows that the same formal
schema returns midway through the prelude, where a trio of French sixths resolve
to dominant sevenths: the initial French sixth on Df resolves conventionally to C7;
this passage is then transposed exactly by major second; but in the third iteration,
the French sixth resolves to B7, a perfect ﬁfth away from the expected E7. (Although
it is not obvious, this alternate resolution is individually T-related to the preceding
two, with one voice moving upward by semitone, rather than the other three moving
down.) Here again we have the AAB schema, with the two A sections related by exact
transposition and the B section featuring an alternate resolution of the initial sonority. It is also relevant that the French sixths are minimal perturbations of the halfdiminished sevenths—a point that Wagner makes explicit at the end of the prelude,
when he repeats the music with the half-diminished {F, A, B, D} substituting for the
French sixth {F, A, B, Ds}.
The climax of the prelude, shown in Figure 8.6.11, articulates a series of predominant-dominant progressions, decorated with a variety of passing chords. The liquid,
semitonal voice leading here is strongly reminiscent of Chopin’s E minor Prelude, and
can in fact be modeled using the very same geometry. (Figure 8.6.12 shows a passage
from Act III, in which the relation to Chopin is even more clear.) The music reaches
a peak in mm. 81–83 (Figure 8.6.11a, last two measures), where two different resolutions of the “Tristan” chord compete: a standard iiø7–V7 resolution suggesting Ef

299

300

history and analysis
Figure 8.6.10 Measures 36ff of the prelude mirror the form of the opening: an initial voice
leading is transposed exactly, whereupon the opening chord type is resolved in a new way.
Here the initial chord is a French augmented sixth and the third voice leading is individually
T-related to the ﬁrst (b). Note that when this music repeats at the end of the prelude, Wagner
uses Dn instead of Ds in the second-to-last measure of (a).

j
œ œ. bœ #œ œ
œ . œ # œj œ
œ
j
j
œ. œ œ. œ œ j
b œ. œ œ. œ #œ œ #œ.
& œ œ. œ #œ œ nœ.
#œ œ
#œ.
œ.
( #) œ
nœ.
b œ.
.
œ
œ
œ
#
.
.
.
.
œ
b
œ
bœ.
œ. œ.
œ. œ.
œ.
# œœœ ...
# œœ ..
? b œœ ..
œœ ..
bœ.
& œ.
œ.
? b œœ ..

œ.
#œ.
b œœ ..

œ.
bœ.
œœ ..

œ.

œ.
nœ.
# œœ ..

( #) œ .

œœ ..

œ.
#œ.
# œœ ..

rearrange voices

& # œœ ..
? œœ ..

œ.
#œ.
# œœ ..

œ.
œ.

#œ.
œ.
œœ ..

# œœ ..
T2

œ.
œ.
b œœ ..

œ.
bœ.
œœ ..

T1

minor, and the alternative resolution from the opera’s opening.30 This explicit statement of the Tristan chord’s multivalence, at the emotional highpoint of the prelude,
is a not-so-subtle clue that the music is in some sense “about” the various ways of
resolving the chord. It is difﬁcult to avoid investing this moment with symbolic signiﬁcance: the competition between resolutions is a competition between functional
orthodoxy and chromatic perversity, with the victorious Wagnerian resolution subverting musical propriety—much as Tristan and Isolde reject their social obligations
in favor of a doomed passion.
Figure 8.6.13 collects prominent Tristan-chord resolutions from the opera,
removing voice crossings and transposing so that they begin on the F half-diminished
chord. (All but two of these have appeared in previous examples; the sources for the
newcomers are given in Figure 8.6.14.) Comparing these to Figures 8.6.1b and 8.6.2,
we see that Wagner indeed makes use of the eight most efﬁcient Tristan resolutions—
exploiting all of the shortest pathways between half-diminished and dominant sev-

30 This procedure is reminiscent of traditional “pivot chord” modulations, in which a single chord
(here, the “Tristan chord”) is given two different harmonic interpretations.

Chromaticism

301

Figure 8.6.11 A reduction of two passages from the Tristan prelude, both of which move
along the lattice at the center of four-note chord space. Labels below each chord again show
how the music moves through the connected hypercubes. Where Chopin moves steadily
forward, Wagner moves backward and forward in a stuttering manner.

Figure 8.6.12
A passage from
Act III, Scene
I, p. 233/494
that can also
be described
using Chopin’s
techniques.

enth chords. To my mind, this suggests that the fundamental logic of the opera is a
contrapuntal logic, and that Figure 8.6.2 is indeed the space through which Wagner’s
music moves. And though time does not permit us to delve deeply into the prelude,
even this cursory sketch shows Wagner demonstrating a sophisticated understanding
of four-dimensional chord space: utilizing all of the most efﬁcient voice-leading possibilities from half-diminished to dominant seventh (Figure 8.6.13), substituting one
half-diminished chord for another (Figure 8.6.9), moving between chords by way of
their chromatic intermediaries (Figure 8.6.3), reusing the same basic contrapuntal
schema with different sonorities (Figure 8.6.10), and even reproducing the openended quasi-sequences of Chopin’s E minor prelude. Chromaticism here starts to
achieve an impressive degree of autonomy; loosening itself from tonal functionality,
it becomes an independent force with its own distinctive logic.

302

history and analysis

Figure 8.6.13
Resolutions of
the Tristan chord
from throughout
the opera.
Compare Figure
8.6.1b.

Figure 8.6.14
Two additional
resolutions
of the Tristan
chord from later
in the opera:
Act II, Scene 1,
p. 121/239 (root
to seventh) (a),
and Act II, Scene
2, p. 141/287
(root to ﬁfth) (b).

(a)

(b)

8.7

alternative approaches

I have argued that nineteenth-century composers exploit chromatic voice leading
as an alternative to traditional tonal syntax, citing a variety of musical passages as
evidence. But readers may legitimately wonder whether my examples establish the
broader point. After all, couldn’t it be that composers chose these chord progressions
for other reasons, applying the efﬁcient voice leading only as an afterthought? Why,
in other words, should we believe that voice leading helps explain or motivate the
examples I have chosen?
For speciﬁcity, let’s consider the F–Cs–A7 progression in Schubert’s D major
sonata (Figure 8.4.1). Over the years, theorists have advanced a variety of purely
harmonic explanations for progressions of this sort: Gregory Proctor, for example,
has argued that Romantic composers often exploited “equal divisions of the octave,”

Chromaticism

such as F-Cs-A; David Kopp has singled out “chromatic mediant relations,” in which
chord roots move by major or minor thirds; and Richard Cohn and Fred Lerdahl
have argued for the importance of hexatonic scales such as E-F-Gs-A-C-Cs.31 (Still
others, such as Suzannah Clark, emphasize common-tone retention rather than voice
leading proper: from this point of view, it is the shared F that motivates Schubert’s
move from F major to Cs major, and the shared Cs that links Cs major and A7.32)
These accounts suggest that the harmonic relations among Schubert’s chords may
be as important as their contrapuntal relations. To be sure, the passage does exhibit
efﬁcient voice leading—but then again, so does most other tonal music. Perhaps voice
leading is a secondary matter, subservient to deeper harmonic forces.
I can offer three responses. First, nineteenth-century music uses an enormous
variety of voice leadings between familiar tonal sonorities. Consider just the examples
in this chapter: the decorated functional progressions of §8.1, Schubert and Schoenberg’s nonstandard augmented sixths, Brahms’ and Wagner’s explorations of the
various resolutions of the Tristan chord, Chopin’s exquisite use of the hypercube at
the center of four-note chord space, and so on. As far as I know, nobody has ever
attempted to provide a purely harmonic explanation for these different chromatic
techniques. (Certainly, not all of them exhibit equal division of the octave, mediant
relationships, or the hexatonic scale.) Yet they seem to be importantly similar. Insofar
as we want to acknowledge this similarity, we need to accept that voice leading is a
motivating force in nineteenth-century music.
Second, as I have stressed, there are asymmetries between chromatic routines
involving triads and those involving seventh chords: in particular, triads very frequently move by major third, while seventh chords often move by minor third or
tritone. Where I explain this asymmetry using the intrinsic geometry of chord space,
the harmonic approach does not explain it at all: the assumption that composers were
concerned with equal divisions of the octave, mediant relations, or hexatonic scales
gives us no reason to think that triads should be any different from seventh chords.
From the harmonic perspective, the difference remains an unexplained mystery.
Third, voice leading can potentially explain the sorts of harmonic relationships
identiﬁed by theorists such as Proctor, Kopp, and Cohn. Suppose, for example, we
postulate that composers were interested in particularly efﬁcient voice leadings
between major triads or dominant seventh chords. A concern with voice-leading efﬁciency would therefore be expected to give rise to mediant relations of the sort Kopp
discusses: after all, geometry shows that triads are particularly close to their majorthird transpositions, while seventh chords are close to their minor-third and tritone
transpositions. Furthermore, by repeatedly exploiting these relationships, composers
will generate passages exhibiting Proctor’s “equal divisions.” (This is because major
and minor thirds evenly divide the twelve-semitone octave.) Finally, as we saw in
Chapter 4, the resulting progressions will necessarily produce subsets of hexatonic

31 Proctor 1978, Kopp 2002, Cohn 1996 and Lerdahl 2001. Cohn’s views are subtle, and also emphasize
voice leading
32 Clark 2002.

303

304

history and analysis

and octatonic scales.33 Thus, voice leading can potentially subsume the harmonic
explanations proposed by other theorists. From the standpoint of explanatory parsimony, then, it makes sense to focus on chromatic voice leading rather than these
derivative phenomena.
In saying this, I do not mean to suggest that a progression like Schubert’s
F–Cs–A7 is entirely contrapuntal, or that Schubert was 100% unconcerned with
harmonic relationships. As I stressed in Chapter 7, composers almost always think
simultaneously about harmony and counterpoint, and it is quite likely that Schubert
attached some genuinely harmonic signiﬁcance to major-third relations. (Indeed
for a composer who thinks seriously about voice leading, the C and Af major triads
will come to have an afﬁnity, even when they are juxtaposed in a way that hides
their contrapuntal connections.34) No doubt there are some chromatic passages in
nineteenth-century music that can be attributed to harmonic factors such as common-tone retention or mediant relations. Nevertheless, I think we have good general
reasons to prioritize voice leading over harmony: absent indications to the contrary,
it is reasonable to assume that a particular instance of efﬁcient voice leading is just
that—an example of a near-ubiquitous procedure that provided the principal nineteenth-century alternative to conventional functional syntax. Voice leading may not
be the last word in the analysis of nineteenth-century music, but it certainly is a very
reasonable starting point.

8.8

conclusion

The preceding pages should make it clear that I am not proposing a simple method
or rule for doing musical analysis: there is no royal road to musical understanding,
geometrical or otherwise. Instead, my claim is that appreciating the grammar of
nineteenth-century music requires a ﬂexible grasp of the various voice-leading possibilities among familiar triads and seventh chords. Chromatic composers were for
the most part extraordinarily intelligent people who spent their lives exploring the
resources of the piano keyboard. As a result, they developed a deep understanding of
the various contrapuntal routes from chord to chord.
Generally speaking, early nineteenth-century chromaticism tends to embellish
traditional tonal progressions. Over the following decades, chromatic procedures gain
autonomy, to the point where they eventually compete with or even supersede traditional principles: although Chopin’s E minor Prelude may be based on a descending
ﬁfths background, the descending semitonal chromaticism is much more salient. By

33 Recall in this connection that each cube in the center of three-note chromatic space contains chords
belonging to a single hexatonic scale, while each hypercube in the center of four-note chord space contains
chords belonging to a single octatonic scale (§3.11). Thus we can expect these scales to arise as the mere
byproduct of chromatic voice leading. Indeed I would suggest that in the nineteenth century this is often
the case: deliberate compositional exploration of these scales is largely a twentieth-century phenomenon.
34 In twentieth-century music one often ﬁnds direct juxtapositions of major-third-related triads in
which there is no efﬁcient voice leading; this is particularly common in Prokoﬁev, for example.

Chromaticism

the time of Wagner’s Tristan, the chromatic and the diatonic are in extremely delicate balance, with chromaticism at times threatening to eradicate tonal functionality
altogether. This is precisely what leads theorists to talk of late-nineteenth century
music as having a Janus-faced quality, combining a functional “ﬁrst practice” with a
chromatic “second practice.” (Cohn aptly draws an analogy to bilingual communities
in which speakers switch rapidly between languages, sometimes within the span of a
single sentence.35) Figure 8.8.1, from Strauss’ Salome, provides a sense of where this
development would eventually lead: here, familiar tonal concepts lose their purchase,

Figure 8.8.1 In Strauss’ Salome, extensive chromatic voice leading is accompanied by equally
chromatic melodic motion, leading to a saturated pitch-class space in which all twelve notes
are constantly in play.

35 See Cohn 2007.

305

306

history and analysis

as incessant chromatic voice leading produces a highly chromatic macroharmony
without any strong sense of tonal center.
In older histories of twentieth-century music, this trend toward increasing chromaticism is sometimes presented as inevitable, a simple matter of musicians following the signpost of Historical Progress. And in truth, the claim of inevitability
is not obviously wrong: for insofar as chromatic techniques are used incessantly, as
in Salome, the result will be textures whose tonality can be quite difﬁcult to discern.
From here it is a relatively small step to the more robustly atonal works of the second
Viennese school. (Indeed, Chapter 5 already broached this thought, pointing out that
chromatic tonality and free atonality often share similar statistical proﬁles, including
similar rates of pitch-class circulation and a similar absence of centricity.) Musicians
who recoiled from these post-Wagnerian extremes, but who did not want to write
traditional music, would therefore need to go back to the drawing board, devising
new approaches that could coexist more peacefully with our ﬁve basic components
of tonality.

chapter 9

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music
While nineteenth-century chordal procedures can be stunningly sophisticated, the
exploration of modality and nondiatonic scales tends to be relatively cautious by
comparison. As a result, the music often has an asymmetrical quality, combining
intensive investigation in one domain with a seeming indifference toward another.
Indeed, this asymmetry between chord and scale may help to explain why latenineteenth-century composers start to ﬂirt with atonality: for as we have just seen,
omnipresent chromatic voice leading can start to weaken the sense of centricity and
macroharmony, dissolving tonality in the universal solvent of semitonal motion.
Insofar as one’s musical world is circumscribed by the opposition between chromatic
counterpoint and functional harmony, and insofar as one resolves to avoid functional
harmony altogether, then one will inevitably be driven out onto the seas of relentless
chromaticism.
In this chapter I consider three techniques that twentieth-century composers
used to counteract chromaticism’s pull. The ﬁrst, chord-ﬁrst composition, exploits
efﬁcient chordal voice leading to generate a sequence of otherwise unrelated scales;
it thus augments nineteenth-century chordal procedures with additional scales that
piggyback on the chordal level. The second technique, scale-ﬁrst composition, uses
efﬁcient voice leading to connect scales rather than chords; the technique thus generalizes traditional modulation by extending nineteenth-century chordal practices
to a new scalar domain. Finally, there is the subset technique, which links scales by
way of common chords or common chord types. As we will see, this last technique is
intermediate between the ﬁrst two: when the shared subsets are small and chordlike,
it can be understood as a species of chord-ﬁrst composition; when they are large, it is
closer to scale-ﬁrst composition.
My ultimate goal here is to propose an alternative to historical narratives that
center on atonality and the avant garde. Reading these accounts, one sometimes
gets the sense that twentieth-century tonality is fundamentally static and backward-looking, as if the language had remained unchanged since the time of Brahms
and Wagner. My own view, by contrast, is that the nineteenth century bequeathed
a genuine and pressing problem to subsequent composers, namely synthesizing its
contrapuntal innovations with the ﬁve components discussed in Chapter 1. As we
will see, a large number of twentieth-century musicians solved this problem in an
essentially similar way, using scales to ameliorate the destabilizing effects of chromatic motion. To my ear, the result is a tonality that is renewed, refreshed, and

308

history and analysis

clearly distinct from that of earlier centuries: listening to Debussy or Miles Davis or
Steve Reich, one recognizes a genuinely novel approach in which scales play a new
and fundamental role.

9.1

Figure 9.1.1
Scale-ﬁrst and
chord-ﬁrst
composition.

three scalar techniques

Central to all three techniques is what jazz theorists call the principle of chord-scale
compatibility, illustrated in Figure 9.1.1. Here, chords are understood as subsets of
familiar ﬁve-to-eight-note scales. (Jazz theorists would say that the chord and scale
are “compatible.”) Given this two-tiered structure, it is possible for one element to
take the lead, determining the changes that occur on the other level. This relationship
might be compared to that between harmony and counterpoint: although both elements are important, passages can
be more harmonic or more contrascale first
scale
scale
puntal, depending on which property seems to be controlling the
music at a particular time. In much
chord first
the same way, chord and scale can
chord
chord
at different points seize control over
the music’s fundamental logic.
A key component of this
approach is that scales are understood to be more than mere byproducts—that is,
they are recognizable objects in themselves, with their own syntactical role to play.
The top staff of Figure 9.1.2 provides an example in which scales might be described
as derivative: the second chord, with Af and Fs, is accompanied by the unusual
scale C-D-E-Fs-G-Af-B; the third chord, with Ds, is accompanied by the equally
unusual C-Ds-E-F-G-A-B. In this passage, the scales are parasitic on the chords,
being determined by the chordal accidentals; no attempt is made to produce a scale
that divides the octave evenly, or contains a large number of consonances, or possesses any of the other virtues discussed in Chapters 4 and 5. By contrast, the second staff accompanies the same chords with collections that possess desirable scalar
qualities. The presence of these “virtuous” scales suggests a compositional mind that
is attuned to both the chordal and scalar levels—a musical “twofoldness” that is our
current concern.
Turning now to the techniques themselves, in chord-ﬁrst composition, the chordal
level predominates: thus, an efﬁcient voice leading like (E, Gs, B, D)®(F, Af, Bf, D)
might give rise to an E acoustic scale (containing E7) followed by a Bf mixolydian
scale (containing Bf7). The second of Scriabin’s Op. 48 Preludes, composed in 1905,
provides a particularly clear example (Figure 9.1.3). The three upper voices contain a
standard nineteenth-century progression in which semitonal voice leading connects
D minor, Bf minor, and an incomplete C major seventh, C-E-B; however, Scriabin
departs from post-Wagnerian practice by assigning a different scale to each chord.
Chords seem to be leading the scales in the following sense: we can easily imagine

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music
Figure 9.1.2 The unfamiliar scales in the top staff simply apply the chords’ accidentals to the
underlying C diatonic collection, and do not suggest particular attentiveness toward scales as
such; by contrast, those on the second staff are quite familiar, and exhibit many of the virtues
discussed in Chapter 4.

Figure 9.1.3 Scriabin’s
prelude, Op. 48 No. 2,
in which efﬁcient voice
leading in the upper staff
gives rise to a series of
scales.

composing the efﬁcient chordal voice leadings prior to the scales, but it is much more
difﬁcult to imagine starting with the F, Df, and G diatonic scales, composing the
chords only later.1
By contrast, in scale-ﬁrst composition, music progresses by way of efﬁcient voice
leading between scales themselves. The opening of Ravel’s Ondine, shown in Figure
9.1.4, begins with a shimmering wash featuring the Cs mode of B acoustic, Cs-DsEs-Fs-Gs-A-B (“Cs mixolydian f6”).2 A series of single-semitone changes creates,
successively, Cs harmonic major, Cs diatonic, and Gs acoustic. (Note that many
of these collections are incomplete.) Unlike Scriabin’s piece, one gets the sense of a
distinctively scalar logic, as if Ravel deliberately moved between closely related scales
by changing one or two notes at a time. Figure 9.1.5 uses our familiar scale lattice to

1 Note that I am considering the notes As, Cs, and Ef to be nonharmonic.
2 See also Tymoczko 1997.

309

310

history and analysis
Figure 9.1.4 The opening of Ravel’s “Ondine,” from Gaspard de la nuit, suggests a series of
single-semitone voice leadings among familiar scales.

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music
Figure 9.1.5 Ravel’s
scales plotted on the
scale lattice.

show that Ravel systematically explores a small region of the space, moving between
nearby collections. This is just the efﬁcient chromatic voice leading of Chapter 8,
applied now to scales rather than chords.
Finally, the subset technique juxtaposes scales sharing some contextually salient set
of notes. For example, Debussy’s “Collines d’Anacapri” presents the opening pentatonic theme B-Fs-Cs-E-Gs-B in three distinct scalar contexts: B diatonic, E diatonic,
and E acoustic (Figure 9.1.6).3 One could say that the music has ﬁve “ﬁxed” scale
degrees (B, Cs, E, Fs, Gs) and two “mobile” degrees (D/Ds and A/As). This technique
can sometimes be hard to distinguish from the scale-ﬁrst technique: for example,
since all three scales in Figure 9.1.6 can be linked by efﬁcient voice leading, one could
in principle say that the music exempliﬁes scale-ﬁrst composition. But it is important
here that the “ﬁxed” collection comprises the main theme of the piece. In describing
this music as an example of the subset technique, I am therefore making the claim
that the subset relationship is more important than voice leading: common tones,
more than counterpoint, determine the modulations in the prelude.
Clearly, the subset technique is intermediate between the other two approaches.
When the subsets are small, we can think of the technique as a special case of chordﬁrst composition: where chord-ﬁrst composition features efﬁcient voice leading,
such as (C, E, G)®(B, E, Gs), the subset technique uses “trivial” voice leadings, such
as (C, E, G)®(C, E, G), in which all the voices are left unchanged. However, when
the subsets in question are large (as in “Collines d’Anacapri”) the subset technique
more closely resembles scale-ﬁrst composition. (This is simply because two scales
that share a large number of notes can typically be linked by efﬁcient voice leading.)
Musical context is important here: when composers emphasize the ﬁxed subset—for

3 See Tymoczko 2004 and Kopp 1997 for more thorough analyses.

311

312

history and analysis
Figure 9.1.6 In Debussy’s “Les collines d’Anacapri,” the pentatonic theme B-Fs-Cs-E-Gs-B
acts as a ﬁxed subset, and appears in the context of several different scales: B diatonic (a), E
diatonic (b), and E acoustic (c).

instance by using it in important themes or melodies—then we may want to highlight
shared subsets rather than voice leading; in other situations, however, it may be that
the voice-leading relationships are paramount. Thus the distinction between the subset technique and the others is one of emphasis rather than fundamental technique.
Of course, the three techniques all have their antecedents in earlier music. In the
nineteenth century, the chord-ﬁrst technique sometimes occurs across modulations:
for example, Figure 9.1.7 presents the modulation from exposition to development
in the ﬁrst movement of Schubert’s Bf-major sonata, D. 960; the semitonal voice
leading between F major and Cs minor chords drags the rest of the music along for
the ride, leading to a dramatic shift in scale and key. Chapter 7 argued that the scaleﬁrst technique is used in ordinary modulations between closely related keys. (That
is, the distance between keys is largely a function of the size of the voice leadings
between the relevant scales.) Figure 9.1.8 provides a rare nineteenth-century example
that employs nonstandard modes: here, the Cs phrygian theme of Chopin’s Mazurka,
Op. 41 No. 1, returns as the ﬁfth mode of Fs harmonic minor. Finally, Figure 9.1.9
presents an example of the subset technique, from Chopin’s Gf major Etude, Op. 10
No. 5. In this piece, the right hand plays only black keys, which act as a ﬁxed subset
contained in both the tonic dominant scales. (Again, the two scales are also related
by efﬁcient voice leading; the point is that Chopin emphasizes the ﬁxed subset compositionally.) These examples suggest that what is new in twentieth-century music is

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music

313

Figure 9.1.7 Chord-ﬁrst modulation in the transition from exposition to development of
Schubert’s Bf major Sonata, D. 960, movement I.

Figure 9.1.8 The scaleﬁrst technique in Chopin’s
Cs minor Mazurka, Op.
41 No. 1. The theme,
originally in Cs phrygian
(a), returns in the Cs
mode of Fs harmonic
minor (b).

Figure 9.1.9 The
subset technique
in Chopin’s Gf
major (“black
key”) Etude,
Op. 10 No. 5.
Throughout the
piece, the right
hand plays only
black keys, which
serve as a ﬁxed
subset common
to the two
primary scales in
the piece.

314

history and analysis

not the techniques themselves, but rather the willingness to apply them more consistently, more frequently, and to a much wider range of scales and modes.

9.2

chord-first composition

We’ll begin with examples in which the musical logic resides in chords rather than
scales: on their own, the scales need not have any particular signiﬁcance; instead, they
are related by virtue of the chords they contain.

9.2.1 Grieg’s “Drömmesyn” (“Vision”),
Op. 62 No. 5 (1895)
The opening of Grieg’s short piece, shown in Figure 9.2.1, is based on a progression
that uses descending semitonal voice leading to connect familiar seventh chords, one
that might easily appear in Chopin’s music. (In fact, it can be modeled on the fourdimensional lattice used in the previous chapter.) Unlike nineteenth-century composers, however, Grieg treats the chords as a skeleton to be ﬂeshed out by diatonic
scales. On their own, these scales would seem arbitrary, without discernable logic or
pattern. But when we consider the chords, their signiﬁcance is clear: the chords are
connected by semitonal voice leading, while the scales just happen to contain them.
A traditionalist might hear Grieg’s piece as moving successively through the keys
of A, Df, Gf, and C major. But to my ear, the seventh chords are stable objects in
themselves rather than unstable objects that need to resolve. This is, in part, because
of the piece’s static harmony and avoidance of V7–I resolutions. But it is also a function of the subtle and shifting relationship between melody, chord, and scale: in the
ﬁrst and third phrases, the melody starts on the added sixth of the underlying harmony, while in the second and fourth phrases, the melody starts on the chordal seventh. Furthermore, the chords themselves move relative to the purported tonic: the
bass of the ﬁrst chord is the ﬁrst scale degree of A major, the bass of the second chord
is the ﬁfth degree of Df major, and the bass of the third chord is the second degree of
Gf major. What results is an extremely subtle counterpoint between the scale, tonic,
and melody, in which the three elements never once move in parallel (Figure 9.2.2).
Given this complexity, my ear tends to gravitate toward the bass as the most stable
Figure 9.2.1 Grieg’s Lyric Piece “Drömmesyn”
(Vision), Op. 62 No. 5. The piece is built
around a series of efﬁcient voice leadings
between four-note chords (a), which give rise to
diatonic scales (b).

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music
Figure 9.2.1 (Continued)

Figure 9.2.2 Grieg’s piece articulates an abstract counterpoint between the melody’s starting
note, the diatonic collection, and the root or bass.

315

316

history and analysis

note—which means that I conceive the melody as successively beginning on the sixth
degree of A major, the seventh degree of Af mixolydian, the sixth degree of Af dorian,
and the seventh degree of G mixolydian.

9.2.2 Debussy’s “Fêtes” (1899)
Figure 9.2.3 outlines the basic voice leading in the central section of “Fêtes,” the second of Debussy’s orchestral Nocturnes. The music is largely sequential, with its 16-bar
model divided into two eight-bar halves. The harmonies in the ﬁrst half of the second
16-bar unit (chords 9–12 on the example) are transposed up by minor third, while
the rest of the phrase is transposed by tritone: instead of Bø7–G7–Bø7–Gs°7, we hear
Dø7–Bf7–Dø7–B°7. The last 16 bars of the section repeat the harmonies of the ﬁrst 16
bars, but now accompanied by the movement’s opening theme—a running scalar
passage featuring Gf, Ef, and A diatonic (Figure 9.2.4). As in Grieg’s piece, the theme
remains ﬁxed in register, beginning twice on Bf despite the change from Df7 to Bf7.
Figure 9.2.3
Voice leadings
in the middle
section of “Fêtes.”
Each measure
represents four
bars of music.

Figure 9.2.4
In the third
phrase of the
middle section
of “Fêtes,”
the opening
chords return,
though now
accompanied
by scales
articulating the
movement’s
main theme.

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music

Thus it begins successively on the third degree of Gf diatonic, the ﬁfth degree of Ef
diatonic, and the third and seventh degrees of A diatonic.
Figure 9.2.3 indicates the relevant interscalar transposition under each voice leading from half-diminished to dominant seventh. (Voice leadings from dominant seventh to half-diminished use a backwards arrow, labeling relative to the root of the
half-diminished chord.) We see that the music exploits all of the different types of
(crossing-free) voice leadings between the two types of chord, mapping the root of
the half-diminished to the third, ﬁfth, seventh, and root of the dominant seventh.4
The technique here is essentially that of Wagner’s Tristan, albeit now accompanied
by a variety of diatonic modes. It follows that we can use our four-dimensional geometrical models to describe the passage: Figure 9.2.5 shows that Debussy’s chords lie
on the adjacent vertices of two hypercubes, with the half-diminished sevenths appearing just above the b°7 chord, and the dominant sevenths just below.5 The voice leading
connecting Fø7 to Df7 (as well as Gsø7 to E7, and Dø7 to Bf7) moves one note by two
semitones, and passes directly through the diminished seventh chord to the chord on
the other side.6 The remaining voice leadings, such as Fø7®Bf7 and Df7®Dø7, move
two notes by semitone, and do not pass through the diminished seventh chord.
The procedures in “Fêtes” can be found throughout Debussy’s compositions, and
are particularly salient in the Prelude to “The Afternoon of a Faun” (Figure 9.2.6). This
testiﬁes to a signiﬁcant degree of continuity between Wagnerian Romanticism and
Debussian impressionism: we ﬁnd the same fascination with half-diminished and
dominant seventh chords, and the same systematic use of the various voice leadings
connecting them.7 The big difference, to my mind, lies in the two composers’ attitude
toward scales. For Wagner, chromatic voice leading is just that—a chromatic technique that invariably brings the chromatic scale into play at the melodic level. For
Debussy, these chromatic voice leadings occur at a much slower rate, and give rise to

Figure 9.2.5 A geometrical depiction
of Debussy’s chords.

4 In the actual music, some of these voice leadings are slightly disguised.
5 Compare with Figure 8.5.10 to see how this ﬁgure is contained in the more familiar structure.
6 The fact that Debussy restricts himself to these chords strongly suggests that his harmonic choices
were motivated by voice-leading facts, even though the relevant voice leadings are sometimes disguised.
7 Cf. Holloway 1982 and Pople 2001.

317

318

history and analysis
Figure 9.2.6 Efﬁcient voice leadings between half-diminished and dominant seventh chords
in Debussy’s Prelude to “The Afternoon of a Faun”: mm. 6–9 (a), 17–19 (b), and 44–46 (c).

additional scales at the musical surface. By remaining in a single scale for a signiﬁcant
length of time, Debussy endows his music with a simple, classicist quality that is in
marked contrast to the relentless churning of Wagnerian chromaticism.

9.2.3 Michael Nyman’s “The Mood That
Passes Through You” (1993)
For a more contemporary example, we turn to one of Michael Nyman’s cues for the
movie The Piano. Nyman’s music is not so much a traditional “piece” as it is a vignette
or musical moment, meant to fulﬁll a speciﬁc dramatic need. (Part of its interest, in
fact, lies in its vernacular quality, demonstrating that chord-ﬁrst composition has
become part of a broader common practice.) Figure 9.2.7 shows that the music has
two basic sections, each based on a repeating chord progression. In the ﬁrst, we hear

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music

Bf minor, D major, and E major triads, each in root position, and each lasting for two
measures. (Note that the right hand contains a concealed ostinato ﬁgure, indicated by
the beamed noteheads.) In the second, we hear a sequence of four descending triads,
ﬁrst gs6–e6–B@–A@, and then B–e6–B@–A@, with a root position B major triad substituting for the ﬁrst-inversion Gs minor. (This is of course the “third substitution” of
§7.2.) The voice leading is mostly parallel and owes more to popular music than to
classical. Nevertheless, it is easy to hear echoes of the nineteenth-century concern
for efﬁcient voice leading, particularly in the repeated juxtapositions of major-thirdrelated triads. Figure 9.2.8 shows that the ostensibly parallel voice leading articulates
semitonal connections in pitch space.
As in the previous example, chords give rise to scales at the musical surface. In the
ﬁrst part of the cue, the Bf minor triad is accompanied by Bf natural minor, while

Figure 9.2.7 Michael Nyman’s “The Mood that Passes Through You,” from the soundtrack to
the movie The Piano. The brackets indicate two instances of major-third juxtapositions: Bf
minor–D major, and Gs minor–E minor.

Figure 9.2.8 Nyman’s left-hand arpeggios articulate a semitonal voice leading between
major-third-related triads.

319

320

history and analysis

the D and E major triads are accompanied by A diatonic. In the second part, the Gs
minor and B major triads are accompanied by B diatonic, E minor is accompanied
by G acoustic, and A major is accompanied by D diatonic.8 (Of particular interest
here is the appearance of G acoustic, one of the most important nondiatonic collections in twentieth-century tonal music and a favorite of Debussy’s.) Once again,
the scalar logic seems secondary: it is chords rather than scales that are determining
the music’s progress.9 Comparable passages can be found throughout postminimalist music, in the works of composers such as Glass, Reich, Adams, Torke, and Lansky
(Figure 9.2.9).
Note that the major-third system appears in twentieth-century styles as
diverse as Russian modernism, American minimalism, and film music. (In particular, it plays a role in both Figures 9.2.7 and 9.2.9.) The progressions in our
examples—and in recent music more generally—are distinctive insofar as they
replace the major triads typical of Schubert’s music with minor triads that produce a more ominous and brooding sound, an effect that is often highlighted by
driving or asymmetrical rhythms. Figure 9.2.10, from Prokofiev’s Overture on
Hebrew Themes, exemplifies these qualities, juxtaposing Af minor, E major and
C minor triads over pulsating eighth notes.10 Figure 9.2.11 shows some related

Figure 9.2.9
Chord-ﬁrst
voice leading in
Adams’ Nixon
in China, Act
I, Scene I, mm.
141–148.

8 Most of the scales are incomplete—unsurprisingly, given the length of the excerpt.
9 However, it is true that G acoustic shares six notes with D diatonic, which in turn shares six notes
with A diatonic.
10 Thanks to Daniel Zimmerman for pointing me to this piece.

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music

321
Figure 9.2.10
Major-thirdrelated triads
in Prokoﬁev’s
Overture on
Hebrew Themes,
R42.

Figure 9.2.11
The major-third
system in (a)
the G minor
prelude from
Shostakovich’s
Twenty-four
Preludes and
Fugues, (b)
Philip Glass’
Einstein on the
Beach, and (c)
the opening
credits of the
2004 television
series Battlestar
Galactica.

322

history and analysis

passages from Shostakovich, Philip Glass, and television music, which combine
a Schubertian (or Wagnerian) harmonic sense with a rhythmic impulse whose
roots lie in Stravinsky and popular music.11 Taken together, they suggest a genealogy by which the major-third system passes from Schubert’s Vienna to contemporary America by way of Russian modernist composers like Prokofiev and
Shostakovich, acquiring in the process a darker, more ominous quality.

9.3

scale-first composition

Next, we’ll consider passages that extend nineteenth-century chordal techniques to
scales themselves, generalizing traditional modulation to a broader range of scales
and modes.

9.3.1 Debussy’s “Des Pas Sur La Neige”
(1910)
Figure 9.3.1 contains the score to Debussy’s “Des pas sur la neige” (“Footprints in the
Snow”). As shown in Figure 9.3.2, Debussy’s piece explores a collection of ﬁve closely
related scales, all containing the ostinato D-E-F.12 These can be considered a kind of
“tonic region,” since each provides a different coloring of a basically D minor tonality.
In addition, the piece also contains three other scales forming a contrasting harmonic
region—Af mixolydian, Af dorian, and C whole tone. The ﬁrst two are again related
by single-semitone voice leading, and emphasize Af, the note a tritone away from the
tonic D. None of these is particularly close to the ﬁrst network, and the two regions
are audibly quite distinct.
The ﬁrst transition between these regions is worth examining more closely.
In mm. 8–9, C7 alternates with Cs7, while in m. 11, G7 alternates with Gfmaj7 (Figure 9.3.3). This semitonal shifting leads us into the foreign scale area: the C7 of mm.
8–9 belongs to the F diatonic of mm. 1–3, while the Cs7 and Gfmaj7 belong to the
Gf diatonic of mm. 29–31. The next harmonic move, from Df diatonic to C whole
tone, occurs by way of the shared subset Gf-Af-Bf-C, emphasized by the left hand in
mm. 13–14. The subsequent whole-tone passage represents the piece’s greatest point
of distance from the opening diatonicism. The transition back to D natural minor
illustrates one of Debussy’s characteristic modulatory devices, the use of an acoustic
scale as an intermediary between whole-tone and diatonic collections. As shown in
Figure 9.3.3b, Bf acoustic shares ﬁve of the whole-tone scale’s six notes, while also

11 The overtly Romantic harmony in Figure 9.2.11c is unusual in Stravinsky’s own music.
12 For this reason, one could also consider Debussy’s piece as an example of the subset technique
described in §9.4. (This is essentially the approach taken in Tymoczko 1997.) However, successive scales
are typically linked by small voice leadings, suggesting that both techniques are in play.

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music

323
Figure 9.3.1
(1 of 2)
Debussy’s “Des
pas sur la neige.”

sharing six of the diatonic scale’s seven notes—a hybrid of whole tone and diatonic
that smoothes the transition between them.13
Figure 9.3.4 summarizes the relations among the prelude’s scales. On the left is the
tonic region, containing C and F diatonic, A and D harmonic minor, and Bf acoustic.
On the right we have the contrasting key area of Df and Gf diatonic, with C whole
13 See Whitall 1975.

324

history and analysis

Figure 9.3.1
(2 of 2)
Debussy’s “Des
pas sur la neige.”

tone connected to both regions. The music initially moves to the secondary region by
way of upward semitonal transposition, returning to the tonic area via the C wholetone scale. A substantial number of Debussy pieces are constructed around similar
networks of scales, including “Le vent dans la plaine,” “Les collines d’Anacapri,” “La
ﬁlle aux cheveaux de lin,” L’isle joyeuse, “Les sons et les parfums tournent dans l’air
du soir,” and “Voiles.” Indeed, Debussy’s use of these techniques is so pervasive and
systematic that one could easily write an entire book about the subject.14

14 For more, see Tymoczko 2004.

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music
Figure 9.3.2 The tonic region in “Des pas sur la neige” contains ﬁve scales that are near each
other on the scale lattice.

Figure 9.3.3 (a) The transition between the tonic (D-centered) scalar region and the
secondary (black-note) scalar region occurs by way of semitonal shift upward. (b) The
transition back occurs by way of the C whole-tone and Bf acoustic scales.

325

326

history and analysis

Figure 9.3.4
The scales in
“Des pas sur la
neige.”

9.3.2 Janáček’s “On an Overgrown Path,”
Series II, No. 1 (1908)
Janáček’s piece is similar in spirit to Debussy’s, though with a distinctive Eastern
European ﬂavor. Figure 9.3.5 provides the score for the opening, while Figure 9.3.6
summarizes its scalar content. The ﬁrst section uses a different scale for each phrase:
beginning with Ef harmonic major, we hear Ef harmonic minor, the Af “Gypsy”
scale (equivalent to Af harmonic minor with raised fourth scale degree), Ef major,
and what is either a whole-tone scale on Ef or the “Gypsy major” scale Ef-F-G-ABf-Cf-D. The next section changes the texture somewhat, introducing a pedal note
marked by triplet octaves. We hear a pair of diatonic collections (Cs dorian and Cs
natural minor) that are somewhat distant from the opening scales. Phrase 8 uses
interscalar transposition to shift phrase 7 into Ef harmonic major, creating a harmonic but not thematic recapitulation. Phrase 9 deepens the sense of recapitulation
by repeating the melodic and harmonic content of phrase 2, though with the initial
notes slightly altered (Ef-Gf-Ef rather than Ef-Af-F, reiterating the pattern established by phrase 1). Phrase 10 oscillates between Es and En, as if undecided between
B Gypsy and B harmonic minor.
Figure 9.3.6 arranges the piece’s eight scales into two networks, each connected by
single-semitone displacements. The tonic network contains scales that are a semitone
away from the initial Ef harmonic major, arranged in a hub-and-spoke design.15 The
15 If we were to examine seven-dimensional chord space, we would see that these “spokes” were all at
right angles to one another; since we cannot visualize seven dimensions, however, we need to ﬂatten the
space so that it lies in two dimensions.

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music
Figure 9.3.5 The opening of Janáček’s “On an Overgrown Path,” Series II, No. 1.

327

328

history and analysis

Figure 9.3.6
The scales in
Janáček’s piece.

nontonic network contains Cs dorian, Cs natural minor, B harmonic minor, and B
Gypsy, arranged like railroad cars rather than the spokes of a wheel. The two networks are closer together than those in Debussy’s prelude, since Cs dorian could be
connected to Ef harmonic minor by way of an Ef natural minor that does not appear
in the piece. Janáček’s scales are also somewhat more exotic, largely because he begins
with a harmonic major rather than diatonic collection; semitonal alteration thus generates a series of colorful scales that include Gypsy and Gypsy major.
Although somewhat tangential to our current concerns, it is worth noting that the
B section of Janáček’s piece recalls Chopin’s F minor Mazurka (Figure 9.3.7). Here we
have a 10-measure phrase in which a series of ﬁrst-inversion triads descend in a “staggered” fashion. (Note also the clever use of double counterpoint: the first half of the
melody begins on the ﬁfth of the underlying B minor triad, but the second half starts
on the root of the Gs minor triad.) Figure 9.3.8 represents its chords using the cubic lat-

Figure 9.3.7
The middle
section of
Janáček’s “On
an Overgrown
Path,” Series II,
No. 1.

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music
Figure 9.3.8 The middle section of Janáček’s piece, plotted on the portion of the cubic
lattice that is near (but not at) the center of three-note chord space. Here, capital and small
letters refer to major and minor triads, “b°” and “Bf+” are diminished and augmented triads,
“Df4” refers to the fourth chord Df-Gf-B, and “Df7” refers to the incomplete seventh chord
Df-F-Cf.

tice that is near (but not exactly at) the center of three-note chord space.16 Like Chopin,
Janáček traverses the lattice downward, by moving one, two, or three voices by step at
each turn, producing a “liqueﬁed” version of a familiar descending step sequence.

9.3.3 Shostakovich’s Fs Minor Prelude and
Fugue, Op. 87 (1950)
Traditional composers raised the notes of the natural minor to bring it closer to
major. Shostakovich, however, was more likely to lower its notes, creating unfamiliar “hyperminor” tonalities with a distinctive sinister character.17 Figure 9.3.9

16 The cubic lattice at the center of the space, shown in Figure 3.11.2a, contains augmented triads at
the shared vertex and major and minor triads elsewhere; the lattices adjacent to the center have major or
minor triads at the shared vertices, and contain a greater variety of chord types.
17 For more on Shostakovich’s scales, see Carpenter 1995.

329

330

history and analysis

shows that Fs natural minor offers four opportunities for semitonal lowering: the second scale degree
can be lowered to produce the phrygian mode;
the fourth can be lowered to produce a chromatic
mode I will call “natural minor f4”; the fifth can
be lowered to produce the Fs mode of D acoustic;
and the seventh can be lowered to produce another
chromatic mode with half-steps Cs-D-Ef (“natural
minor f7”). The remaining notes are not good candidates for alteration, since
lowering A or D would produce note duplications, while lowering Fs would
change the tonic.
The four lowerings can be combined to produce 16 different seven-note scales,
including Fs locrian (which lowers both Gs and Cs) and the Fs mode of G harmonic
minor (which lowers all four notes). We can represent these 16 possible combinations
with a familiar geometrical structure, the four-dimensional cube in Figure 9.3.10.

Figure 9.3.9 Fs natural
minor has four degrees that
can be lowered by semitone,
represented here by the
closed noteheads.

Figure 9.3.10 The four lowerings can be combined to produce sixteen scales, eight of which
appear in Shostakovich’s Fs minor Prelude and Fugue. I have labeled only the scales relevant
to Shostakovich’s piece.

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music

(This graph depicts a portion of seven-dimensional chord space, near but not at its
center.) Eight of its sixteen scales appear either in the prelude or in the opening of
the subsequent fugue, and Shostakovich does not employ any scales not found on the
ﬁgure.18 In this sense, the “scale tesseract” represents the modulatory space through
which Shostakovich moves.
Figure 9.3.11 shows the tonic-key passages from the prelude and the opening of
the fugue. The prelude begins with 18 measures of Fs aeolian, disrupted by brief

Figure 9.3.11 Tonic-key passages in Shostakovich’s Fs minor Prelude and Fugue. These involve
a progressive sequence of lowerings, leading ultimately to the harmonized fugue theme.

18 One possible exception is the B major chord on the second page of the prelude, which might be
thought to imply Fs dorian. However, the complete scale is not stated explicitly, and in any case it could
easily be added to the graph as a point above Fs natural minor.

331

332

history and analysis

moments of chromaticism; the recapitulation lowers Gs to Gn, transforming Fs
natural minor into Fs phrygian. The fugue subject suggests a “phrygian f7” scale
Fs-G-A-B-Cs-D-Ef, which lowers the E of the preceding phrygian. (Note that while
the subject itself does not contain a second scale degree, the note appears in both
the countersubject and the subject’s continuation.) The harmonization of the fugue
subject, meanwhile, moves from the Fs mode of G harmonic major to Fs phrygian.
If we look only at these tonic-key passages, we see a sequence of semitonal descents,
beginning at natural minor and concluding with a “hyperminor” that has lowered
second, ﬁfth, and seventh degrees. We can represent this journey as a descending
motion along the right edge of Figure 9.3.10, much as we represented Chopin’s E
minor Prelude as a systematic series of descents along the four-dimensional chord
lattice.19 (Needless to say, it is amazing that such similar geometries can represent
both chords in Chopin and scales in Shostakovich!) Musically, this sequence of lowerings serves to prepare us for the unfamiliar tonality of the fugue: by moving gradually from a standard Fs natural minor to the hyperminor of the harmonized fugue
subject, Shostakovich slowly acclimates us to his unusual scalar vocabulary, fulﬁlling
the traditional function of a prelude in an unfamiliar manner.

9.3.4 Reich’s New York Counterpoint (1985)
Figure 9.3.12 lists the scales in Steve Reich’s New York Counterpoint for eleven
clarinets, one live and ten prerecorded.20 The ﬁrst movement opens with pulsating chords implying Af and Ef diatonic. These eventually give way to rhythmic
canons in Af diatonic, with the six voices divided into three pairs playing mostly
parallel tenths. As shown in Figure 9.3.13, the top voice in each pair plays the notes
(G, C, F), with the pitches Af, Bf, and Ef being ordered differently in each line;
the result of this permutation is that the dotted quarter note occurs on a different
pitch in each part. The movement then combines these canons with the original
pulsating chords, leading to modulations that produce subtle alterations in the
canonic pitches.21
The second movement is exclusively in B diatonic and again combines canons
with repeated chords (Figure 9.3.14). Two of the pairs now play exactly the same
music, with the third presenting a very slight variant. The canonic structure is consequently much clearer, sounding almost as if it had been produced by a digital delay.
The third movement begins with a Df acoustic scale that is related by single-semitone

19 Shostakovich’s prelude suggests a variety of other scales as well: mm. 17–23 vacillate between Bn and
Bf, suggesting Fs-Gs-A-Bf-Cs-D-Ef; mm. 29–30 suggest an explicit but ﬂeeting octatonic scale, which
can be associated with the collection Fs-Gs-A-B-C-D-Ef on Figure 9.3.10; and the end of the prelude
suggests the doubly lowered Fs-G-A-Bf-Cs-D-Ef. These scales, however, are often incomplete or accompanied by extraneous notes—a mild sort of polytonality typical of Shostakovich’s music.
20 For simplicity, the following discussion will use the notated pitches, rather than the sounding pitches
a major second below.
21 The live clarinet also plays noncanonic “resultant melodies” that draw their pitches from the canonic
parts; for simplicity, my discussion omits these.

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music

333

voice leading to the opening Af diatonic.22 The six canonic voices are now divided
into two groups, each playing mostly triads. At rehearsal 67, shown in Figure 9.3.15,
the bass clarinets enter in canon with the notes Ef-A-Ef, producing the seven-note
“whole tone plus one” scale Ef-F-G-Af-A-B-Df. (The rhythm of each bass clarinet
part is the four-against-three cross-rhythm, for which the phrase “pass the goddamn
butter” is a useful mnemonic.) The piece ends by oscillating between the “whole-tone
plus one” and diatonic collections, closing with the pitches Gs, B, Cs, and Ds—the
four notes common to the Df acoustic, E diatonic, and B diatonic scales.
Figure 9.3.16 graphs the scales using a two-dimensional scale lattice: the opening
Af diatonic is connected by single-semitone voice leading to both Ef diatonic and to
Df acoustic, and Df acoustic is in turn connected by single-semitone voice leading
to the “whole-tone plus one” scale. Similarly, the B diatonic of movement 2—three
steps ﬂatward from Af diatonic—is connected by single-semitone voice leading to
the E diatonic of movement 3. Note that the “whole-tone plus one” collection appears
naturally on the graph, as a third layer of scales surrounding the central zigzag of
ﬁfths: in particular, the “Df whole-tone + Af” scale is connected by single-semitone
voice leading to both B acoustic and Df acoustic.23 Such graphs are characteristic of
Reich’s later pieces: like many of his works, New York Counterpoint makes very heavy
use of the diatonic collection, occasional use of the acoustic scale (as well as other
familiar scales such as the harmonic minor), and more sporadic use of exotic scales
such as the “whole-tone plus one.” Scales are often linked by efﬁcient voice leading
and frequently demarcate compact regions in scale space. However, Reich’s modulations themselves give the sense of a relatively free journey through the space, rather
than a systematic oscillation around a single tonic region.

Figure 9.3.12
Scales in Steve
Reich’s New York
Counterpoint.

22 The acoustic scale’s Bf is never stated. My analysis is inﬂuenced by the fact that Reich frequently uses
the scale in other pieces.
23 This graph of diatonic, acoustic, and “whole-tone plus one” scales has analogues in some (but not
all) of the situations in which there is a generalized circle of ﬁfths: for instance, it exists in the case of diatonic seventh chords, but not diatonic triads. Interested readers are invited to explore this.

334

history and analysis

Figure 9.3.13
Canons in the
ﬁrst movement
of New York
Counterpoint
(a). The canonic
upper voices
reorder the last
three pitches, so
that a different
note is held in
each part (b).

Figure 9.3.14 Canons in the second movement of New York Counterpoint. The paired voices
play almost exactly the same music, the one exception being starred at the end of the second
measure of the second staff.

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music

335
Figure 9.3.15
Canons in the
third movement
of New York
Counterpoint.

Before moving on, I should mention the fascinating relationship between the
harmonic and rhythmic structures in Reich’s music. Since New York Counterpoint is
written in twelve-beat measures, its various rhythmic patterns are structurally analogous to familiar equal-tempered chords. For example, the opening measure of the
third movement contains attacks on beats 0 (the downbeat), 2, 4, 5, 7, 9, and 11 (Figure 9.3.15). As pitch classes, these are the C diatonic scale.24 Figure 9.3.15 shows that
the ﬁrst canon enters at a delay of two eighth notes, which means that there are ﬁve
common attack points between the original rhythm and its canonic statement; this is
the rhythmic analogue to the ﬁve common tones between C and D major. Thus, just
as Reich frequently juxtaposes scales that share nearly all of their notes, so too do his
rhythmic canons often maximize (or nearly maximize) their common attack points.
It would be an interesting project to trace this parallelism more carefully, with an

Figure 9.3.16 The scales in the
third movement of New York
Counterpoint, graphed on an
extended version of the twodimensional scale lattice.

24 For more on the pitch-class/rhythm isomorphism see Babbitt 1962, Pressing 1983, and Cohn 1992b.
Note that, for simplicity, I am just talking about the rhythm in the ﬁrst measure of the two-measure pattern.

336

history and analysis

eye toward understanding the relationship between these two musical domains. For
instance, it is suggestive that the ﬁrst explicit appearance of the “diatonic rhythm” in
New York Counterpoint occurs precisely at the introduction of the ﬁrst nondiatonic
pitch collection.

9.3.5 Reich’s The Desert Music, Movement 1
(1984)
The Desert Music, for orchestra and chorus, explores the ideas in New York Counterpoint on a much grander scale.25 As in New York Counterpoint, the ﬁrst movement
opens with pulsating eighth-note chords, moves eventually to rhythmic canons, and
concludes by synthesizing the two textures.26 The music begins with four repetitions
of a ﬁve-chord sequence, stated in pulsating eighth notes, with the chorus singing the
syllable “de.” Figure 9.3.17 shows that the vocalists’ chords contain ﬁve or six pitch
classes and suggest a number of familiar scales: the ﬁrst belongs to Ef acoustic and F
harmonic major; the second to Ef acoustic and Af diatonic; the third to Ef acoustic
and Bf whole tone; the fourth to Cs harmonic major and B acoustic; and the ﬁfth to
C and F diatonic. The instrumental parts add extra notes, creating a series of six- and
seven-note sonorities (Figure 9.3.18). The ﬁrst, third, and fourth sound like altered
dominants, by virtue of combining a major third and minor seventh; the second and
ﬁnal chords sound like extended minor chords.
The logic of this opening progression can be clariﬁed by imagining that it
begins “in medias res,” with the true (and hidden) starting point being the ﬁnal D
dorian. We then have a sequence of ﬁve scales that move efﬁciently and in a ﬂatward
direction: D dorian, F harmonic major, Af diatonic, Ef acoustic, and a “strange” scale

Figure 9.3.17 Reich’s The Desert
Music opens with a sequence of ﬁve
chords in the chorus, each suggesting a
variety of scales.

25 I am indebted here to Quinn (2002), who discusses scale-to-scale voice leadings in Reich’s music.
Callender 1998 and Morris 1987 are also relevant.
26 Interestingly, the middle movement of The Desert Music contains the same rhythmic pattern as the
middle movement of New York Counterpoint, suggesting that the later piece consciously reuses ideas from
The Desert Music.

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music

F-G-Af-Bff-C-Df-Ef.27 (Note the resemblance to Shostakovich’s prelude and fugue,
which also moves ﬂatward through closely related scales.) Both the efﬁcient voice leading and the ﬂatward tendency are clear on Figure 9.3.19a, which represents the modulations on our three-dimensional scale lattice. (Since the strange scale does not appear
on the lattice proper, I have added it to the bottom of the graph using dotted lines.) It
is also clear why Reich begins with F harmonic major rather than D dorian: by reserving the most dramatic harmonic shift for the end of the phrase, he creates a striking
Figure 9.3.18 (1 of 2) A reduction of Reich’s The Desert Music, movement 1.

27 This strange scale can be understood as an Af diatonic collection with lowered second scale degree;
it is somewhat reminiscent of the jazz “altered scale,” the fourth mode of the acoustic collection.

337

338

history and analysis

Figure 9.3.18
(2 of 2) A
reduction of
Reich’s The
Desert Music,
movement 1.

cadential “brightening”—as if the clouds had suddenly parted to reveal a glittering
blue sky, illuminated by a ray of D-dorian sunshine.28
The second half of the movement cycles through similar scales while introducing both freely composed choral parts and Reich’s trademark rhythmic canons. The
canons start in F mixolydian, a scale not previously heard in the piece. The music
then articulates a series of single-semitone voice leadings, from F mixolydian to Ef
acoustic to Af diatonic and back to Ef acoustic. From there the modulations become
more dramatic as we move to a mode of B acoustic by a four-semitone shift. (This
mode, called “F altered” by jazz musicians, is connected to the “strange” scale by twosemitone voice leading; it can be understood as a “normalization” of this earlier scale,
since both harmonize the ﬁve-note choral chord F-Af-A-Df-Ef.) In Figure 9.3.19b, I
map this second part on the scale lattice. Once again it is clear that the music moves in
a generally descending (ﬂatward) direction, frequently exploiting efﬁcient voice leading between nearby scales. Figure 9.3.19 clariﬁes at a glance the similarity between
the modulations in the two parts of the piece—a relationship that would be rather
tedious to describe verbally.

28 It is interesting that for both Reich and Shostakovich, the dorian mode represents a comparatively
bright tonality—as if their scalar palette had been shifted toward the darker end of the harmonic spectrum.

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music
Figure 9.3.19 Scales in The Desert Music, movement 1. (a) The progression of scales from
R5–R9, and (b) the progression from R20–R44. The progression from R45–54 is the same as
that in (b), but without Bf diatonic (F mixolydian).

The ﬁfth and ﬁnal movement of The Desert Music returns to these ideas, cycling
through the same basic scalar progression eight more times, and ending with the pulsing chords of the opening. The beginning of the movement is particularly interesting: in
Figure 9.3.20, I show that it moves between four different modes, each suggesting an Ef
dominant sonority—Ef acoustic, Ef mixolydian, Ef mixolydian f6, and Ef whole tone
plus Af. It is signiﬁcant that the “whole-tone plus one” scale appears almost exactly as
it did in New York Counterpoint: tritone motion in the bass transforms a mixolydian f6
mode (missing its fourth scale degree) into a “whole-tone plus one” scale sharing six of
its seven notes. In fact, Figure 9.3.21 traces the passage on the same graph we used to represent New York Counterpoint, showing that it explores very similar harmonic territory.
Here we see clear evidence of a common practice linking one Reich piece to another, and
more generally to a broader tradition of twentieth-century scalar thinking.

9.3.6 The Who’s “I Can’t Explain” (1965) and
Bob Seger’s “Turn the Page” (1973)
Figure 9.3.22a shows the chords in the Who’s “I Can’t Explain.” The verse is constructed around a I–VII–IV progression in E mixolydian, while the chorus is a standard I–vi–IV–V progression in E major. The two parts of the song therefore involve

339

340

history and analysis

Figure 9.3.20
A summary of
the opening The
Desert Music,
movement 5.

Figure 9.3.21 Scales in the opening The Desert Music, movement 5.

a single-semitone change over a ﬁxed tonic, exactly analogous to the opening of
Debussy’s “Des pas sur la neige.”29 Bob Seger’s “Turn the Page,” shown in Figure
9.3.22b, is a kind of dorian-mode dual to The Who’s song. The verse contains virtually the same chord progression, i–VII–IV–i, though with a minor tonic rather than
major. (Note that The Who’s mixolydian and Seger’s dorian modes are related by
the single-semitone shift Gs®G.) At the end of the chorus, Seger switches brieﬂy to
natural minor, employing a standard rock VI–VII–i progression.

29 In Debussy’s prelude, the semitonal voice leading Bf®B connects D natural minor to D dorian; here
the voice leading D®Ds connects E mixolydian to E major.

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music
Figure 9.3.22 Scales
in The Who’s “I Can’t
Explain” (a) and Bob
Seger’s “Turn the
Page” (b).

Of course, these two songs have been arbitrarily selected from among thousands
that use closely related modes. I cite them chieﬂy to make the point that the procedures we have been discussing have entered the musical vernacular: not only can
they be found in works of self-conscious “art music,” but also in ﬁlm music, jazz, rock,
and no doubt in other styles as well. At this point in musical history, it is totally unremarkable to ﬁnd musicians of virtually any stripe exploiting efﬁcient voice leadings
between the full range of diatonic modes. Scale-ﬁrst composition, in other words, is
simply an accepted part of our contemporary tonal language.

9.4

the subset technique

We now turn to the subset technique, whereby a composer uses scales that all contain
some prominent collection of notes. These notes are held ﬁxed and remain stable
across scale changes, while the remaining notes are “mobile” and are altered to form
a variety of different collections.30

9.4.1 Grieg’s “Klokkeklang” (“Bell Ringing”),
Op. 54 No. 6 (1891)
Figure 9.4.1 presents the opening of the “Klokkeklang,” one of Grieg’s most unusual
and inventive works.31 Discarding functional harmony in favor of open ﬁfths, the
piece creates an austere soundworld that perfectly captures the effect of distant tintinnabulation. The ﬁrst phrase is in C diatonic, featuring a C-G/F-C drone in the
left hand and a series of (mostly) descending parallel ﬁfths in the right. The phrase
is comprised of four two-measure groups, each immediately echoed. The ﬁrst two
“echoes” ﬁll in the bare ﬁfths of the right hand with an additional note, forming diatonic triads; in the third “echo” the right hand is transposed down by step, while the
ostinato shifts downward by minor third, leading to a cadence on G.

30 Clark (2002) discusses the subset technique in Schubert’s music, but applied to chords rather than
scales.
31 For another perspective, see Sutcliffe 1996.

341

342

history and analysis
Figure 9.4.1 The opening of Grieg’s Lyric Piece “Klokkeklang” (Bell Ringing), Op. 54 No. 6.

In the second phrase, outlined by Figure 9.4.2, the ostinato shifts to G-D-A, and
the ﬁfths ascend by diatonic third.32 The echoing process is now extended, with each
two-measure idea appearing four times: as in the ﬁrst phrase, the ﬁrst echo ﬁlls in
the bare ﬁfth with an additional note, but the second and third echoes repeat the
preceding four measures with added sharps. (This sort of systematicity evokes the
algorithmic practice of “change ringing,” which in turn anticipates the music of later
composers such as Nancarrow, Reich, and Ligeti.) As shown in Figure 9.4.2, the right
hand combines with the ostinato bass to form two different diatonic collections: the
white-note C diatonic and the two-sharp D diatonic. We can think of the music as
containing ﬁve “ﬁxed” pitches D-E-G-A-B and two “mobile” pitches F/Fs and C/Cs.
The end of the phrase brings a surprise: when the white-note collection ascends
by thirds to B5, completing the diatonic circle of thirds, its echo adds a Gs that creates an A diatonic collection. This Gs clashes with the Gn and A in the ostinato,
creating a mild polytonal dissonance.33 (It is possible that Grieg meant this G/Gs
clash to evoke the bells’ inharmonicity.) The climactic gesture concludes with a long
passage in which the ﬁfths descend by diatonic thirds, from E5-B5 to G3–D4. Once
again, there is a clash between different forms of a note in different registers: the top
note of the gesture (Bn) suggests C diatonic, while the bottom note (Bf) suggests F
diatonic. The next two measures present a pair of mysterious sonorities, G minor and
F augmented. As shown in Figure 9.4.2, these combine with the ostinato to imply D
harmonic minor, here missing only its En. The ﬁnal chord “normalizes” Cs to Cn,
preparing for the recapitulation.
Surveying the whole of Grieg’s piece, then, we can say that there are three “ﬁxed”
notes (D, A, E) and four “mobile” notes that can appear either inﬂected or unin-

32 Note that the tonal center shifts to D before the scale itself changes, a possibility discussed in §4.5.
33 As in much polytonal music, the different scales are clearly distinguished by register: all the
notes below E5 belong to D diatonic, while those above A2 belong to A diatonic. Furthermore, the
wide registral separation between the Gs5 in the right hand and the clashing G3 in the left ameliorates the sense of dissonance, creating a sense of independent auditory streams, each with its own
macroharmony.

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music

343
Figure 9.4.2
A reduction
of the central
section of
“Klokkeklang.”

ﬂected (Bf/B, F/Fs, C/Cs, and G/Gs). The play of inﬂections suggests a variety of
different scalar collections, each stated fairly explicitly: C diatonic, D diatonic, A
diatonic, F diatonic, and D melodic minor. (Figure 9.4.3 shows that these ﬁve collections are all contained within two adjacent cubes of the scale lattice.) The piece progresses from a neutral “white-note” state in which all notes appear uninﬂected, to a
climactic section in which all four inﬂections are presented within the span of eleven
measures (mm. 43–53). Interestingly,
the B section begins by contrasting two
scales that are close but not adjacent on
the lattice (C and D diatonic), with the
separation increasing as the music progresses: D diatonic moves sharpward
to A diatonic, while C diatonic moves
ﬂatward to F diatonic, and thence to the
nondiatonic D harmonic minor (see
the arrows in Figure 9.4.3). This progression brings to mind a pistol duel,
in which the participants begin back to
back and walk several paces away from
each other.

9.4.2 “Petit Airs,” from
Stravinsky’s Histoire
du Soldat (1918)
Stravinsky’s “Petit airs au bord du ruisseau” exhibits an easygoing folksiness, depicting a wandering soldier relaxing by a brook, enjoying his newfound (and hard-totune) ﬁddle. On the surface, the music would seem to have nothing to do with Grieg’s
austere tone painting. But when we dig deeper, we ﬁnd that there are interesting
resemblances between the pieces, beginning with their ostinati: the double bass in
“Petit airs” plays a “walking” motif G-D-A-G that outlines the same three pitch classes
as those in the B section of Grieg’s “Klokkeklang” (Figure 9.4.4). As in Grieg’s piece,
Stravinsky seems to divide his pitch material into “ﬁxed” notes that always appear in
the same form (G-D-A-E-B) and “mobile” notes that can either be inﬂected or uninﬂected (F/Fs, C/Cs). Not surprisingly, Stravinsky juxtaposes these “mobile” notes

Figure 9.4.3
Scales in
“Klokkeklang.”

344

history and analysis

Figure 9.4.4
Scales in
Stravinsky’s
“Petit airs,”
from Histoire du
soldat.

Figure 9.4.5
“Petit Airs” uses
the diatonic and
acoustic scales
combining F/Fs
and C/Cs.

more freely than Grieg, often assigning different accidentals to different instruments:
for instance, in mm. 29–37, shown in Figure 5.6.9, the clarinet and bassoon play in
D diatonic while the violin adds Fn and Cn, creating two tonally distinct “strata.”
Polytonality, which occurs only ﬂeetingly in “Klokkeklang,” is much more pervasive
in Stravinsky.
There are four familiar scales that contain the ﬁve “ﬁxed” notes, and they can
all be represented by a square face of our scale lattice (Figure 9.4.5). Like Grieg,
Stravinsky systematically explores the scales that can be constructed in this way.
Figure 9.4.4 shows that each of the collections appears prominently in “Petit airs.”
Particularly noteworthy are mm. 53–60, which present an explicit statement of the G acoustic collection.
(See the bottom system of Figure 9.4.4.) This nondiatonic scale acts somewhat like Grieg’s D harmonic
minor, providing a striking point of contrast with the
surrounding diatonic and polytonal music.

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music

9.4.3 Reich’s City Life (1995)
The third movement of Steve Reich’s City Life features a repeating ostinato built
upon the ﬁfth D-A. The movement is divided into three sections, each beginning
with the sampled words “It’s been a honeymoon.” (The unhappy tone of the sampled
voice creates a striking contrast with the text’s meaning.) After about 20 seconds, the
remaining instruments enter, ﬁlling out the D-A ﬁfth with scale fragments. Figure
9.4.6 shows that these fragments suggest D lydian, the fourth mode of A harmonic
minor, and D mixolydian. Reich’s music therefore exempliﬁes, in a particularly obvious and systematic fashion, the same procedures at work in both Grieg and Stravinsky. Once again, we have a set of “ﬁxed” scale degrees stacked in ﬁfths, ﬁlled out by
additional “mobile” degrees that appear in a variety of forms.34
The resemblances among Grieg’s “Klokkeklang,” Stravinsky’s “Petit airs,” and
Reich’s City Life might initially seem to be completely fortuitous, purely superﬁcial
similarities with no deeper signiﬁcance. But in fact, there are important historical and
musical connections among the three composers. At a purely musical level, all three
were interested in exploring alternatives to functional harmony, while stopping short
of complete atonality. In particular, all three embraced a wide variety of scales and
modes, and devised creative ways to generalize traditional modulatory procedures.35
And then there are speciﬁc historical connections as well: Grieg was an important
inﬂuence on Ravel, whose music in turn was important to Stravinsky; and both Stravinsky and impressionism inﬂuenced the language of jazz, which was in turn important to Reich.36 So it should perhaps not be terribly surprising to ﬁnd these three
composers mining similar musical territory.
Indeed, it would not be too surprising even if there were no historical connections among them. For as we have seen in Part I, the familiar scales of the Western
tradition—such as the diatonic, acoustic, and harmonic scales—are in many ways
natural objects of musical exploration. Furthermore, the idea of writing music that
exploits scales containing a particular ﬁxed subset is reasonably intuitive, and we
can well imagine each composer happening upon it independently. Thus, rather
than considering the resemblances among our three pieces to be insigniﬁcant coin-

Figure 9.4.6 A summary of Steve
Reich’s City Life, movement 3.

34 Reich’s movement again uses the “diatonic rhythm” {0, 2, 4, 5, 7, 9, 11}. The music opens by setting
this rhythm in canon with itself at a distance of an eighth note. This is analogous to combining the C and D
major scales, and leads to ﬁve shared attacks. Later in the piece, the canonic distance increases to a quarter
note, analogous to combining C and E diatonic collections, which decreases the number of shared attacks
to three. The music thus exhibits a common Reichian technique of moving from relative rhythmic alignment toward increased disalignment. See Cohn 1992.
35 See Tymoczko 1997, 2002, 2003a, 2006.
36 See, among many other sources, Herresthal 2005 and Strickland 2000.

345

346

history and analysis

cidences, I prefer to think of them as symptomatic of shared musical concerns crossing stylistic boundaries.

9.4.4 The Beatles’ “Help” (1965) and
Stravinsky’s “Dance of the Adolescents”
(1913)
In “Help!,” John Lennon’s lead vocal largely conﬁnes itself to the ﬁrst ﬁve pitches of
the A major scale, with a sixth note (Fs) appearing only in the song’s introduction
(Figure 9.4.7). This simple melody, almost obsessive in its repetitiveness, becomes a
ﬁxed set of pitches that are contextualized within two different scales, A major and A
mixolydian. Here timbre reinforces the distinction between the ﬁxed subset and the
mobile pitches: the lead vocal conﬁnes itself to the ﬁxed notes, while both the guitar
and backup vocals articulate the mobile pair G/Gs. (Note that the resulting scales, A
major and A mixolydian are the only two diatonic collections containing the ﬁxed
pitches.) Particularly interesting is the mixolydian cadence that accompanies the lead
vocal D®Cs: in the key of A major, melodic D®Cs would likely be harmonized with
V7–I; in “Help!,” however, this archetypal schema is replaced by a striking modal progression in pure major triads, D–G–A. (This technique, whereby common melodic
schemas are modally reharmonized in pure triads, seems characteristic of the Beatles
in particular and rock music more generally.) Note also that the opening progression
b–G–E7, familiar from §3.10, links three chords that share the notes B and D; it again
introduces the seventh chord precisely when the root motion changes from major
third to minor third.
Stravinsky’s “Dance of the Adolescents” uses a somewhat more abstract version of
the same technique, in which it is not particular notes that are held ﬁxed, but rather
more abstract intervallic patterns. The scales in Figure 9.4.8a share the major pentachord {G, A, B, C, D}, and hence are related by the subset technique. Those in Figure
9.4.8b do not share any ﬁve-note subset; nevertheless, they are audibly similar by
virtue of the fact that they all contain some major pentachord—that is, they contain
a ﬁve-note segment that is transpositionally equivalent to {G, A, B, C, D}. Just as two
major scales sound very similar, by virtue of being transpositionally related, so too
do these scales sound somewhat similar by virtue of the fact that they contain large,
transpositionally related subsets. (Or to put it another way, the scales all contain the

Figure 9.4.7 A sketch
of the Beatles song
“Help!” The upper
staff contains the
notes in the lead vocal
line, while the lower
staff outlines the
harmonies.

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music
Figure 9.4.8 The subset
technique in its concrete (a) and
abstract (b) forms.

interval pattern 2-2-1-2.) This is particularly true when the composer chooses to
emphasize these subsets in some salient way.
In the “Dance of the Adolescents,” the major pentachord forms the basis of the
folksy theme shown in Figure 9.4.9. (Here A is the tonic, suggesting natural minor
or dorian.37) The theme can be embedded within familiar scales in three ways: we
can add E and F, producing A aeolian; we can add E and Fs, producing A dorian; or
we can add Ef and F, producing the “locrian s2” mode of F acoustic.38 These scales
can then be transposed to produce three general modal categories, aeolian, dorian,
and locrian s2. Figure 9.4.10 shows that the folksy theme appears in each of these
modal contexts in the second half of the “Dance of the Adolescents.”39 Since each of
our three mode types appears at least once, we can say that Stravinsky exhaustively
exploits the various ways of embedding his theme in familiar modal contexts.
Though it might again seem fanciful to compare Stravinsky to the Beatles, the
resemblance is upon reﬂection relatively clear. Both “Help!” and “The Dance of the
Adolescents” exploit melodic material that is deliberately simple or even primitive.
Indeed, in both pieces the ﬁxed material is remarkably similar, with the ﬁxed pitches
being A-B-Cs-D-E-(Fs) in “Help!” and the ﬁxed intervallic pattern being 2-2-1-2
Figure 9.4.9 The folk-like melody used in the “Dance of
the Adolescents.”

37 This folksy melody seems to be original to Stravinsky. For an extended discussion of Stravinsky’s
borrowings, see Chapter 12 of Taruskin 1996.
38 A fourth possibility combines Ef and Fs, producing a mode of G harmonic major; here, however,
the augmented second is melodically awkward. The three possibilities in the main text represent the only
way to embed the theme in a scale whose steps are at most two semitones large, and whose thirds are at
least three semitones large (§4.4).
39 In each case, the music also adds some characteristically Stravinskian polytonal elements, such as
bassoon trills foreign to the underlying scale; nevertheless, the underlying scales are fairly clear. Note also
that consecutive scales, such as G locrian s2, Bf dorian, and Bf natural minor, are often linked by minimal voice-leading. Interestingly, Stravinsky uses both of the single-semitonal voice leadings connecting
acoustic and diatonic scales, one of which preserves the ﬁxed subset (R31–32) and one of which does not
(R25–27).

347

348

history and analysis
Figure 9.4.10 Stravinsky presents his folk-like melody in ﬁve scalar contexts.

in “Dance of the Adolescents.” Both pieces contextualize this simple melodic material within musical textures that are anything but primitive, adding sophisticated
harmonies, countermelodies, and orchestrational embellishments. (In fact, both
pieces use Debussyian parallel triads, the ﬁrst in the chorus’s vocal harmonies, the
second in the orchestral wash.) And both pieces use an expanded scalar vocabulary
in which scalar and chromatic transposition are available, and in which ionian and
mixolydian are more or less on equal footing. (Note that by ignoring transposition

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music

and centricity, we can see that both pieces augment their “ﬁxed” pitches in essentially similar ways, extending A-B-Cs-D-E with either G or Gs to form two different
diatonic collections.) All of which is just to say that both pieces make relatively
straightforward use of the possibilities afforded by an expanded scalar vocabulary.

9.4.5 The Miles Davis Group’s “Freedom Jazz
Dance” (1966)
We’ll close with what might seem like a trivial example of the subset technique, one in
which the shared collection is a perfect ﬁfth—or maybe just a single note. The Miles Davis
Group’s “Freedom Jazz Dance,” from the album Miles Smiles, consists in a series of improvisations over a static Bf harmony. Although one might casually say that the piece is “in
Bf,” this description masks an important subtlety: it is actually in a variety of Bfs, since
the soloists interpret the tonic drone differently. The piece thus provides an interesting
improvisational counterpart to the precomposed music we have been considering.
Since it would take us too far aﬁeld to discuss the entire piece, a few brief remarks
must sufﬁce. The bass line, played by Ron Carter, is based on Bf and often features
fourths-based riffs such as F-Ef-Bf. The harmonic accompaniment, played by Herbie Hancock, often uses chords such as E-Bf-Ef, drawn from the blues scale on Bf
(Bf-Df-Ef-En-F-Af). Hancock’s relatively sparse accompaniment leaves the soloists
plenty of freedom, and they respond by “coloring” the Bf drone in a variety of ways.
Figure 9.4.11 provides a series of excerpts from the solos, showing that the improvisers play a number of familiar scales—Bf natural minor, Bf melodic minor ascending,
Bf mixolydian, Bf acoustic, Af harmonic minor, and the Bf-Cf octatonic scale. (Of
course, there is also a lot of nonscalar playing in the piece as well.) From the standpoint
of the current chapter, the interesting point is that the Miles Davis Group’s notion of
“being in Bf,” like Debussy’s notion of being “in D,” is general enough to encompass
natural minor, dorian, the acoustic scale, and even the octatonic. In other words, the
relevant conception of tonality is not the major-minor system of the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries, but rather the extended scalar system of the twentieth.

9.5

conclusion: common scales,
common techniques

In this chapter, we have seen numerous appearances of scales such as the acoustic and octatonic. When I ﬁrst started thinking seriously about twentieth-century
tonality, I was amazed to ﬁnd so many different composers using such similar scales.
Why do these collections reappear in so many different styles? Was there a kind of
underground commerce in scales, with composers cluing each other in to their most
important discoveries? Did Debussy and Stravinsky talk scales and modes during
their conversations in Paris? Did George Gershwin teach impressionist techniques
to the early beboppers? Did Steve Reich learn the “altered scale” from some jazz harmony book? The alternative, that so many different composers had independently

349

350

history and analysis
Figure 9.4.11 Excerpts from the solos in the Miles Davis Group’s version of “Freedom Jazz
Dance.” Miles Davis favors traditional Bf minor scales, Wayne Shorter makes heavy use of Bf
acoustic, and Herbie Hancock uses even more exotic octatonic and harmonic minor scales.
(Asterisks indicate notes outside the scale.)

found their way to the same basic collections, seemed even more improbable: for how
could so much haphazard investigation converge on such similar outcomes?
Now, of course, this strikes me as considerably less surprising. Although there
may have been some composer-to-composer commerce in scales, we can explain the
convergence without it. After all, one of the main claims of Chapter 4 is that traditional
scales are overdetermined, with a variety of different considerations pointing toward
the same basic scalar collections—viz. familiar scales divide the octave relatively
evenly, contain large numbers of consonant intervals, avoid consecutive semitones
while having relatively small gaps between their successive notes, and are generally

Scales in Twentieth-Century Music

optimal from a variety of independent perspectives. Thus we should not be astonished to ﬁnd composers of different stylistic proclivities using octatonic or acoustic
scales. Of course composers would independently ﬁnd their way to these collections—
much in the way that different mountain climbers tend to follow the most obvious
routes up a particular cliff.
This is not to say that these scales are the only important ones, or that all twentieth-century tonal music makes use of them. Some tonal composers, including
Messiaen and Shostakovich, constructed idiosyncratic scales that do not possess
the virtues I have highlighted. (Messiaen used seven symmetrical “modes of limited
transposition” whereas Shostakovich sometimes constructed ad hoc modes out of
octatonic and other scale fragments.) Others—particularly “neoclassical” composers—eschewed nondiatonic scales in favor of a pervasive (and occasionally somewhat
brittle) diatonicism. Still others created polytonal effects by superimposing multiple
scales at the same time, leading to musical textures poised delicately between tonality
and atonality. There is plenty of variety in twentieth-century tonal music, with scalar
procedures playing only one part in an ensemble cast.
Nevertheless, it is striking that at least three major twentieth-century tonal styles—
impressionism, jazz, and postminimalism—make use of the same basic collection of
nondiatonic scales and modes. These scales, along with the three techniques in this
chapter, constitute a twentieth-century “common practice” that is larger than any
particular tonal composer, and indeed than any particular tonal style. Although the
outlines of this common practice may be less clear than the outlines of earlier common practices, its very existence indicates that the difference between the nineteenth
and twentieth centuries is more a matter of degree than of kind. The naive contrast
between nineteenth-century homogeneity and twentieth-century individualism is
misleading: if there is an enormous harmonic gulf between Mussorgsky and Johann
Strauss, then there are also interesting threads of continuity between Debussy, jazz,
and Reich. Indeed, I would go so far as to say that the scales and techniques described
in this chapter represent the single most interesting example of a twentieth-century
tonal common practice—one that results not just from conscious imitation, but also
from a simultaneous convergence on an intrinsically fertile territory.

351

chapter 10

Jazz
This last chapter reviews some central features of jazz harmony, emphasizing connections with earlier styles. For reasons of space, I focus on a collection of ideas
that evolved in the late 1950s and early 1960s, and that now form a kind of lingua
franca for contemporary improvisers. My goal is to show that jazz synthesizes the
contrapuntal preoccupations of late nineteenth-century chromaticism with the
scale-based procedures of early twentieth-century modernism, creating a contemporary “common practice.” This common practice has inﬂuenced composers such
as Steve Reich and John Adams, resulting in a network of relationships that cross
the boundaries between notated and non-notated music (sometimes called “serious” and “popular”). Given these pervasive inﬂuences, it is reasonable to wonder
whether we make too much of the boundaries between styles: if jazz is both inheritor of early modernism and progenitor of late twentieth-century postminimalism,
then at what cost do we segregate it from “legitimate” concert music? My answer
is that the cost is large indeed. We can obtain a full picture of twentieth-century
tonality only by considering notated and non-notated music as part of an integral
tradition.1
In saying this, I do not mean to efface the obvious differences between improvised and notated music, but rather to suggest that we sometimes take these differences too seriously. Ask yourself whether a highly avant-garde composer like
Xenakis is more or less like Debussy than is an improvising musician like Bill
Evans. True, both Xenakis and Debussy use notation, but once we move past this
fact there are few similarities in their specific approaches to melody, harmony,
and rhythm. Meanwhile, Bill Evans is an improviser who self-consciously borrowed ideas from impressionism, whose chords and scales relate to Debussy’s
in very clear ways, and who helped transmit certain musical techniques from
Debussy to late-twentieth-century tonal composers. From this point of view, it
seems short-sighted to say that Schoenberg, Xenakis, and Lachenmann “belong
with” Grieg and Debussy, simply because they all happen to use musical notation.
To say so is to fetishize superficial resemblances at the expense of more profound
and purely musical connections.

1 For an alternative approach, see Taruskin 2005, which attempts to treat the notated tradition in isolation from other styles.

Jazz

10.1

basic jazz voicings

Basic jazz harmony derives from an elementary voice-leading schema ﬁrst described in
Chapter 7, in which ﬁfth-related diatonic seventh chords are connected by descending
stepwise voice leading. Figure 10.1.1 moves the schema up by diatonic third, so that
it connects the four upper voices of a series of ninth chords. Here we have a ﬁve-voice
passage in which the bass leaps while the upper voices move by step. Figure 10.1.1c
embellishes this pattern once more, suspending the ninth of the ii9 chord into the
dominant and replacing the seventh of the tonic sonority with a sixth.2 The resulting
chords are fundamental to modern jazz, and are sometimes called the A and B “left
hand” voicings, as they leave the pianist’s right hand free to improvise (Figure 10.1.2).

Figure 10.1.1 (a) A basic nineteenth-century voice-leading schema, linking ﬁfth-related
diatonic triads by stepwise voice leading. (b) The same schema, now interpreted as the upper
four voices of a sequence of ninth chords. (c) A variant that suspends the ninth of the ii chord
into V, forming a thirteenth; the note B in the Cmaj9 chord is also replaced with A, so that all
four upper voices move down by step from V to I.

Figure 10.1.2 The “left hand voicings” in their
A and B forms.

2 The form E-G-B-D does appear, though E-G-A-D seems to be preferred. (See McGowan 2005 on
“dialects of consonance” in jazz.) This preference is sometimes attributed to the desire to avoid the minor
ninth that can result when a melodic C is played above the chordal B. However, the change may also reﬂect
the fact that the voicing E-G-A-D is a diatonic “fourth chord”(§10.2). Relevant here is the fact that a diatonic seventh chord like E-G-B-D is already somewhat “fourthy,” as it contains two component fourths
(B-E and D-G) and can be written as a stack of fourths with one missing note (that is, as B-E-[A]-D-G).
When substituting E-G-A-D for E-G-B-D, a jazz musician can use efﬁcient voice leading to change E-B
into E-A, heightening the fourthiness without drastically changing the sound of the chord.

353

354

history and analysis

Since each of these chords contains all but two of the notes in the diatonic scale,
jazz pedagogues sometimes describe chord voicings negatively, by identifying the diatonic notes that a particular chord should not contain: for example, they say that a ii
voicing can contain any diatonic note except the leading tone; that a V voicing can
contain any diatonic note except the tonic; and that the I voicing can contain any
diatonic note except the fourth scale degree. These forbidden tones are sometimes
called “avoid” notes, indicating that they should be avoided if a chord is to have a
particular harmonic function.3 The underlying idea is that there are certain basic
voice-leading motions that are essential to deﬁning harmonic function: the introduction of scale degree 4 as one moves from tonic to predominant, the resolution
^1®^7 as one moves from predominant to dominant, and the resolution ^4®^3 coupled
with the return of scale degree 1, as one progresses from dominant to tonic (Figure
10.1.3). “Avoid notes” obscure this skeleton by introducing certain notes prematurely.
(For instance, including the leading tone in the ii chord tends to blur the difference
between predominant and dominant, just as includFigure 10.1.3 The basic
ing the tonic note in V tends to blur the difference
voice-leading structure of
between dominant and tonic.) The advantage is that
the ii–V–I. As long as these
this approach conveys the freedom inherent in jazz:
contrapuntal motions are
as long as the fundamental voice-leading skeleton is
clear, the schema can be
embellished with a large
reasonably clear, notes can be freely added without
variety of additional notes.
disturbing the effect of functional harmony.4 Indeed,
even the basic voice-leading skeleton can sometimes
be slightly obscured, as in Figure 10.1.4.
This sort of harmonic ﬂexibility would lead to incoherence, were it not for several important facts. First,
jazz makes extremely heavy use of root position chords,
providing unambiguous clues as to a chord’s identity.5
Figure 10.1.4 The schema in Figure 10.1.3 need not always be presented in its entirety. In (a)
the root of the V chord is transposed by tritone; while in (b) the leading tone is absent from
the V chord. In both examples, the open noteheads show tones involved in the basic schema
of Figure 10.1.3.

3 The term “avoid note” is often associated with Mark Levine (1989), though he says he heard it at
Berklee in the 1950s.
4 It is interesting that the ascending semitonal resolution of the leading tone, so central to classical
harmonic practice, is not among the basic voice-leading motions in jazz.
5 Temperley (2007) makes the same point.

Jazz

Second, where classical composers use many highly similar chord progressions (such as
I–IV–vii°–I and I–ii–V–I), jazz musicians tend to use the ii–V–I schema almost to the
exclusion of the others. This prevents confusion between chords with closely related
pitch content. Third, jazz tunes typically repeat the same chord progressions over and
over, giving listeners many opportunities to identify a tune’s harmonic structure. Furthermore, many jazz compositions reuse the same progressions: ostensibly distinct
tunes like “Oleo,” “Anthropology,” and “Rhythm-a-ning,” all use the chord progression
from George Gershwin’s “I Got Rhythm”; while others, including “Au Privave,” “Blue
Monk,” and “Collard Greens and Black-Eyed Peas,” use variants on the standard blues
progression. (In fact, the blues and “rhythm changes” together account for a substantial
fraction of the jazz repertoire.) Taken together, these simpliﬁcations make it much easier to identify jazz harmonies. And because listeners have a pretty good idea what chord
is coming, improvisers can be correspondingly free in their harmonic embellishments.
Not surprisingly, the preceding ideas can sometimes be useful for analyzing twentieth-century notated music.6 Figure 10.1.5 shows several classical anticipations of the
jazz A and B voicings, while Figure 10.1.6 shows a series of six- and seven-note chord
voicings, all avoiding precisely the notes that jazz pedagogy recommends. Furthermore,
twentieth-century composers have a noticeable tendency to place the root in the bass
of “extended” chords: pieces like Debussy’s “Sirènes” and Reich’s The Desert Music, for
Figure 10.1.5 A and B voicings in classical music. (a) Ravel, “Forlane” from Le tombeau de
Couperin, m. 130, presenting the A voicings on V and IV (upper staff). (b) Grieg’s Lyric Piece
“Salon,” Op. 65 No. 4, m. 1 outlines the dominant B voicing with its ascending sixteenth
notes. (c) The same piece has a variant of the A dominant voicing, in which the root of the
chord replaces the ninth. (d) Scriabin’s Etude, Op. 65 No. 3. The four highest notes of the G7
chord outline an A voicing.

6 See Tymoczko 1997, 2002, and 2003.

355

356

history and analysis
Figure 10.1.6 Concert-music chords that omit the jazz “avoid notes.” The ﬁrst three examples
present tonic voicings that omit the fourth above the root. (a) Debussy’s “Sirènes,” m. 8.
(b) Ravel Jeux d’eau, m.1 (c) Reich, Different Trains, movement 1. (d) A ii11–Vsus–I in Ravel’s
“Rigaudon,” from Le tombeau de Couperin, mm. 1–2. The dominant voicing is a suspended
chord, analogous to Figure 10.1.4b; as in jazz practice, the leading tone becomes the “avoid
note” in the suspended chord. (e) An extended predominant in Ravel’s Pavane pour une
infante défunte, mm. 67–68. ( f ) Altered dominant chords in the opening of Reich’s The
Desert Music, movement 1, all conspicuously omitting the fourth above the root. (g) Debussy,
Prelude to “The Afternoon of a Faun,” R10, is similar.

example, consist largely of extended root position dominant chords, embellished with
sevenths, ninths, and other tones.7 We should not, of course, be too surprised by such
correspondences, both because of the historical connections between notated music
and jazz, and because many of these principles are tantamount to common sense: it is
only natural, when using extended sonorities, to want to avoid harmonic confusion by
placing the root in the bass; just as it is only natural to want to clarify harmonic function
by avoiding the tonic note in dominant voicings.
7 Some of the ideas in this section have been explored by Dan Harrison (1994) in the context of late nineteenth-century music. Like jazz pedagogues, Harrison argues that a chord with a prominent leading tone
and ﬁfth scale degree can often be interpreted as a dominant chord, no matter what other notes it contains.
However, he diverges from jazz pedagogy by interpreting tonal harmony as fundamentally triadic, and by
taking IV to be the characteristic predominant. McGowan 2005 adapts Harrison’s ideas to a jazz context.

Jazz

10.2

from thirds to fourths

Traditional tonal theory teaches that harmonies are generated by extending thirds
upward from the root. But as chords grow larger, their identity as stacks of thirds
becomes less and less determinate. Postwar jazz musicians exploit this fact to reconceive traditional chords as quartal rather than tertian in origin: for example, Figure
10.2.1 rearranges the dominant and tonic A voicings as stacks of diatonic fourths,
producing a distinctively modern feel. (A pianist might play these voicings when
accompanying a soloist; guitarists—whose instruments are tuned in fourths—play
them as a matter of course.) As shown in the ﬁgure, each voicing can be extended
upward by one or two fourths before encountering an avoid note.
These quartal voicings suggest that we might want to look for a fourth-based predominant voicing as well. The most common option here, shown in Figure 10.2.2, is
called the “ ‘So What’ chord,” since it appears prominently in Bill Evans’ playing on the
Miles Davis tune of the same name. The “ ‘So What’ chord” consists of three perfect
fourths and one major third, and is often encountered in the form shown in Figure
10.2.2b, with the lowest note doubled in the soprano. (Guitar players will recognize
this as the open strings of the guitar, tuned down a major second.) We, of course, recognize the chord as a stack of two-step intervals in the pentatonic scale. If we begin on
a different pentatonic note—as in Figure 10.2.2c—we obtain all the various chords
that insert a major third into a sequence of ﬁve perfect fourths. (In each case, the
chord exhausts the notes of a pentatonic scale.) Figure 10.2.3 combines a “ ‘So What’
chord” with quartal V–I voicings to produce a fourth-based version of the ii–V–I
schema. Such quartal voicings have been important to jazz since the 1950s, and many
pianists play three-note quartal voicings as a matter of course. Often associated with
McCoy Tyner, they create an “open” feel that evokes the sound world of Stravinsky,
Bartók, and Hindemith.8
Not surprisingly, the trend toward quartal voicings goes hand in hand with an
increasing use of melodic fourths in solos. Passages in melodic fourths can occasionally be found in the recordings of the 1940s, particularly by musicians associated with
Lennie Tristano, but they become much more common in the early 1960s, largely

Figure 10.2.1 The dominant
and tonic A voicings
reinterpreted as stacks of
fourths. In (c) the stacks are
extended until they reach an
“avoid note.”

8 Scriabin’s “mystic chord” is often voiced as a stack of acoustic scale fourths: C-Fs-Bf-E-A-D. Fourths
appear prominently in Stravinsky (Firebird Suite [1919], “Infernal Dance,” R26), Bartók (Out of Doors,
movement 2), and Hindemith (Ludus Tonalis).

357

358

history and analysis
Figure 10.2.2 Quartal predominant voicings. (a) The
“So What” voicing. (b) The same voicing with the
bass note doubled in the soprano. This is a complete
stack of pentatonic thirds: D-F-G-A-C-D-F-G-A-C-D.
(c) Other inversions of the “‘So What’ chord” begin the
stack of thirds on a different note of the F pentatonic
scale. Each voicing has four perfect ﬁfths and one foursemitone “near ﬁfth.”

Figure 10.2.3 Quartal ii–V–I voicings
played with both hands (a) and with the
left hand alone (b).

through the inﬂuence of the John Coltrane Quartet. One way to create quartal melodies is to use small collections of notes that are themselves stacks of fourths: by randomly selecting notes from among a small stack-of-fourths collection, one will obtain
a high proportion of fourths, allowing the improviser a degree of melodic freedom
while still ensuring that the resulting music will sound reasonably “fourthy.”9 Figure
10.2.4a presents a passage from the ﬁfth chorus of Keith Jarrett’s solo on “You and
the Night and the Music” (from At the Deer Head Inn) in which the four-note stack
of fourths {F, G, Bf, C} expands to a ﬁve-note pentatonic scale in the last measure of
the example. Figure 10.2.5, the opening of the tune “Freedom Jazz Dance,” is quite
similar: here, a pentatonic arpeggio (F, Bf, Ef, G, C, F) is augmented by the note D to
form a six-note stack of ﬁfths.10
In Chapter 4, we noted that the pentatonic scale is a minimal perturbation of
a pure stack of fourths, returning to its starting point without passing through all
twelve pitch classes (§4.4). It is interesting to think that similar considerations might
play a role in explaining the more spontaneous improvisational choices made in
1960s jazz. For suppose you are an improviser who would like to play melodic fourths

9 Two thirds of the intervals randomly selected from the notes F-G-C will be perfect fourths or ﬁfths,
50% of the intervals in F-G-Bf-C are perfect fourths or ﬁfths, and 40% of the intervals in Ef-F-G-Bf-C
are perfect fourths or ﬁfths.
10 Pentatonic scales also appear in early jazz, though their effect is more folksy than quartal. My sense is
that the pentatonic playing in the 1960s is only loosely connected to these earlier procedures.

Jazz

359
Figure 10.2.4
Two passages
from Keith
Jarrett’s solo on
“You and The
Night and The
Music,” which
exploits stacks of
fourths.

Figure 10.2.5 The
opening of “Freedom
Jazz Dance” begins
by arpeggiating the
Ef pentatonic scale,
adds a D to create a
diatonic hexachord, and
concludes with the Df
pentatonic scale.

in a largely diatonic environment: like the designer of scales, you have an interest in
ensuring that your melodic fourths do not lead you too far away from the underlying harmony (Figure 10.2.6). One natural solution is to incorporate a four-semitone
“near fourth,” so that the sequence of intervals returns to its starting point after just
ﬁve notes. Virtually the same considerations apply to the abstract problem of designing ﬁve-note scales, and indeed to the problem of tuning an instrument in fourths:
thus guitars, lutes, and viols often include an anomalous major third to ensure that
the top string sounds the same note as the lowest, although the precise location of the
third varies from instrument to instrument. It is somewhat remarkable that the same
fundamental facts can help such disparate musical phenomena.
Fourth chords and pentatonic scales are now so central to jazz as to be virtually
identiﬁed with the style. In fact, the enormous popularity of 1960s jazz means that
composers who build quartal harmonies are more likely to be heard as referencing
jazz than (say) the earlier works of Stravinsky, Hindemith, or Bartók. Of course, jazz
musicians were in turn inﬂuenced by these same composers, deliberately borrowing quartal harmonies from the notated tradition in order to evoke a more modern
sound.11 To my mind, this is a remarkable instance of the oft-neglected interaction
between jazz and concert music: quartal harmony, originally the province of the

11 James Moody, in a personal conversation, recalled that a number of musicians in the 1940s and
1950s were interested in Hindemith’s fourth chords.

360

history and analysis
Figure 10.2.6 (a) An extended sequence of melodic fourths will generate notes that clash with
the underlying harmony or scale. (b−c) To correct this problem one can add a “near fourth,”
producing a pentatonic or diatonic collection.

notated avant-garde, moved eventually into jazz, where it became incorporated into
the canons of functional harmony; from there, it moves back into notated music
as various contemporary composers borrowed jazz sounds in their own compositions. It would hardly be possible to write a coherent history of quartal harmony,
itself a crucial component of twentieth-century tonality, without considering jazz
and concert music together.

10.3

tritone substitution

Perhaps the most mysterious feature of jazz harmony, from a classical standpoint, is
the practice of replacing a dominant seventh chord with its tritone transposition. For
a musician with a classical education, these “tritone substitutions” can seem like harmonic sorcery—chaotic acts of rule breaking that defy all musical logic, yet nevertheless produce compelling musical effects. But as we will see, the tritone substitution is
anything but mysterious: indeed, it is a straightforward generalization of traditional
chromatic procedures, one that can easily be explained using our familiar geometrical
models.
Figure 10.3.1 applies a tritone substitution to the second chord in the ii7–V$–Imaj7
progression discussed at the start of the chapter. The tritone in the upper staff is
unaffected by the change, while the notes in the lower staff move semitonally in contrary motion. The substitution’s effectiveness can thus be attributed to two factors:
it preserves the leading tone and seventh of the V7 chord, the “tendency tones” most
directly responsible for pushing it forward toward the tonic; and it does not radically
disrupt the contrapuntal ﬂow in the remaining voices, transforming descending diatonic steps into descending chromatic steps. Figure 10.3.2 provides an example that
uses quartal voicings. (Here an additional voice plays the root of the chords; for the
time being, we can imagine that the bass player has miraculously intuited that the
pianist intended to make the substitution.) Once again, tritone substitution preserves
the tendency tones B-F and moves the remaining voices by semitone: A and E, the

Jazz

ninth and thirteenth of a G7 chord, become Bf and Figure 10.3.1 (a) A familiar
Ef, the thirteenth and ninth of Df7. Again, the sub- seventh-chord ii–V–I voicestituted notes ﬁt naturally within the contrapun- leading schema. (b) The
dominant chord can be replaced
tal framework of the original progression, leading
with its tritone transposition so
to familiar voice-leading motions in each of the as to preserve the notes in the
individual lines: in fact, the A-Bf-G motion in the upper staff, moving those in the
soprano of Figure 10.3.3 recalls a gesture common lower staff by semitone.
in classical minor-key harmony.
If we think about this a bit more, we will eventually notice that both of these examples exploit the
fact that tritones are unchanged by tritone transposition, while perfect fourths can be connected
to their tritone transpositions by semitonal voice
leading. It follows that as long as a chord can be
decomposed into perfect fourths and tritones, it can
be replaced by its tritone transposition without much disrupting the music’s harmonic or contrapuntal fabric. In effect, the substitution takes advantage of the symmetry, or near symmetry, of the chord’s two-note constituents. Figure 10.3.4 reminds
us that tritone transposition corresponds to reﬂection around the central horizontal
line of the two-note Möbius strip: every chord gets sent to the point where its image
would appear, if the “line of tritones” were in fact a mirror. Since tritones are at the
mirror’s location, they are identical to their tritone transpositions, and since perfect
fourths (or ﬁfths) are very close to the mirror, tritone transposition does not move
them very far. Musically, this means that tritone substitution preserves tritones while
minimally perturbing fourths and ﬁfths.
Three points are important here. First, tritone substitution relies crucially on the
fact that jazz harmony uses seventh chords rather than triads. A four-voice dominant seventh chord can be decomposed into a perfect ﬁfth and tritone, whereas a
plain triad cannot. (Similarly, the upper voices of a ﬁve-note ninth chord can be

Figure 10.3.2 Tritone substitution as applied to
the quartal version of the A voicing. The notes
in the middle staff are preserved, while those in
the upper staff move by semitone.

Figure 10.3.3 Tritone substitution
produces a f^7®^5 leap reminiscent
of the f^7®f^6®5 motion in classical
minor-key harmony.

361

362

history and analysis
Figure 10.3.4 (a) Tritones can be linked to their tritone transpositions by zero-semitone
voice leading, while perfect fourths can be linked to their tritone transpositions by semitonal
voice leading. (b) These facts reﬂect the geometry of two-note chord space.

decomposed into tritones and ﬁfths.12) Second, tritone substitution is most naturally applied to the dominant chord, since it preserves the all-important tritone
between leading tone and fourth scale degree. Contrapuntally, it may be possible
to apply tritone substitutions very broadly, but many of these substitutions disrupt
the basic musical skeleton described in §10.1 (Figure 10.3.5). Not surprisingly, jazz
musicians most often apply tritone substitution to dominant chords, less frequently
apply it to predominant chords, and almost never apply it to the tonic. Finally, tritone substitution and quartal chord voicings go hand in hand. Originally, jazz harmonies were much more clearly tertian, and tritone substitution was most often
found in the basic form shown in Figure 10.3.1. The increased use of added notes
eventually allowed jazz musicians to reinterpret traditional harmony quartally
while also making manifest the underlying logic of tritone substitution. (When a
chord is arranged in fourths, it is clear that tritone substitution preserves its quartal

12 In fact, efﬁcient voice leading between seventh chords (or the upper voices of ninth chords) preserves this partitioning when chord-roots relate by fourth, ﬁfth, or tritone: the voice-leading schema in
Figure 10.1.1a sends the third and seventh of D minor into the seventh and third of G7, while sending
the root and ﬁfth of D minor into the ﬁfth and root of G7. This is also apparent in the upper voices of
Figure 10.1.3. With other root progressions, the third/seventh pair exchanges places with the root/ﬁfth pair,
as in (C, G, E, B)®(C, G, E, A).

Jazz

organization.) The happy convergence between quartal voicings and tritone substitution may therefore have contributed to the increased systematization of what was
originally a more ad hoc collection of musical practices.
Readers will no doubt notice that this discussion echoes ideas in earlier chapters.
In §7.2, we discussed diatonic “third substitution” in classical music—the process
of replacing a diatonic triad, such as IV, with a third-related diatonic triad, such as
ii6. Our explanation was that the substitution kept two notes ﬁxed while moving the
remaining note by diatonic step (Figure 10.3.6). The preceding explanation of tritone
substitution has the same essential structure: here, tritone-related dominants share
two common tones (the crucial third and seventh) while the remaining notes move
by chromatic step. Tritone substitution, like diatonic third substitution, therefore preserves something of the harmonic and contrapuntal character of the original chord,
with the difference between the cases lying in the intrinsic geometry of the relevant
chord spaces: since three-note diatonic triads divide the octave into three nearly even
parts, they can be linked to their third transpositions by very efﬁcient voice leading; since fourths and ﬁfths divide the octave into two nearly even parts, they can be
linked efﬁciently to their tritone transpositions. This example nicely illustrates the
power of the geometrical approach: were it not for our intensive exploration of the
geometry of chord space, we might never think to associate the third substitutions of
the eighteenth century with the tritone substitutions of the twentieth. And thus we
would miss an important connection between these two very different periods.
Since the tritone substitution has its roots in basic musical facts, we should expect
it to appear in earlier styles as well. Figure 10.3.7a reminds us that the standard German sixth chord can be understood as a tritone substitution for the applied dominant
chord V7/V. (Indeed, tritone substitution presumably originates with augmented sixth
chords, as discussed in Chapter 8.) Figure 10.3.7b applies the tritone substitution to the
standard viiø$–I6 progression. The result is a striking progression from ivø7 to I6, commonly associated with Strauss’ Till Eulenspiegel. The progression demonstrates a principle close to any jazz musician’s heart: if a particular half-diminished chord works

Figure 10.3.5 Tritone substitution applied
to tonic (b) and predominant (c) chords. The
tonic substitution is not very effective, while the
predominant substitution is somewhat more so.

Figure 10.3.6 Diatonic thirdsubstitution (a) and chromatic
tritone-substitution (b). Both
substitutions preserve important
notes in the ﬁrst chord while
moving the remaining notes by
short distances.

363

364

history and analysis

Figure 10.3.7 Classical chord progressions that can be understood as tritone substitutions.
(a) The augmented sixth chord can be seen as a tritone substitution for V7/V. (b) The central
chord progression in Till Eulenspiegel can be seen as a tritone substitution for a common
viiø$–I progression. (c) The initial progression of Tristan can be seen as a tritone substitution
for iiø$–V. (d) In the “Forlane” from Le tombeau de Couperin, Ravel embellishes a descendingﬁfth sequence with tritone transpositions.

as a dominant sonority, then its tritone transposition will probably work as well. Figure
10.3.7c shows that the Tristan chord can be derived by applying the tritone substitution
to the ﬁrst chord in a standard iiø$–V7 progression. (Recall from Chapter 8 that Wagner
explicitly uses these substitutions in Tristan.) Finally, Figure 10.3.7d presents one of many
passages from Ravel that can be analyzed in terms of tritone substitution—a beautiful
g s–G7–c–f s–F7–Bf progression that embellishes
descending ﬁfths with tritone-related chords. (Since Figure 10.3.8 Voice leading
the music presents both chords in the tritone-re- between ﬁfth-related (a) and
lated pair, the term “tritone embellishment” might tritone-related (b) dominant
seventh chords. The two voice
be more appropriate here.) These are just some of
leadings are individually T-related,
the countless passages from nineteenth- and early and are nearly the same size.
twentieth-century music that involve something
like tritone substitution. From this perspective, jazz
simply codiﬁes procedures that are already present,
at least in embryo, in notated music.
Finally, it is worth noting that the tritone substitution depends on the very same features of
chord structure at play in descending-ﬁfths progressions. The two voice leadings in Figure 10.3.8
are roughly the same size, since their second

Jazz

chords differ only by semitone. Traditional tonal syntax exploits the ﬁrst voice
leading to connect ﬁfth-related dominant seventh chords in sequence. Tritone
substitution exploits the second to replace one dominant seventh chord with its
tritone transposition. In this sense, the possibility of tritone substitution is latent
in the basic routines of traditional tonality. Over the course of its history, tonal
harmony exploits this possibility with increasing frequency—beginning with augmented sixths in the eighteenth century, progressing through the occasional use
of tritone substitutions in the early nineteenth century, leading to more daring
impressionist uses of the technique, and culminating in its universal acceptance
in modern jazz.

10.4

altered chords and scales

In composed music, it is possible for chords to change as rapidly as the melody. In
improvisation, however, very high rates of harmonic change have the effect of constraining a player’s freedom; he or she expends so much mental energy thinking
about chords that little is left for melodic invention. As a result, jazz typically features
at most one or two chords per measure, with improvisers playing four, eight, or more
notes per chord. For exactly this reason, scales provide invaluable guidance about
which melodic notes will sound good, particularly when improvisers need to negotiate the altered and extended chords central to jazz harmony.
The lower staves in Figure 10.4.1 show the basic voice-leading skeleton from
the beginning of the chapter. Since the harmonies all belong to C diatonic, it would
be possible to play that scale for the entire passage. But doing so requires the player
to handle the avoid notes with some care: for instance, the tonic scale degree, when
played over the dominant chord, will typically need to be treated as a passing or
neighboring tone. Figure 10.4.1 identiﬁes an alternative approach, where the avoid

Figure 10.4.1 An improviser who plays diatonically will need to handle the “avoid notes”
with care, for instance by making them into passing or neighboring notes. Another alternative
is to raise the avoid notes by semitone, in which case they can be used more freely. The
resulting ii–V–I progression uses three different scales.

365

366

history and analysis

notes are raised by semitone to create altered chords.13 Since there are no avoid notes,
the improviser is now free to treat all seven scale tones as if they were harmonic: for
instance it becomes possible to leap in and out of the altered notes, sustain them
for long durations, and so on. But notice that the passage now involves a series of
three different scales: ii7 is accompanied by C diatonic, V7 by G acoustic, and Imaj7
by G diatonic. The simple ii–V–I progression, the archetype of functional harmony,
has become a fundamentally polyscalar construction.
Figure 10.4.2 shows that the G acoustic scale combines a lower whole-tone fragment
G-A-B-Cs with an upper octatonic fragment Cs-D-E-F-G, each spanning a tritone.
(Jazz musicians sometimes call this the “lydian dominant scale.”14) Now it can happen
that one musician will spontaneously use a tritone substitution while others do not, as
in Figure 10.4.2b: here, the pianist plays fII7 while the bass player plays the ﬁfth scale
degree. Given the bass, listeners are likely to hear G as being the most important note
in the chord, understanding the scale to be the fourth mode of Df acoustic. Notice
Figure 10.4.2 (a) The lydian dominant mode of the acoustic scale combines a wholetone lower tritone with an octatonic upper tritone. (b) Here, the pianist makes a tritone
substitution, playing the Df lydian dominant mode, while the bass player does not. (c) The
result is a G altered scale, which combines an octatonic lower tritone with a whole-tone upper
tritone.

13 George Russell’s Lydian Chromatic Concept (1953, but reprinted in 2001) explicitly discusses this
practice. However, the technique itself was used by Debussy and other early twentieth-century composers.
14 The term is symptomatic of a widespread tendency to elide the difference between scale and mode.

Jazz

that here the whole-tone and octatonic fragments have switched positions: it is the
lower tritone G-Af-Bf-B-Cs that is octatonic, and the upper tritone Cs-Ds-F-G that
is whole tone. Jazz musicians call this new scale the G “altered scale,” since it contains
many more nondiatonic “alterations” than G lydian dominant: rather than the solitary
s^4, the altered scale has f9, s9, s11/f5, and s5/f13.15 Perhaps its clearest precedent in
classical music occurs in the minor mode, where the lowered and raised forms of the
leading tone sometimes collide (Figure 10.4.3).16
We have now considered two ways to ﬁll the
tritones G-Cs and Cs-G with whole-tone or octatonic scale fragments. Since each tritone can contain either fragment, it is reasonable to wonder
what happens when we combine them freely. It
turns out that we can form three different scales
in this way—whole tone, acoustic, and octatonic,
with the acoustic appearing in both lydian dominant and altered modes (Figure 10.4.4). Each
contains the notes {G, B, Cs, F} and hence can
appear over either V7 or its tritone substitute.
These scales, together with the diatonic, are in
many ways the central scales of jazz harmony:
they are played by countless improvisers and
are highlighted in virtually every jazz textbook I have encountered.17 They have also
reappeared at various points throughout this
book. Chapter 4 argued that these scales are
theoretically interesting, since they are the
only scales with one-or-two semitone steps
and three-or-four semitone thirds. Chapter 9
showed that the same scales play an important role in a wide variety of twentiethcentury notated music.18 Here we see that
they are essential to jazz as well.
Figure 10.4.5 reproduces a number of
extended and altered dominant sonorities

15 The altered scale is often spelled with two thirds and no fourths, as in G-Af-Bf-Bn-Df-Ef-F-G
(Figure 9.3.18, R43).
16 It would be interesting, in fact, to investigate whether early jazz players played this quasi-harmonic
minor scale in contexts where later musicians use the altered scale.
17 See Tymoczko 1997 for a survey of various textbooks’ treatments of scales.
18 Interestingly, it was jazz theorists—in their role as practical-minded pedagogues—who ﬁrst isolated
this collection of scales and asserted their importance. And though more academic theorists were aware of
the individual scales, they did not begin to emphasize the group until well after they had been discussed in
jazz. Indeed, the ﬁrst published theoretical discussion of the four scales seems to be Tymoczko 1997, which
was preceded—and directly inspired—by Levine 1989.

367

Figure 10.4.3
(a) A harmonic
minor scale with
an additional
(neighboring)
f^7. (b) The
resulting notes
are very similar
to the altered
scale.

Figure 10.4.4
There are four
ways to combine
octatonic and
whole-tone
upper and
lower tritones,
producing one
whole tone scale,
one octatonic
scale, and two
modes of the
acoustic scale.

368

history and analysis

from the beginning of Chapter 8, showing that each belongs to one of our four
scales. One might wonder whether one of these scales will inevitably contain any
given altered dominant chord. The answer is “almost.” Recall from §4.4 (and Figure
10.4.6) that seven types of scale contain every “nonchromatic chord”—that is, every
chord that does not include a chromatic cluster such as {C, Cs, D}. To incorporate
all of these chords we would need to expand our four-scale vocabulary to include the
hexatonic and harmonic collections. (Jazz musicians typically use chromatic clusters
only as a special effect, so we do not need to worry about chords with clusters.) Interestingly, however, it turns out that the hexatonic and harmonic scales are in practice
rarely needed. Figure 10.4.7 shows that there are only four nonchromatic set classes
with ﬁve or fewer notes not contained within some diatonic, acoustic, whole-tone,
or octatonic scale. Consequently, the four basic scales are sufﬁcient for most musical
circumstances.
Of course, jazz musicians use other scales as well (Figure 10.4.8). Pentatonic scales
can impart a “fourthy” ﬂavor to predominant, dominant, and tonic chords. The

Figure 10.4.5
Scales that are
compatible with
common altereddominant
chords.

Figure 10.4.6 The
transpositions of
these seven scales
contain all the
sets that do not
themselves contain
a chromatic subset
such as {C, Cs, D},
and hence all of the
common extended
or altered tonal
harmonies.

Jazz
Figure 10.4.7 The ﬁrst column lists the number of set classes containing a chromatic cluster
such as {C, Cs, D}. The second lists the number of set classes contained in the diatonic,
acoustic, whole tone, and octatonic scales. The third lists the number of set classes that do not
contain a chromatic cluster, but are not contained in one of these four scales. All set classes
belong to one of these three categories.

Three Notes
Four Notes
Five Notes
Six Notes

Chromatic
1
5
16
32

Dia, Aco,
Wt, Oct
11
23
19
13

Other
0
1
3
5

Figure 10.4.8 Other scales commonly played in jazz. Pentatonic scales are often used over ii,
V, and I. The hexatonic scale can be played against a tonic major seventh. The acoustic scale
often appears over iiø7 in the “locrian s2” mode; the same scale sometimes appears against
a bare tonic triad (without the seventh). Harmonic minor is sometimes used for minor-key
dominant chords, as in classical music, and harmonic major can be used over a majorseventh tonic.

acoustic scale can be played over a iiø7 or I chord, lending a minor coloring to the
major mode ii–V–I. Acoustic and harmonic minor scales often appear in minormode contexts, while the hexatonic can be played over a major or minor tonic
chord. More unusual scales, such as the gypsy scale, are sometimes used to evoke an
exotic or non-Western ambience. Taken together, these conventions provide a fairly
robust set of rules for associating chords and scales, thus synthesizing functional
harmony, nineteenth-century chordal techniques, and impressionist scale use.19 And

19 Jazz pedagogues, as noted in Chapter 9, describe these conventions as “the principles of chord-scale
compatibility.”

369

370

history and analysis

though these fundamental principles are familiar from the twentieth-century notated
tradition, they are applied in jazz with a systematic rigor that far exceeds anything
found earlier.

10.5

bass and upper voice tritone
substitutions

I have already mentioned that a bass player or pianist will sometimes make a tritone substitution without alerting the other musicians. In bass-only tritone substitutions, the same upper voices are reinterpreted as belonging to a new root
a tritone away. This is illustrated in Figure 10.5.1a, where the seventh, ninth,
third, and thirteenth of a G7 voicing become the third, ﬂat thirteenth, seventh,
and sharp ninth of a Df7 altered chord. (This could occur if the bass player, but
not the pianist, decided to apply a tritone substitution.) In the upper voice version of the substitution, the bass stays ﬁxed, while the upper voices move by tritone. For instance, in Figure 10.5.1b, the seventh, ninth, third, and thirteenth of
the G7 voicing become the third, ﬂat thirteenth, seventh, and sharp ninth of a G7
altered chord.20 (This could happen if the pianist applied the tritone substitution
independent of the bass player.) Note that this substitution changes the macroharmony more dramatically than the bass-only version, since many more notes are
affected: both voicings in Figure 10.5.1a belong to the same G acoustic collection,
while in (b) the second belongs to Df acoustic.
Figure 10.5.1 Bass substitution
Scales provide a useful way to conceptualize
and upper-voice substitution.
these transformations. The whole-tone, octatonic,
Here either the bass player or
lydian dominant, and acoustic scales all contain
pianist makes the substitution,
but not both. In each case, the
both the dominant note (^5) and its tritone substieffect is to transform a diatonic
tute (f^2); thus as long as a chord’s notes are chovoicing containing the seventh,
sen from one of these scales, they will be consistent
ninth, third, and thirteenth above
with either of the chord roots a bass player might
the root into an altered voicing
play (Figure 10.5.2). Furthermore, since both whole
containing third, ﬂat thirteenth,
tone and octatonic are tritone symmetrical, upper
seventh, and sharp nine.
voice substitution will send a whole-tone voicing to another whole-tone voicing, and an octatonic voicing to another octatonic voicing. (Since
any of the notes in these scales can reasonably be
played over a V7 chord, these new chords will be
guaranteed to work reasonably well.) Meanwhile,
upper-voice substitution exchanges the G lydian
dominant mode for G altered: hence any collection
of upper voices drawn from one of these scales can

20 This is just the A voicing of Df7 over a G bass.

Jazz
Figure 10.5.2 Upper-voice substitution leaves the whole-tone and octatonic scales
unchanged (top two lines), exchanges the lydian dominant and altered modes of the acoustic
scale (line three), and sends the diatonic scale to its tritone transposition (bottom line).

Figure 10.5.3 Independent applications of the tritone transposition can clash with purely
diatonic voicings. Here, the diatonic notes C and D clash with the bass player’s (tritone
substitute) Df; similarly, the unsubstituted G in the bass clashes with the pianist’s Gf
diatonic.

be transposed by tritone to produce a voicing drawn from the other. By contrast,
this same procedure can lead to problems in diatonic contexts: since upper-voice
substitution sends the C diatonic scale to Fs diatonic, it can create clashes with the
bass line, as in Figure 10.5.3.
One important musical consequence is that a soloist can always play a descending-by-semitone melodic sequence over a sequence of dominant harmonies that
descend by ﬁfths. In effect, the soloist applies the upper-voice tritone substitution
to every other chord, as shown in Figure 10.5.4. The harmonic meaning of the notes
thus alternates between chords: for example, in Figure 10.5.4a, the augmented triad
represents the seventh, sharp eleventh, and ninth in the ﬁrst and third chords, and
the third, root, and sharp ﬁfth of the second and fourth chords (Figure 10.5.5).
Similarly, the melodic fourths in 10.5.4b alternate between lydian dominant and
altered voicings. This idiom, by which dominant voicings move chromatically over
a descending ﬁfth bass line, is ubiquitous in jazz, providing an easy way to cope with
fast descending ﬁfth sequences.
Readers will not be shocked to learn that these ideas are again anticipated, often
very explicitly, in the music of Debussy, Ravel, and other early twentieth-century
composers. Debussy in particular was extremely fond of the lydian dominant mode,
and often constructed textures in which a dominant seventh chord is accompanied

371

372

history and analysis
Figure 10.5.4 Chromatically descending voicings can always accompany descending-ﬁfths
patterns in the bass. In effect, tritone transposition is applied to every other chord in the
sequence.

Figure 10.5.5 This
table shows how tritone
substitution affects the
notes in a dominant voicing.
The root of the dominant
chord becomes the s4 (or
s11) and vice versa. (Notes
here are labeled according
to their intervals above the
bass.) The f9 and ﬁfth are
exchanged, and so on.

by a sharp eleventh. (See Figure 10.5.6a.) Both Debussy
and Ravel also apply tritone substitution independently to either the bass or upper voices: for instance,
in Figure 10.5.6b, Ravel begins by alternating between
C7 (expressed by the “mixolydian f6 mode”) and Gf7
(expressed by a voicing that belongs both to Gf diatonic
and lydian dominant); when the music returns, however, the bass stays ﬁxed, producing an “altered” voicing
of the C7. In (c), from Debussy’s “La danse de Puck,” a Cs
altered scale alternates with standard V7 voicing, suggesting an upper-voice substitution. Finally, Figure 10.5.6d
presents a much-discussed passage from Debussy, in
which semitonally descending A voicings in the right
hand appear over descending ﬁfths in the bass, exactly
as in Figure 10.5.4. (This passage includes an upper
voice Af pedal.21) In light of the preceding examples,
it does not seem entirely anachronistic to describe this
as a series of Debussian dominants, in which diatonic
voicings alternate with their tritone substitutes.

21 This progression echoes a similar passage in Berg, as discussed in Stuckenschmidt 1965.

Figure 10.5.6 Impressionist composers preﬁgured many central ideas of jazz harmony. In
(a), from Prelude to “The Afternoon of a Faun,” mm. 61–62, Debussy uses an acoustic scale
over V7, as in Figure 10.4.1. In (b), from Ravel’s “Ondine,” bass substitution is applied to
the dominant chord at the end of m. 46 and m. 51. In (c), from the Prelude “La danse de
Puck,” Debussy applies something like upper-voice substitution, moving between altered
and diatonic dominant voicings. In (d), from Six épigraphes antiques, No. 4, Debussy uses
descending-semitone voicings over a descending-ﬁfths bass line, applying the upper-voice
substitution to every other chord in the sequence.

#œ œ œ #œ #œ œ œ œ œ œ œ œ œ œ œ
3
3
j
j
j j3
# œœœ
œœ œœ œœ œœ œœ
œœ
œœ
œ
œ
? œ˙ . œ œ œ œ
˙.
˙.
˙.
&

˙

bœ bœ
œœ
œœ
œœ
bœ
bœ bœ bœ
b
œ
b
œ
œ
œ
œ
œ
œ
œ
œ
œ
œ
œ
œ
œ
œ
œ
œ
œ
œ
œ
œ
œ
œ
b
œ
?œ
bœ
œ
œ

m. 46

?

j
œ

bœ.

bœ

œ
˙.
C7

bœ
bœ

bœ

Gf7 (diatonic)

m. 51 (transposed up by minor third)

œœ
œœ
œœ
bœ
bœ
œœ b œ œ œ œ œ œ œœ œ œ œ œ œ œ œœ œ œ œ œ œ œ b œ b œ œ b œ œ œ œ œ
bœ
j bœ
bœ
œ b b b œœœ
? œ œ˙ . b œ b œ .
œ
œ ˙.
&

C7

C7 (altered scale)

tritone-related pairs:

A/Ds

D/Gs

œ œ œ #œ œ #œ #œ #œ
œ
.
®
œ # œ ..
& # œr n ˙˙˙
œœœœ Œ . œ œ œ œ
˙
ŸÈ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ ŸÈ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ ŸI~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
#˙
˙
#œ
œ
? #œ
..
..
#œ

Cs altered
Cs7[f5f9]

Cs diatonic/lydian dominant
[f13]

Cs9
3

3
3
bœ
& b œ b œ œ œœœ œ œ b # œœœ
‰ bœ ‰ œ ‰
J
j ‰ b œj ‰
? Œ
bœ
bœ
bœ

Bf7

Ef7 (alt.)

b œ bb œœ
œœ b œ œ œœ œ b œœ œ
b œœ ‰ œœ ‰ b b œœ ‰
J
j ‰ b œj ‰ j ‰
bœ
bœ
bœ
bœ
bœ
3

Af7

Df7 (alt.)

Gf7

374

history and analysis

10.6

polytonality, sidestepping, and
“playing out”

So far we have been imagining an idealized performance situation in which players
are always perfectly in synch, and their notes systematically related. But of course this
is unrealistic: in the blur of the improvisatory moment, there is room for a good deal
of asynchrony, as players go their own way by stepping outside of the underlying harmony. One of the most interesting features of contemporary jazz is the way players
negotiate and exploit this possibility—deliberately moving between states of being
together and being apart.
The origins of this technique can perhaps be traced to the blues, which is characterized by “blue notes” that create a delicious dissonance with the underlying harmony.
In Figure 10.6.1, scale degrees f3 and f5 are superimposed above a dominant seventh.
The music thus suggests a kind of polytonalFigure 10.6.1 The blues often features
ity, or clash between independent harmonic
polytonal clashes between melody and
streams, in which an upper-register (Afriharmony.
can American) “blues scale” contrasts with
a lower-register European harmony. Figure
10.6.2 presents a more audacious example,
drawn from Warne Marsh’s solo on the tune
“Smog Eyes.” The underlying harmony here
is a tonic Ef major, but Marsh begins his
solo with a wonderfully brash E major chord a half step too high. What is more, he
embellishes the top note of the line with an upper neighbor. As s^4 in Ef major, An
would typically resolve upward to the Bf; but as the fourth scale degree in E major,
it is an upper neighbor to the Gs. The authority of Marsh’s phrasing is such that
the downward resolution feels utterly compelling, suggesting that we hear E major
as being both locally stable (relative to the An, which wants to resolve downward
to it) and globally unstable (relative to the key of the rest of the ensemble). Marsh
intensiﬁes the feeling of resolution by lowering Gs to Gn, initiating a descending
arpeggio that resolves the entire E major triad down by semitone to the tonic Ef.
(Note how register and tonality interact: the line ascends to the doubly dissonant
An, the upper neighbor to the third of a chord that is itself an upper neighbor; then

Figure 10.6.2 Out-of-key playing in Warne Marsh’s solo on “Smog Eyes.” Marsh plays an
E major ﬁgure over an Ef harmony; the A is an upper neighbor to the Gs, and the entire E
major triad resolves downward to Ef.

Jazz

the descent brings the music back into the key.) All of this, of course, occurs over
a supposedly stable tonic triad. Marsh thus exploits two fundamentally different
mechanisms of tension and release: there is the standard tonal oscillation between
dominant and tonic, but also the oscillation between states of being in the same key
and states of being apart.
These concepts can again be applied, mutatis mutandis, to music in the classical tradition. Chopin, for example, was an improvising musician who also liked to
exploit sudden shifts between semitonally related keys. For example, the B section
of his ﬁrst Nocturne, shown in Figure 10.6.3a, contains a four-measure phrase that
shifts from Df major to D major and back. This semitonal shift—which a jazz
musician might call “sidestepping”—is perhaps comparable to Marsh’s temporary
shift from Ef to E major. Figure 10.6.3b shows an example from Chopin’s second
Nocturne, where a cadence on Bf major immediately leads to a dazzling digression
to E major. The underlying musical impulse here is again not so foreign to jazz: the
music brieﬂy and dramatically shifts to a distant and colorful key, before settling
back to its proper home. Of course, an improviser like Marsh typically shifts key
independently of the rest of the ensemble, creating a polytonal clash. Chopin, who
Figure 10.6.3 Sidestepping in Chopin. (a) In the ﬁrst Nocturne (Op. 9 No. 1), Chopin shifts
suddenly from Df major to D major, in the middle of the phrase. (b) In the second Nocturne
(Op. 9 No. 2), he returns from Bf to Ef by way of E major.

375

376

history and analysis

as a solo player was in complete control of the music, and who was in any case uninterested in polytonality, shifts the entire texture at the same time.22
There are some jazz pieces in which the ii–V–I architecture of functional harmony disappears almost entirely, being replaced by this process of moving in and
out of synchrony. (The ambiguous term “modal jazz” is sometimes used in this context, though it can also refer to other musical phenomena.23) McCoy Tyner’s “Passion
Dance” is a good example: although the tune itself contains a few chord changes, the
solo section is entirely based on a tonic F7 chord, implying a drone-like mixolydian.
In his solo, Tyner reinforces this drone-like feeling by continually reverting to a low
F-C ﬁfth in the bass. Above this, the right hand plays melodic stacks of fourths, with
the fourths F-Bf-Ef and G-C-F representing the tonic voicings, and formations like
Fs-B-E representing the nontonic (out-of-key) states.
Figure 10.6.4 shows two phrases that occur near the beginning of Tyner’s solo,
each exhibiting the same basic oscillation between in-key and out-of-key playing. In
the ﬁrst, Tyner repeats the descending stepwise pattern G-F-Ef in an unsystematic

Figure 10.6.4 Harmonic motion in “Passion Dance” largely consists in oscillations between
in-key and out-of-key playing.

22 The semitonal shifts in Prokoﬁev and Shostakovich sometimes do create polytonal effects, and are
perhaps even closer to those in jazz. See Frankenhauser 2008.
23 “Modal jazz” can be used to describe either highly diatonic pieces with very few chord changes, or
relatively chromatic music in which harmonic tension is generated by out-of-key playing.

Jazz

chromatic sequence, presenting it on Ef (in a variant form), Fs, F, D, Ds, Cs, C and
Bf, before returning to F mixolydian. (Note that the out-of-key section begins with
the hands moving in contrary motion, with the right-hand scale fragment descending while the left-hand fourths ascend.) The second phrase departs from F mixolydian only in its fourth measure, moving to the black-note pentatonic collection while
the quartal voicing shifts up to Fs-B-E. One can hear this music as suggesting a dominant seventh sonority on Fs, a semitone away from the tonic. However, the musical
impression is not so much of motion between well-deﬁned chords as of oscillation
between two basic harmonic states—“home” and “away,” with the “away” state potentially manifesting itself in a variety of different harmonic colors.
While the solos on “Passion Dance” are almost entirely devoid of traditional
chord progressions, many jazz pieces combine this sort of “playing outside” with traditional tonal functionality. Harmonic tension in this music thus arises from motion
within a key (from stable I to unstable V and back), from motion between keys (from
the global tonic to various subsidiary regions), from neighboring and passing tones
(creating ﬂeeting dissonances with the underlying harmony), and from more radical
motion between states of being together and being apart. The interaction between
these four kinds of tension can produce music of extraordinary subtlety, in which
the choice between functional tonality and other modes of pitch organization can be
made anew every few seconds.
I should also mention one more way in which jazz musicians evoke a sense of
polytonality or “being apart”: the use of dominant voicings that contain a triad foreign
to the tonic key. (Pedagogues sometimes call these “upper structure” voicings.) Figure 10.6.5 shows how to combine the essential notes of the dominant harmony (root,
third, and seventh) with a triad foreign to the underlying key. (The ﬁgure eliminates
those voicings that contain an Fs, which would create a chromatic cluster with F-G
in the dominant voicing, or a C, which would prematurely anticipate the resolution

Figure 10.6.5 “Upper structure” dominant voicings combine root, third, and seventh in
the bass with a foreign triad in the upper voices. Upper-voice tritone substitution leaves the
lowest three notes unchanged, transposing the triad by tritone. This provides a convenient
way to remember and categorize these voicings.

377

378

history and analysis

of the leading tone.) Jazz soloists can create polychordal effects by emphasizing the
“upper structure” triads, for instance by playing prominent E-major or Ef-major
arpeggios over an accompanimental G7 chord. Although these upper structure arpeggios could in principle be described as altered dominant chords, they evoke a sensation
of polytonality not too dissimilar from the cases we have been considering.

10.7

bill evans’ “oleo”

We’ll now use these ideas to analyze Bill Evans’ version of Sonny Rollins’ “Oleo,” from
the 1958 trio album Everybody Digs Bill Evans. It’s an unusual and austere piece, like
Bach in its stripped-down rigor: for much of the recording, Evans plays only with his
right hand, while the drummer Philly Joe Jones lays out, leaving the bass player (Sam
Jones) to improvise two-part counterpoint with the solo line. By omitting left-hand
chords, Evans creates space to depart from the tune’s underlying framework—playing
outside the key for a signiﬁcant portion of the solo. (Because of the wide registral and
timbral separation between the instruments, clashes between melody and bass are
not at all jarring.) The coordination in the ensemble is itself virtuosic—the tempo
is fast (approximately 240 beats per minute) and the music replete with destabilizing syncopations and polyrhythms. Yet the players manage not only to make musical
sense, but also to swing.
The piece is a repeating 32-bar AABA form, based on the chord changes to
Gershwin’s “I Got Rhythm” (Figure 10.7.1). (Each AABA unit is called a “chorus.”)
Traditionally, the B section of “Oleo” is improvised, with only the chords being ﬁxed.
In the ﬁrst three choruses, Philly Joe Jones drums normally only in the B section; in
the A sections he either remains silent or plays a dotted half-note polyrhythm on the
hi-hat. (At the start of the fourth chorus, he explodes into activity in what is, to my
mind, one of the most dramatic entrances in all of jazz.) Two features of the tune are
noteworthy. First, the B section (mm. 17–24) features a series of whole-tone voicings that descend semitonally over descending ﬁfth chords, discussed earlier in §10.5.
Second, Evans begins the dotted-quarter ﬁgure on the second eighth note of measure
17, creating a continuous dotted-quarter pulse that lasts until the second half of measure 20. This is a common technique, whereby soloists start a polyrhythm so that it
will synchronize with the main pulse at a structurally important moment—here the
downbeat of m. 19.

10.7.1 Chorus 1
The solo opens with a blues gesture emphasizing f5 and f3, shown in Figure 10.7.2.
The phrase is delayed so as to start on beat three of the ﬁrst measure, although the
casual listener might easily miss this. The sixth measure of the solo features an octatonic scale over Ef7 and is followed by a pair of two-measure phrases that recall the
blues-inﬂected opening. (These phrases develop the Bf-F-Ef-D motive bracketed on
the example.) Evans then plays two repetitions of a two-and-a-half-measure phrase,

Jazz

379
Figure 10.7.1
Sonny Rollins’
tune “Oleo,” as
played by Bill
Evans.

each divided into six-beat units. These phrases sidestep between a B major triad,
whose third is embellished with an upper neighbor, and a Bf major triad embellished
in the same way. The B major chord can be understood either as an out-of-key element or as a (triadic!) tritone substitution for a dominant F major triad.
The B section begins with a development of this six-beat idea: what was once a
second-inversion B major triad becomes a root position G major triad, representing
the seventh, ninth, and eleventh of an Aø7 chord. Figure 10.7.3 interprets this as an
efﬁcient voice leading between Bf and G major triads—reminiscent of the chromatic
progressions we ﬁnd in nineteenth-century music, although here the G major triad
is an upper structure of Aø7. (The Bn suggests the A mode of the F acoustic scale, also
known as “locrian s2.”) The next phrase spins out this idea into a longer melodic
line. The ﬁnal A section begins with another example of sidestepping, as secondinversion major triads slide chromatically back and forth between Bf and C, leading

380

history and analysis

Figure 10.7.2
The ﬁrst chorus
of Evans’ solo.

to an embellished scalar descent from F5 to A3. It is interesting that the ﬁnal sixteen
bars of the chorus feature four appearances of the same basic musical shape, marked
on the score with the Greek letter b. Having somewhat less individuality than a classical motive, this “shape” is more like a turn or melodic curlicue, a stylized way to get
from one place to another.24 This particular pattern is characteristic of Evans’ playing, and appears repeatedly in many of his solos; almost every jazz improviser has a
similar collection of favorite melodic devices, small “signatures” that help deﬁne the
player’s style or sound.

24 In this respect it is perhaps analogous to the small cells that contribute to the identity of an Indian
Rag.

Jazz

381

Figure 10.7.3 Measures 47–49
articulate an efﬁcient voice leading
between Bf and G major triads.
However, the G triad represents
the upper notes of an extended Aø7
chord.

10.7.2 Chorus 2
The second chorus, shown in Figure 10.7.4, begins by linearizing a set of four-note
voicings. Figure 10.7.5 shows that the Cs minor seventh can be understood as a tritone
substitution for, or upper structure of, G7, though it is also possible to understand it
as a chromatic passing chord.25 The next phrase features rhythmic displacement of
a sort that is quite common to jazz: the rhythmic and registral accents are on beats
2 and 4, as if the entire phrase had been shifted forward by one beat (Figure 10.7.6).

Figure 10.7.4
The second
chorus of Evans’
solo.

25 One implication of Figure 10.5.4 is that “tritone substitute” and “chromatic passing chord” are
intimately connected.

382

history and analysis
Figure 10.7.5 The ﬁrst phrase of the chorus linearizes a collection of
four-note voicings, similar to those discussed earlier in the chapter.

Figure 10.7.6 The second phrase of the chorus displaces the accent: on its own, the melody
would be heard with the registrally accented notes on strong beats (lower line); as played,
however, the notes are rhythmically weak, creating a kind of polyrhythm.

The B section begins with a trick that appears in the statement of the tune: the
augmented triad D-Bf-Fs, originally the root, ﬂat thirteenth, and third of the chord,
is shifted down by semitone as the chord roots fall by ﬁfth, producing Cs-A-F, the
sharp eleventh, ninth, and seventh of the chord. The pitches of the sixth phrase recall
the very opening of the solo (Figure 10.7.2, mm. 33–35), except here the En is treated
as a lower neighbor to the F; meanwhile, the dotted-quarter rhythm sets up the virtuosic polyrhythms of the next chorus. The end of the phrase returns to eighth notes,
delaying the resolution of the Bf7 chord until the third beat of m. 94. Philly Joe Jones
enters precisely when Evans ends his phrase, one bar before the end of the chorus—an
incredibly brash entrance that sets the stage for the dazzling music that is to follow.

10.7.3 Chorus 3
The climactic chorus, shown in Figure 10.7.7, reaches a peak of rhythmic density,
chromaticism, and polyrhythmic complexity. It is built on a common rhythmic
device, an extended series of dotted sixteenth notes grouped in fours. On the page, the
rhythm looks almost unplayable, particularly at this tempo, but it is not actually that
difﬁcult. (To practice it, begin by playing a series of dotted quarters against a quarter-note pulse; then, while holding the dotted-quarter pulse ﬁrmly in mind, let your
ﬁngers play four notes in the span of each dotted quarter.) Although conceptually

Jazz

383

straightforward, the device produces a spectacular impression and has been adopted
by a number of musicians.
Evans’ playing here is largely chromatic and outside the tonal system: he moves
the motive F-Gf-F-D up and down by semitone, with no regard for the underlying chord changes—an apotheosis of the more cautious sidestepping earlier in the
solo. (Note, by the way, that both the rhythm and the contour of this motive are
anticipated by the seemingly throwaway turn in mm. 5 and 13 of the tune.) Since
the dotted-sixteenth groups fall on the downbeat of every third measure, the rhythm

Figure 10.7.7
The third chorus
of Evans’ solo.

384

history and analysis

articulates three-measure units. However, the pitches articulate a phrase of nine dotted-quarters that is repeated a half step lower (Figure 10.7.8).26 Evans breaks off his
polyrhythm on the fourth beat of the seventh measure of the chorus, taking a onebar rest that allows him to resynchronize with the tune’s eight-bar units. After this
brief pause, the second phrase begins a ﬁve-group unit that descends chromatically
(mm. 105–106), repeated at the interval of an ascending major third (mm. 107–108).
(Note that here Evans observes the two-measure phrasing of the tune, reigning in
the dotted quarters’ tendency to group the measures into threes.) The next phrase
(mm. 109–112) begins with another chromatically descending ﬁve-group unit, but
continues diatonically, creating a subtle feeling of resolution as the chromatic macroharmony clariﬁes. Note that the sequence picks up right on schedule on the second
eighth note of m. 109, suggesting that there is a missing dotted-quarter unit across
the barline of mm. 108–109.
Figure 10.7.8 The rhythm of the dotted sixteenth-note ﬁgure articulates three-measure
groups. However, the pitches articulate a nine dotted-quarter sequence.

The B section opens with the last appearance of the dotted-sixteenth-note idea,
this time using a G harmonic minor scale over a D7 chord. The next phrase returns
to the shapely melodic playing of the earlier sections of the solo: we hear a G altered
scale over G7; a Gf7 arpeggio that suggests an upper structure of (or tritone substitution for) the C7; and a slightly chromaticized C-7 arpeggio. The phrase ends with a
little octatonic ﬁllip over F7. Evans marks the return of the A section by introducing a
new harmonic idea, a quartal passage articulating the notes F-G-Bf-C.

10.7.4 Chorus 4
Like the last act of a Shakespeare play, Chorus 4 lowers the energy level of the climactic Chorus 3, bringing the solo to a satisfying close (Figure 10.7.9). The music
opens by developing the quartal idea introduced in the last eight bars of Chorus 3.
(Jazz players pride themselves on this sort of ﬂexible phrasing, in which the improvised motives blur the tune’s section boundaries.) The subtle process of variation in
these measures is illustrated in Figure 10.7.10: we begin by moving straight up and
down the inverted stack of fourths F-Bf-C-F. Evans then varies the gesture’s contour and rhythm, playing a series of “down by step, up by third” motions along the
“scale” Fs-B-Cs-[Fs]. He repeats this varied form a semitone lower in the “tonic”
stack of fourths. The fourth statement moves the pattern backward in time by one

26 I have my doubts about whether Evans meant to do this, though I feel uncomfortable betting against
his ingenuity.

Jazz

385

eighth note. Finally, the ﬁfth iteration recalls the beginning of the ﬁrst, though with
the triplet now displaced forward in time. The impression is of a kaleidoscopic
series of ever-changing variations, as the same basic elements are recombined in
new ways.
A relatively simple descending line in mm. 134–136 leads to an idea whose overt
bluesiness recalls the very beginning of the solo. Figure 10.7.11 shows how Evans
plays with this musical idea in these next few measures: the second statement shifts
the pattern upward so that it starts on Fn rather than Dn—transposing the motive
up by step along the non-octave repeating scale (D4, F4, Bf4, Df5, Ef5, E5). He also
compresses the third note so the repetitions occur on weak eighth notes. The third
statement uses the same pitches and rhythms as the second, but begins an eighth
note later, so that the repeated notes are now on the beat again. (Note that these
two phrases also vary the number of repeated notes.) Once more, the impression is

Figure 10.7.9
The fourth
chorus of Evans’
solo.

386

history and analysis
Figure 10.7.10 Motivic development at the
opening of the fourth chorus.

Figure 10.7.11
Development of
the bluesy motif.

of a dazzling process of continuous musical variation, wherein the same basic elements are constantly reconﬁgured—as if you could never step twice into the same
musical river.
The B section begins with a series of chromatically ﬁlled-in major thirds; these
ascend by minor third while the harmonies descend by ﬁfth (Aø7, D7, G7). Figure
10.7.12 interprets the underlying musical logic: in the lower staves, we ﬁnd augmented
triads descending semitonally over descending ﬁfths harmonies as in mm. 17–24 and
82–83. Evans, not content to use this stock pattern for a third time, hits upon a clever
variation: instead of moving down by semitone from one augmented triad to the
next, he moves up by minor third—producing the same series of augmented triads,
but now in an ascending fashion. This spontaneous stroke of music-theoretical inspiration exploits two different kinds of substitution: tritone substitution, which allows
semitonally descending augmented triads to accompany dominant seventh chords
descending by ﬁfth, and what might be called “major-third substitution” (deriving
from the augmented triad’s threefold symmetry), which allows Evans to replace aug-

Jazz

387
Figure 10.7.12
With augmented
triads, ascending
minor thirds
and descending
semitones
produce the
same sequence of
chords.

mented triads that descend by semitone with augmented triads that ascend by minor
third.27
The rest of the phrase is more typical, using scales and arpeggios to outline the
underlying harmonies. The solo ends by returning to the bluesy idea of m. 137, doubling its repeated notes at the major third, evoking Stravinsky as much as the blues
proper. Evans ends his solo by developing the last two notes of this gesture, falling
chromatically to A-Cs. Noticing the waning intensity, Philly Joe Jones stops drumming in preparation for the bass solo.
These sorts of relationships would be interesting if they were found in a piece
of composed music, carefully constructed over weeks or months. But their appearance in such a rhythmically complex improvisation is truly remarkable. Many classical musicians, I suspect, would be hard pressed simply to keep time with Evans’
rhythm section—indeed, it can be hard enough to follow the form while listening to
the record. (Philly Joe Jones, with his dotted half-note polyrhythms, certainly doesn’t
help!) That Evans is able to do so, while spontaneously developing a coherent musical statement, must be counted an act of genuine virtuosity. Whether we look at the
large-scale form of the piece, with its recurrent motives and organic formal development, or at small-scale processes of variation, the improvisation seems logical, clear,
and carefully constructed. This is not simply a virtuosity of the body but of the mind
as well—the spontaneous expression of a deep understanding of the fundamental
principles of twentieth-century tonal composition.

10.8

jazz as modernist synthesis

Arnold Schoenberg and Walter Piston both observed that theirs was an age marked
by the proliferation of styles.28 Like many of their contemporaries, they despaired
of trying to synthesize these diverse trends into a coherent body of knowledge,
27 It is interesting to compare this passage to the opening of Radiohead’s “Just,” where the triads C–Ef–
D–F support a melodic octatonic scale. Radiohead’s progression can be understood as an ascending minorthird pattern (C–Ef–Fs–A) that has been transformed by a major-third substitution (Fs®D) which changes
an ascending minor third into a descending semitone. (After this substitution the ascending minor thirds
continue apace.) The Fs®D substitution preserves the chord tone Fs, so that the octatonic scale sounds the
root of the ﬁrst two chords and the third of the second two. In Evans’ solo, descending augmented triads
become ascending minor-third augmented triads; in Radiohead’s song, ascending minor-third major triads
instead descend by semitone. Underlying both procedures is the same fundamental geometry.
28 See Piston 1941 and Schoenberg 1975.

388

history and analysis

explaining that they were too close to the developments they surveyed. (Indeed, it was
precisely Piston’s despair that gave rise to modern American pedagogy, centering on
the “common practice period” of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.) Instead,
both prophesied that there would come a time in which the various developments of
the early twentieth century would be clariﬁed, coalescing into a coherent musical language. I ﬁnd it marvelous to reﬂect that these prognostications were essentially correct. For there is a late twentieth-century musical language that synthesizes many of
the developments of nineteenth and early twentieth-century music, including chromatic voice leading, quartal harmony, polychords, impressionist scales, and polytonality. This musical language has been codiﬁed in textbooks, is taught at (some)
conservatories, and can be heard on any given night in New York, Riga, Dubrovnik,
Tokyo, and throughout much of the rest of the world.
Of course, Schoenberg and Piston would have been shocked to see the form in
which their prophecies were realized. First, the synthesis was not achieved by the
inheritors of the European notated tradition—composers of string quartets and symphonies, trained in the best conservatories and having access to the ﬁnest orchestras
and concert halls. Instead the language was forged by improvising musicians, many
poor and African American, who carved an alternative musical tradition out of the
materials afforded by popular culture. Second, the modernist synthesis did not take
the form of a robust alternative to tonality: instead, it created a hybrid style that incorporates modernist devices while continuing to exploit functionally tonal ideas. For
the contemporary jazz musician, chromatic voice leading, octatonic scales, quartal
harmonies, and polychords are just more grist for the tonal mill. Figure 10.8.1 shows
that a simple jazz ii–V–I is an accretion of musical techniques formed over the ages:
at its core, we have a ii–V–I schema dating from the time of Monteverdi; in the upper
voices of the piano’s right hand, we ﬁnd an efﬁcient chromatic voice leading between

Figure 10.8.1 A simple jazz progression incorporates techniques from the entire history of
tonality.

Jazz

third-related major triads (Ef, G, Bf)®(D, G, B), reminiscent of the progressions
that fascinated Schubert, Brahms, and Wagner. On top of this we ﬁnd scales characteristic of early twentieth-century modernism: an acoustic scale over the V chord,
and the lydian mode over the tonic chord. This routine passage, in other words, is a
musical synthesis literally centuries in the making, incorporating and domesticating
the ideas of previous revolutionary eras.
From an economic point of view, there are clear reasons why jazz musicians would
emphasize synthesis and shared musical practices. Notated music is a highly individualized business, created by composers who largely work alone. Jazz, as an inherently
social form of music making, is more fertile ground for constructing a genuinely
shared musical language: the constant formation and reformation of musical ensembles facilitates an exchange of musical ideas, and the necessity of playing together
forces musicians to agree on a set of common principles. As a result, innovations in
jazz tended to accumulate, forming an ever-growing common practice. Notated composers, on the other hand, are free to rethink musical syntax from the ground up. Not
surprisingly, then, twentieth-century concert music contains a multitude of highly
individual musical languages, stunning in their diversity, but sometimes completely
disconnected from one another.
Ultimately, this economic difference allowed jazz musicians to act as custodians
of a tradition of advanced tonal thinking, bridging the gap between the tonality of
Debussy and Ravel, and that of Louis Andreissen, Steve Reich, and John Adams. To
composers who grew up during the modernist ascendancy—a time when atonality
was in fashion and tonality was occasionally dismissed as a remnant of the past—jazz
must have provided a beacon of hope, an example of a sophisticated tonal language
that drew on the past, yet went beyond it in signiﬁcant ways. For these composers,
jazz would have provided a major source, if not the major source, for ideas about how
to compose in a distinctively modern and tonal style. Certainly this was true in my
own case: it was pieces like Bill Evans’ “Oleo” (as well as the music of Art Tatum, John
Coltrane, and Miles Davis) that convinced me that tonality had continued to develop
and grow throughout the twentieth century, unnoticed by ofﬁcial academic culture.
And I learned as much about the mechanics of tonal harmony from jazz theorists like
Mehegan and Levine, as I did from the atonal composers who taught me about Bach
and Schubert.
Today, of course, both tonality and jazz have made some inroads into elite musical culture. Nevertheless, it remains true that jazz continues to occupy a subordinate
position in American music theory and music education (Figure 10.8.2). Students
continue to receive music degrees from major American universities without ever
engaging seriously with jazz. It is possible that this represents only the intrinsic difﬁculties of teaching non-notated music, exacerbated by a serious case of institutional
inertia: for a long time, jazz education was an oral tradition, and there were few good
written resources to be found. (Furthermore, even under the best of circumstances,
academic institutions are like ocean liners, requiring a long time to turn around.)
But it is also possible that the current status of jazz reﬂects, at least in some ways,
the legacy of decades of systematic bias. It is sobering to think that many of the most

389

390

history and analysis
Figure 10.8.2 According to online databases of academic journals, jazz plays a relatively
minor role in contemporary music scholarship. For example, just a handful of articles
mention tritone substitution, whereas thousands mention serial music.

Search Subject
Arnold Schoenberg
John Cage
“serial music” or serialism
Duke Ellington
John Coltrane
tritone substitution

Hits
JSTOR
RILM
2421
2545
2368
1448
2688
2433
1227
354
453
210
15
3

important jazz innovations occurred during a time when it was still illegal, in some
parts of this country, for people of different races to marry. Given this, it is perhaps
not surprising that a musical style that married African and European approaches
might have had difﬁculty making inroads into university curricula. One can only
hope that the recent election of the ﬁrst African-American president of the United
States foreshadows a future, however distant, in which irrational barriers may mean
less than they once did, and in which we can start to appreciate the profound connections between jazz and other musical styles.

Conclusion
Imagine yourself as a European composer at the beginning of the twentieth century,
when the world was changing at an unimaginable pace. The decreasing cost of travel
had made it possible to bring, say, a gamelan to Paris, or to mount strangely terrifying
exhibitions of “primitive” art. Unprecedented scientiﬁc and technological discoveries were expanding your sense of what was possible: suddenly, images and sounds
could be preserved for posterity, information could be transmitted instantaneously
across vast distances, and the very distinction between space and time was in question. Under the circumstances, it would be perverse not to wonder whether there
could be musical analogues to this revolutionary ferment. Surely, there were some
features of Western music that were just conventions—parochial habits that went
unchallenged simply because no one had ever thought to challenge them. Perhaps
the V–I cadence was one of these, or the use of familiar meters, or even the notion of
consonance itself. . . .
Composers, in other words, faced the broadly scientiﬁc problem of determining which features of musical language were arbitrary and which were rooted more
ﬁrmly in our biology or unchangeable cultural habits. Different musicians responded
in different ways, arraying themselves along the spectrum from extreme conservatives
(almost in denial about the changes sweeping the world) to utopian radicals (who in
retrospect seem somewhat naive about humanity’s appetite for musical revolution).1
For a time, music really was “experimental,” as composers drew and redrew the line
between what would be different and what would remain the same. The problem is
that in music, unlike science, “experiments” rarely produce unequivocal answers: it
is entirely likely that a particular compositional style—be it impressionism, atonality, or bebop—will attract some adherents while repulsing others. And so, a century
later, we are still struggling with the aftershocks of the modernist explosion. Rather
than reaching consensus on the fundamental mechanisms of musical coherence, the
musical world has split into distinct and sometimes hostile camps. For every musician who thinks that tonality is a thing of the past, there is another who thinks that
atonality was a vast and horrible mistake—the musical analogue, as Milan Kundera
once wrote, of the Dictatorship of the Proletariat.

1 Interestingly, music theorists like Riemann and Schenker tended toward the conservative end of the
spectrum, insisting on the naturalness of traditional Western music well into the twentieth century.

392

conclusion

This situation is exacerbated by the fact that music occupies an intermediate position in our psychic economy. It is possible to splash paint relatively haphazardly on
canvas without creating something that is truly noxious—at worst, the result will
be bland but inoffensive, a kind of apocalyptic wallpaper. By contrast, imagine the
situation of the avant-garde cook who simply combines all possible tastes in the way
Jackson Pollock splashed paint. (Please note that I am not limiting myself to food
tastes!) It’s safe to say that the culinary avant-gardist would have to close up shop
relatively quickly, and that even the most diehard aesthetes would give Aleatoric Eatery a pass. Somewhere between these two extremes lies the situation of the avantgarde composer, who faces an audience less tolerant than the audience for paintings,
but more tolerant than the audience for food. It is quite possible to develop a taste
for atonal music, and as a result there are more fans of atonal music than there will
ever be for Atonal Food. But at the same time, developing a taste for atonality often
involves a signiﬁcant investment of time, and it is not for everybody—meaning that
avant-garde music will never be as popular as avant-garde painting. Atonality is neither so abrasive as to die out completely, nor so attractive as to achieve widespread
acceptance.2
My initial motivation in writing this book was to try to imagine a time in which
the aftershocks of modernism were no longer so keenly felt, and in which we could
begin to glimpse rudimentary answers to the old modernist questions. To my mind,
the ﬁve properties of Chapter 1 are fairly basic to the Western conception of musical coherence and not likely to be supplanted soon: for the foreseeable future, the
majority of successful Western music will continue to exploit acoustic consonance,
small melodic motions, consistent harmonies, clear tonal centers, and identiﬁable
macroharmonies. (Whether this is a matter of biology, deep cultural inertia, or some
combination of the two is practically speaking not that important.) And this in turn
means that familiar chords and scales—overdetermined and multiply optimized as
they are—will continue to play a central role in our musical life. Thus the goal of Part
I, to provide a conceptual framework for composers who are less interested in replacing tonality than in devising new tonal styles. I like to think of the ﬁve features as basic
ﬂavors that can be combined and recombined endlessly—as if the composer were a
chef attempting to create new musical dishes with the same basic set of ingredients.
From a purely theoretical perspective, the important point is that it is extremely
difﬁcult to satisfy all ﬁve features simultaneously. This can be seen by considering the
continuous geometrical spaces in Chapter 3. To combine harmonic consistency and
conjunct melodic motion is to utilize short-distance line segments between structurally similar chords, and this is possible only if we exploit some unusual feature
of the geometry: either the global “twist” by which opposite faces are identiﬁed, or

2 There is also the fact that painters sell one-of-a-kind commodities which often appreciate in value,
whereas composers (like cooks) sell repeatable experiences and depend for their proﬁts on a high volume
of sales. This results in a tragicomic disparity between avant-garde painters and composers: while it is
almost de rigueur for successful visual artists to buy their own palaces and islands, even the most successful
atonal composers typically need to augment their modest compositional income by teaching.

Conclusion

the boundaries that act like mirrors. (These two possibilities can be associated with
traditional tonality and 1960s “micropolyphony,” respectively.) But there are other,
more subtle forms of constraint as well, leading us to expect that composers would
naturally gravitate toward scales that (for example) contain many consonances while
also dividing the octave nearly evenly. In this sense, tonality is not one among an
inﬁnitude of habitable planets, all easily accessible by short rocket ﬂight; instead, it
is much closer to being the only habitable planet that we have discovered so far. And
just as we have an interest in conserving the ecology of this, our only habitable planet,
so too might we have an interest in protecting the sophisticated tonal languages that
manage to survive in today’s unfriendly economic climate.
This is not to say that there is nothing new under the sun, or that the music of
the future is doomed to repeat the procedures of the past. Over the course of the
book, I have described a number of new ideas—including individual T-relatedness,
near symmetry, pitch-class circulation, global macroharmonic proﬁles, chord lattices,
interscalar transposition, and so on—that naturally suggest directions for further
musical exploration. Previous composers have explored these ideas in a fairly intuitive and unsystematic manner. My hope is that a deeper theoretical understanding
will open new compositional doors, suggesting new ways in which we might transmute the basic materials of tonality into something rich and strange. (Even the simple
harmonic “grammar” of §7.1 is potential grist for the twenty-ﬁrst-century compositional mill, providing a way to tweak or automate or parody the ancient procedures of
functional tonality.) And while I had initially envisioned an entire chapter describing
the potential compositional applications of these ideas, I eventually decided against
this. For it seemed to me that readers might prefer to discover for themselves how
to use these new concepts to create new music. And I thought that I myself might
prefer to be surprised by what readers come up with, rather than pushing them to
walk along the paths that I had already made.
As I said, my initial goal in writing this book was to explore basic theoretical and
compositional issues. But during the course of my thinking, I gradually began to realize that my ﬁve features could also provide a helpful framework for understanding
the development of Western music. The narrative sketched in Chapter 6—and ﬂeshed
out by the rest of Part II—suggests a reasonably systematic progression wherein composers repeatedly grappled with the problems and opportunities bequeathed to them
by their predecessors. Increasing interest in three- and four-voice composition led
to triadic harmony, which eventually paved the way for the functional conventions
of the classical era. The gradual standardization of major and minor modes led to
an increased emphasis on chromatic transposition, which eventually underwrote
the expanded modal vocabulary of twentieth-century tonality. Nineteenth-century
chromatic voice leading led to more chromatic macroharmonies, resulting in a split
between atonal composers who followed the vector of increasing chromaticism to
its logical conclusion, and scalar composers who ameliorated chromaticism with the
three scalar techniques of Chapter 9.
My hope is that these sorts of ideas might inspire theorists and historians to do
more careful and detailed work. My chief goal has been to introduce (or reframe)

393

394

conclusion

basic theoretical concepts such as voice leading, pitch-class intervals, chord similarity,
key distance, scale, mode, centricity, and so on. I have provided some hints about how
we might use these concepts, both in traditional analysis and in statistical investigations of larger trends. But in a book such as this, it is impossible to consider these
issues in anything like the detail that they deserve. Forced to play the dual role of tool
salesman and carpenter, I have left you with a frame rather than a completed house.
Consequently, there is more to be said about the varieties of nineteenth-century chromaticism, or the various statistical approaches to musical analysis, or really any of the
historical topics broached in this book. Hopefully, readers will see this as an invitation
to future work, rather than a defect of the book as it stands.
To my mind, the most novel feature of my historical narrative concerns the transition from the nineteenth to the twentieth century. I am fascinated by the thought
that, amid the fog and confusion of recent history, it is just possible to discern the
outlines of a genuine common practice, stretching from impressionism through jazz
to contemporary postminimalism. This common practice fuses nineteenth-century
voice leading with a distinctively twentieth-century interest in scales, combining a
ﬂexible attitude toward centricity with a serious concern for macroharmony. I do
not want to suggest that this is the only twentieth-century music worth paying attention to, but for me it forms a kind of central core, the twentieth century’s most
obvious contribution to elementary mechanisms of tonality. Particularly interesting
here is the thought that jazz, rather than being some marginal offshoot of classical
music, is actually more continuous with early twentieth-century tonality than many
forms of more avant-garde music. Thus my claim that the history of twentiethcentury tonality runs straight through jazz: we cannot possibly hope to understand
the development of notated tonal music without understanding its relation to nonnotated styles.
This brings me to my ﬁnal point. I began by suggesting that early twentiethcentury composers faced the difﬁcult problem of determining which aspects of
musical practice might be changed and which were more deeply ingrained. Twenty-ﬁrst-century composers confront a very different challenge. In the past, notated
composers had a monopoly on high-culture respectability, since notation was virtually the only way to preserve and transmit one’s music. Over the last hundred
years, however, the primary means of musical dissemination has shifted from scores
to recordings. And while the notated tradition was conducting its experiments in
musical coherence, alienating audience members in the process, jazz and rock were
becoming increasingly sophisticated, to the point where they now challenge the
status of notated music. New instruments—the electric guitar, the synthesizer, the
drum set—changed our sonic frame of reference, so that there is now something
archaic about the very sound of string quartet or orchestra. The upshot is that young
composers not only have to answer the metaphysical questions of their modernist
ancestors, but also have to ﬁgure out how notated music ﬁts into this new cultural
context. They need to think about what it means to write string quartets in the world
of Metallica—or, failing that, to establish how best to marry the strengths of notation to the raw power of the electric guitar.

Conclusion

This, then, is contemporary composers’ biggest challenge: to rebuild interest on
the part of audiences who are largely indifferent to avant gardism, who think that
notated music begins and ends with the classics, and who in any case care more about
jazz, rock, rap, and electronica. The task is to show that notation—and more generally, a certain kind of sophisticated musical thinking—has something to contribute
to contemporary culture. I myself believe that this is possible, and that there is music
waiting to be written that combines the intellectuality of Bach (or Debussy) with the
raw energy of Coltrane (or The Pixies or Einstürzende Neubauten). I would love to
think that something in this book had inspired some young musician to grapple with
this challenge, perhaps by exploring some of the ideas I have described. But failing
that, it would be enough to say something useful about the deep questions of tonality
and atonality, still with us a century after the advent of modern music.

395

This page intentionally left blank

appendix a

Measuring Voice-Leading Size
My view is that measures of voice leading should depend only on the distance moved
by each voice. Mathematically, we take the absolute value of the difference between
the initial and ﬁnal pitches: thus the distance from C4 to D4 is |60 – 62| or 2, while the
distance from Cμ4 to C5 is |60.5 – 72| or 11.5. (In some cases, we might want to measure relative to a scale, but we will ignore that complication as it does not change the
underlying mathematics.) When several voices move simultaneously, then a measure
of voice-leading distance should depend only on the collection of distances moved by
each voice. For instance, the ﬁrst voice leading in Figure A1 moves its three voices by
two, zero, and zero semitones, while the second moves its voices by one, one, and one
semitones.1 A measure of voice-leading size therefore needs to tell us whether the collection {2, 0, 0} is larger or smaller than {1, 1, 1}. We can assume that larger motions in
any individual voice do not result in smaller overall voice leadings; thus the collection
{6, 3, 1} should be at least as large as {4, 3, 1}, since six is greater than four.
Unfortunately, as mentioned in Chapter 2, it is
Figure A1 The ﬁrst voice
not obvious how to compare collections. One pos- leading moves one note by
sibility is to compare their largest element, in which two semitones, while the
case {2, 0, 0} is larger than {1, 1, 1} (since 2 > 1). (I second moves three notes by
call this the “largest-distance metric.”) Another pos- one semitone each.
sibility is to add the distances in the two collections,
in which case the ﬁrst (total distance = 2) is smaller
than the second (total distance = 3). (This is sometimes called the “taxicab metric.”) Yet a third possibility is to treat the set of distances as determining
the coordinates of a line segment in Euclidean space,
with the length of the line segment representing the
size of the collection. Here again, the ﬁrst collection is larger than the second, since
the line segment (2, 0, 0) is 2 units long, whereas (1, 1, 1) is only 3 units long.
(This is called the “Euclidean metric.”2)
Since each of our methods is in itself perfectly reasonable, we have no reason to
choose one rather than another. Faced with this embarrassment of riches, we could

1 Note that the distance is always a positive number and does not depend on whether the voice moves
up or down.
2 The formula for computing distance in n-dimensional Euclidean space is x12 + x22 + ... + x n 2 .

398

appendix a

arbitrarily choose one and hope for the best. (This is what music theorists have traditionally done.3) Alternatively, we might note that there are some facts about which
“reasonable” metrics should agree: surely, for example, no reasonable metric can treat
the voice leading (C, G)®(Fs, Cs), in which both voices move by tritone, as being
smaller than (C, G)®(Cs, Fs), in which the voices move by semitone!4 This suggests
the strategy of trying to demarcate the “zone of agreement” among reasonable metrics. In the best-case scenario, we might ﬁnd that all of the claims we would like to
make are valid for all reasonable metrics—and thus there is no need to choose one
rather than another. Less optimistically, we might ﬁnd that we occasionally need to
select a method of measuring voice leading; but by charting the “zone of agreement,”
we will at least be able to see where particular choices lie in the space of reasonable
alternatives.
This is the strategy I follow here. I propose that any method of measuring voice
leading is acceptable, as long as it does not have the counterintuitive consequence that
“voice crossings” make a voice leading smaller (Figure 2.7.2).5 It is actually quite easy
to formulate this principle mathematically: if a metric is not to favor voice crossings,
then it must treat the collection of distances {x1 + c, x2, . . . , xn} as being at least as large
as {x1, x2 + c, . . . , xn}, whenever x1 > x2 and c ³ 0. Furthermore, {x1, x2 + c, . . . , xn} should
be at least as large as {x1, x2, . . . , xn}. Intuitively, this means that the metric should not
prefer an uneven distribution of distances, such as {4, 0, 0} over a more even distribution, such as {1, 1, 2}. This well-known mathematical principle can be stated in
a number of equivalent ways.6 Originating in early twentieth-century economics, it
is called the submajorization partial order, and it appears in an extraordinarily wide
range of applications.7 The principle determines a “partial order” because it provides
a way to compare some but not all collections of numbers. For instance, it tells us that
{1, 1} can be no larger than {2, 0}, but it does not tell us anything about the relative
sizes of {3, 3} and {4, 1}.
Figure A2 uses the Möbius strip to illustrate the geometry underlying this
approach. The arrows in the upper left show that the musical “no-crossings principle” is equivalent to the geometrical principle that voice leadings bouncing off the
mirror (which contain crossings) should never be shorter than those that directly

3 See, for example, Straus (2003), who chooses the taxicab metric, and Callender (2004), who chooses
Euclidean distance. For early (and somewhat vague) discussions of voice leading size, see Masson 1697/1969,
Hostinský 1879, and Schoenberg 1975.
4 To be clear, there may be some notions of distance according to which, say, G is closer to C than Cs is,
but I claim that these alternatives measure something other than voice-leading distance.
5 Composers regularly employ voice crossings, but there is no reason to think that in doing so they are
reducing voice-leading size.
6 For instance, here is a not obviously equivalent formulation: given two voice leadings A and B, A is
no larger than B if the largest distance moved by any single voice in A is less than or equal to the largest
distance moved by any voice in B, and if the sum of the largest two distances in A is less than or equal to the
sum of the largest two distances in B, and if the sum of the largest three distances in A is less than or equal
to the sum of the largest three distances in B, and so on.
7 See Marshall and Olkin 1979, and Hall and Tymoczko 2007.

Appendix A
Figure A2 Two connections between geometry and voice-leading distance. (Möbius strip,
upper left) To say that voice crossings never make a voice leading smaller is to say that the
two edges of this triangle are not shorter than the third. Since the voice leading b contains
a crossing, it bounces off the mirror boundary. The “uncrossed” alternative (a) forms the
triangle’s third edge. According to all reasonable measures of voice-leading size, the uncrossed
voice leading in a is no larger than the crossed voice leading in b. (Möbius strip, lower right)
The ﬁgure provides a geometrical illustration of the submajorization partial order. All voice
leadings in the inner diamond are smaller than (C, G)®(D, F). All voice leadings outside
the shaded area are larger. The shaded area represents the zone of acceptable disagreement
among reasonable metrics.

connect their endpoints.8 (This, in turn, is related to what mathematicians call “the
triangle inequality.”) In the lower right, I show how the no-crossings principle gives
us a method of comparing some, but not all, voice leadings. The vertical arrow corresponds to the voice leading (C, G)®(D, F). The inner diamond determines the voice
leadings that, according to any reasonable metric, must be at least as small as this one.
The outer white space contains voice leadings that must be at least as large as the vertical arrow. The shaded area, meanwhile, represents the zone of acceptable disagreement; arrows that terminate in this area may reasonably be considered to be either

8 Any voice leading with a crossing in pitch space is represented by a line segment that bounces off the
mirror boundary at the point where two voices cross.

399

400

appendix a

smaller or larger than (C, G)®(D, F).9 If we are interested in making comparisons
between similar-sized voice leadings we therefore need to choose a speciﬁc metric,
but when comparing very different voice leadings we often do not: for instance, we
can say that the arrow (C, G)®(B, D) on Figure A2 is at least as large as the two other
arrows originating at the same point for any reasonable metric whatsoever.
It turns out that reasonable metrics agree about a surprisingly large number of
musically interesting facts. For instance, they agree that more-even chords in general have smaller voice leadings to their various transpositions.10 They also agree that
“inversionally symmetrical” voice leadings are particularly small: suppose A®B is a
voice leading such as (C, E, G)®(B, E, Gs), in which, for every voice that moves up by
x semitones, there is also a voice that moves down by x semitones; reasonable metrics
will all agree that A®B is at least as small as any other individually T-related voice
leading A®Tx(B). From this it follows that, for any reasonable metric, major triads
can be connected by minimal voice leading when they are related by major third, and
dominant seventh chords can be connected by minimal voice leading when they are
related by minor third or tritone. (In other words, reasonable metrics agree about the
importance of the major-third and minor-third systems.) Thus we need not always
select one voice-leading metric from among the many equally plausible alternatives:
in many cases, we can assume only that our voice-leading metric is a “reasonable” one
obeying the submajorization partial order.11
It bears repeating that my distinction between “reasonable” and “unreasonable”
metrics applies only when we are interested in measuring voice-leading size. In other
contexts, there are other conceptions of musical distance that we might want to consider. For example, we might sometimes want to consider G4 to be particularly close
to C3, since the upper note is the lower note’s third harmonic.12 Although this is a
legitimate measure of musical distance, it cannot be considered a measure of voiceleading size, as I use the term: voice-leading size has to do with how far the hands move
on the piano keyboard from one chord to another. It is, in other words, a measure of the
aggregate effort needed to move along a speciﬁc path between two musical “places.”
This quantity is known to be relevant to listeners’ psychology, determining our ability
to separate notes into individual melodic streams.13 And it is this quantity, rather than
the other distances considered above, that composers seem to try to minimize as they
move from one chord to another.

9 Strictly speaking, this is true only of voice leadings that do not touch the edges; once a voice leading
passes into the exterior white region it is necessarily larger than the vertical arrow.
10 See Tymoczko 2006. Here I am considering only bijective voice leadings.
11 This principle is general enough that it can plausibly be attributed to composers’ individual psychology: it is certainly hard to imagine that a composer would think that the voice leading (C, G)®(B, D) on
Figure A2 is smaller than (C, G)®(D, F). By contrast, it is much harder to imagine that, say, Mozart used
the largest-distance metric rather than the taxicab metric.
12 Or we might consider the chord {C, Cs, E, Fs} to be close to {C, Df, Ef, G}, since they contain the
same collection of intervals (Tymoczko 2008c); in still other cases, we might measure distance by counting
how many voices are moving.
13 See Huron 2001. Wessel 1979 contains an important caveat.

appendix b

Chord Geometry: A More Technical Look
This appendix offers a more technical description of the higher dimensional chord
spaces. My goal is to provide enough information to allow you to work with the spaces
directly, either by hand or using a computer. My treatment will presuppose only elementary mathematics, explaining technical terms (such as “fundamental domain”
and “quotient space”) along the way. However, I will not shy away from messy details
omitted from the main text.
Musically, a pitch can be represented by a number, as discussed in §2.1. An ordered
sequence of n pitches is therefore represented by an ordered sequence of n numbers,
or in mathematical parlance an “n-tuple.” (Chapter 2 refers to these n-tuples as “basic
musical objects.”) Geometrically, an n-tuple determines a point in inﬁnite n-dimensional Cartesian space, or “ordered pitch space.” To generate the space of unordered
sequences of pitch classes, we need to “fold” this space to eliminate octave and order
information. (Mathematicians would say that this folding produces a quotient of the
original space.) In other words, we move from an inﬁnite, periodic “wallpaper space”
to the ﬁnite space representing one of its individual tiles (§3.2). In three dimensions
we obtain the tile by gluing together all points such as (x1, x2, x3), (x2, x3, x1), and (x2, x1,
x3), which represent different ways of ordering the same pitches, as well as all points
such as (x1, x2, x3) and (x1 + 12, x2, x3), in which the same pitch classes appear in different octaves.
The easiest way to approach this process is to ﬁnd a region of the original space
that contains exactly one point for each unordered set of n pitch classes. This region,
by itself, will not have any interesting mathematical or topological qualities: as a portion of plain-vanilla Euclidean space, it will be completely unremarkable, just like
the space from which it is drawn. (Mathematicians would say that this region is a
fundamental domain, which is not yet a quotient space.) Our region becomes mathematically interesting only when we ascribe unusual properties to its boundaries: for
instance, when we assert that some points act like mirrors, or are glued together in
various ways. We make these assertions because we would like to use the region to
model distances or trajectories in the original, inﬁnite space—much as we used the
single tile of wallpaper to record the ant’s progress in §3.2.
This distinction between a fundamental domain (a region of ordinary Euclidean
space) and a quotient space (a more topologically exotic space) is worth illustrating.
Figure B1a depicts the inﬁnite, one-dimensional line containing single pitches. To
convert this into a space of pitch classes, we need to glue together all octave-related

402

appendix b

pitches x and x + 12. We begin by constructing a region of the original space containing one point for every pitch class. This is an ordinary line segment such as that in
Figure B1b, consisting of all points greater than or equal to zero, and less than 12.
(Note that our ﬁgure does not include the point 12, since it represents the same pitch
class as zero; however, it contains every point less than 12, including points inﬁnitesimally close to 12.) Because this is just a line segment, there is no reason (yet!) to say
that the points at different ends are close together. It is only when we start to use the
space to represent distances or trajectories in our original pitch space that we notice
that it its endpoints are related: for instance, the motion shown in Figure B1c disappears off the right edge of our line segment to reappear on the left. This tells us that
the two edges of the line segment should be glued together, and that two points near

Figure B1 (a) Pitch space is a line. (b) The region 0 £ x < 12 contains one point for
every pitch class. (c) The line segment 59®64 disappears off the right edge of our region,
reappearing on the left. (d) This tells us that we should attach the right edge to the left,
forming a quotient space. We can represent this quotient space as a circle in two dimensions.
Alternatively, we could simply add a new point, 12, to the right edge of our space and declare
it to be the same as the point at the left edge.

Appendix B

opposite ends are actually close together. We can express this visually by bending the
line segment, producing the familiar pitch-class circle shown in Figure B1d. Alternatively, we could simply add the point 12 to the right edge, declaring it to be the same
as the point 0 on the left.1
Our goal, then, is to determine how to identify a region of n-dimensional Euclidean space containing one point for every unordered set of n pitch classes.2 To do
this, we can choose the region containing all and only those chords whose pitches
(1) are in nondescending order, (2) span no more than an octave, and (3) together
sum to a number less than 12 and greater than or equal to zero.3 Clearly, by reordering and octave transposing, we can transform any sequence into one that meets the
ﬁrst two criteria: for instance, we can turn (G4, C3, E5) into (C4, E4, G4), which is in
nondescending order and spans no more than an octave. However, the pitches (C4,
E4, G4) do not meet the third criterion, since the numbers (60, 64, 67) sum to 191.
Observe, though, that we can reduce their sum by 12 by transposing the last note
down by octave and moving it to the front of the list. (In Chapter 4 we describe this
process as transposition by one descending step along the “scale” C-E-G.) The resulting sequence, (G3, C4, E4), sums to 179 (or 191 – 12), while still meeting the other
criteria. By repeating this process, therefore, we can eventually bring the sum into the
range 0 £ x < 12.4
Our region is therefore bounded by the following mathematical inequalities:
x1 £ x2 £ . . . £ xn £ x1 + 12

(B.1)

0 £ x1 + x2+ x3 + . . . + xn < 12

(B.2)

Equation B.1 says that the pitches are in nondescending order, spanning no more
than an octave. Equation B.2 says that the sum of the pitches is greater than or equal
to zero, and less than 12. Together, these inequalities determine a region of inﬁnite
n-dimensional Cartesian space, in which there is exactly one point for every collection
of n unordered pitch classes. Of course, points in this region still represent ordered
pitch sequences, and not chords proper; in this sense the region, like a single tile of
wallpaper, is a kind of steppingstone between our original “ordered pitch space” and
the topologically complex “unordered chord space” we are trying to construct.
Before I try to explain what this region looks like, I should note that in some
sense, complicated mathematics is unnecessary. For if we wanted to, we could simply program a computer to display the lower dimensional chord spaces directly.
There are numerous computer graphics packages that allow users to draw in two- or

1 In fact, this might be preferable since it shows that our quotient space is intrinsically one-dimensional;
the circular representation may falsely suggest that the space has two dimensions.
2 There will actually be many different regions satisfying this criterion, of varying shapes; in what follows, I will describe a region that is particularly useful.
3 I use “nondescending” rather than “ascending” because I want to include chords that have pitch duplications, such as (C4, C4, C4, E4).
4 This process will never run afoul of the other two constraints, since the original ordering spans no
more than an octave.

403

404

appendix b

three-dimensional space; using the algorithm in Figure B2, we can transform any
arbitrary ordered pitch sequence into a point lying in our region, and can thus graph
arbitrary chords in the space. Furthermore, as explained in Chapters 2 and 3, we can
graph voice leadings simply by imagining that each voice glides smoothly from its
origin to the destination. (A computer can be programmed to provide the illusion
of a smooth glide by taking discrete steps that are too small for the eye to follow.) At
each stage along the glide, we project the current point into our fundamental region.
Were we to do this, we would immediately see the shapes in Figures 3.3.1 and 3.8.2.
Furthermore, as we plotted various voice leadings on the ﬁgure, we would ﬁnd that
our algorithm automatically accounts for the space’s “exotic” boundary points: some
boundaries would act like mirrors, while others would seem to be glued together.
(That is, we would sometimes see a trajectories disappear off one part of the ﬁgure to
reappear on another.) For someone who is not comfortable with geometry or abstract
mathematics, or for someone who does not recognize what shapes Eqs. B.1 and B.2
correspond to, this sort of direct, intuitive hands-on exploration may perhaps be the
easiest way to proceed.
However, my job here is to try to explain—in a principled way—how to understand the two sets of inequalities. In preparation for this task, I will review several
elementary musico-geometrical facts.
Fact 1. Transposition is represented by adding a constant to every note in
a chord: (x1 + t, x2 + t, . . . , xn + t) is the transposition of (x1, x2, . . . , xn) by
t semitones (§2.1).
Fact 2. Geometrically, adding t to every note in a chord corresponds to moving
in parallel to the “unit diagonal” that connects (0, 0, . . . , 0) to (1, 1, . . . , 1)
(Figure B3).

Figure B2 An algorithm for moving any ordered pitch set into the fundamental region
deﬁned by equations (1) and (2).

Appendix B

(a, b)

po

sit

Figure B3 Transposition is
represented by motion parallel to
the line stretching from (0, 0) to
(1, 1). The planes perpendicular
to this line contain chords
summing to a constant value.

ns

(1, 1)

io

0

n

irs to
pa ing
ns m
ai m
nt su
co hes
tc
pi

of

second note

Fact 3. The equation x1 + x2 . . . xn = c determines a higher dimensional
analogue to the plane—a “hyperplane”—perpendicular to the unit diagonal
described in Fact 2 (Figure B3).5
Fact 4. There is exactly one transposition of any ordered pitch sequence
with elements that sum to any particular value. The number t = (c − x1 − x2
− . . . − xn)/n is the unique transposition such that (x1 + t, x2 + t, . . . , xn +
t) sums to c. Geometrically, this means that there is a unique way to move
any point p parallel to the unit diagonal until it reaches an arbitrary plane
perpendicular to that diagonal (Figure B3).

tra

(a/2 – b/2, b/2 – a/2)
(0, 0)

first note

Armed with these facts, let us return to our two equations:
x1 £ x2 £ . . . £ xn £ x1 + 12

(B.1)

0 £ x1 + x2+ x3 + . . . + xn < 12

(B.2)

Fact 3 tells us that Eq. B.2 determines a collection of hyperplanes perpendicular to
the line connecting (0, 0, 0, . . . , 0) to (1, 1, 1 . . . , 1), with sums in the range 0 £ c < 12.
By Fact 2, these hyperplanes are related by transposition.6 Next, we observe that if any

5 The term “hyperplane” refers to a ﬂat Euclidean space with one fewer dimension than the n-dimensional space in which it resides. To see that the equation x1 + x2 + . . . + xn = c determines a hyperplane, it
helps to know that any linear equation a1x1 + a2x2 + . . . + anxn = c, with the ai all real numbers, determines
a hyperplane. (Intuitively, we can freely choose n − 1 of the n coordinates, with the ﬁnal coordinate being
determined by our earlier choices.) To see that the plane is perpendicular to the line connecting (0, 0, . . . ,
0) to (1, 1, . . . , 1) recall that two vectors are perpendicular when x • y = 0. (Here “•” is the dot product of
linear algebra: x1 y1 + x2 y 2 + . . . + xn y n .) That is, (x1, x2, . . . , xn) • (1, 1, . . . , 1) = 0, or x1 + x2 + . . . xn = 0. Thus
the (n − 1)-dimensional plane x1 + x2 + . . . xn = 0 contains vectors perpendicular to the vector (1, 1, . . . , 1).
The expression (x1, x2, . . . , xn) • (1, 1, . . . , 1) = c, or x1 + x2 + . . . xn = c, identiﬁes the hyperplane that is c units
away along the line connecting (0, 0, . . . , 0) to (1, 1, . . . , 1).
6 If two of our hyperplanes sum to c1 and c2, then they are related by (c2 − c1)/n semitone transposition,
with n being the size of the chord.

405

406

appendix b

ordered pitch sequence satisﬁes the ﬁrst set of inequalities (Eq. B.1), then so do all its
transpositions. (This is just to say that if an ordered pitch sequence is in nondescending order spanning less than an octave, then its transpositions are, too.) It follows
that Eq. B.1 determines the same shape in each of the cross sections x1 + x2 . . . + xn = c.
The space of musical chords is therefore some sort of prism: the inequalities x1 £ x2
£ . . . £ xn £ x1 + 12 determine the shape of the cross section, while the equation x1 + x2
+ x3 + . . . + xn = c identiﬁes the particular cross section containing pitch sequences
summing to c.
The next problem is to determine the shape of the cross section. We begin by
reviewing the deﬁnition of a “simplex”—an n-dimensional ﬁgure bounded by the
lines interconnecting n + 1 vertices.7 (A simplex is so-called because it is, in some
sense, the “simplest” n-dimensional ﬁgure, with the minimal number of vertices.) In
two dimensions, the simplex’s three vertices determine a triangle. In three dimensions, the four vertices determine a tetrahedron. Mathematicians sometimes use the
term “the standard simplex” to refer to the simplex bounded by the endpoints of the
basis vectors in n-dimensional Cartesian space. Figure B4 shows that the basis vectors
in two-dimensional space deﬁne a one-dimensional simplex stretching from (0, 1) to
(1, 0); the three basis vectors in three-dimensional space determine a simplex stretching from (1, 0, 0) to (0, 1, 0) to (0, 0, 1). (The higher dimensional ﬁgures, although
harder to visualize, are analogous.) Every point in these two simplexes is represented
by coordinates that are all nonnegative and sum to one. For this reason, these simplexes are important in applications in which a total quantity of “stuff ” is divided up
into a ﬁxed number of parts: for example, the one-dimensional simplex in Figure B4
might be used to represent the result of an election featuring two candidates, while
the two-dimensional simplex might be used for a three-party election.

Figure B4 The “standard simplex” in two-dimensional space is a one-dimensional
line segment (i.e. a one-dimensional simplex) stretching from (1, 0) to (0, 1); in three
dimensional space, it is a two-dimensional triangle (two-dimensional simplex) bounded by
(1, 0, 0), (0, 1, 0), and (0, 0, 1). The standard simplex contains all points with nonnegative
coordinates summing to 1.

y

y
z

(0, 1)

(0, 1, 0)

(0, 0, 1)

x
(1, 0)

x
(1, 0, 0)

7 Strictly speaking, the vertices must be “afﬁnely independent”—that is, that there should be no c-dimensional plane containing more than c + 1 of the points.

Appendix B

Now a mathematician would immediately recognize that the equation x1 £ x2
£ . . . £ xn £ x1 + 12 determines a simplex in the hyperplane x1 + x2 + x3 + . . . + xn =
c. There are a number of ways to see why this is so.8 Perhaps the most instructive is
to note that there is a close relation between our equations and the standard simplex described in the previous paragraph. To see why, note that we can rewrite the
inequalities x1 £ x2 £ . . . £ xn £ x1 + 12 as
xi – xi–1 ³ 0 for 1 < i £ n
x1 + 12 – xn ³ 0
Since xi − xi − 1 is the interval from note xi − 1 to xi , our new inequalities simply say that
the intervals between adjacent notes in the sequence are all nondescending, including
the “wraparound” interval from the last note, xn, to the note an octave above the ﬁrst,
x1 + 12. Furthermore, these n positive numbers must sum to 12, since they begin with
x1 and end with x1 + 12. Dividing by 12 therefore gives us the coordinates of a point
in the standard simplex.9 Conversely, for any point in the standard simplex, we can
multiply its coordinates by 12 and construct a pitch sequence with those numbers as
its consecutive intervals. According to Fact 4, there will be one and only one transposition of this sequence lying in the hyperplane x1 + x2 + x3 + . . . + xn = c.10 We conclude
that there is a “coordinate transformation” sending our original simplex, in Figure B5 The coordinate transformation
which numbers represent pitches, into from pitch-class space, in which coordinates
the standard simplex, in which the represent numbers, to interval space, in which
they represent intervals.
numbers represent intervals, as measured in fractions of an octave (Figure
Original
New
B5). Mathematicians will recognize
Coordinate
Coordinate
that this coordinate change is an “afﬁne
x1
(x2 – x1)/12
transformation,” which means that it
(x3 – x2)/12
x2
transforms one simplex into another.
…
…
It follows that our original inequalities
11
xn
(x1 + 12 – xn)/12
determine a simplex as well.
8 The simplest is to note that each of the inequalities xi £ xj carves the space into two halves, bounded
by the hyperplane x i = x j . If n such half-spaces determine a ﬁnite region in (n − 1)-dimensional space, then
that region is bounded by n hyperplanes, which is just to say that it is a simplex.
9 For example, beginning with the pitch sequence (60, 64, 67) we can construct the interval sequence
(4, 3, 5) representing the interval from 60 to 64, from 64 to 67, and from 67 to the note an octave above 60.
Dividing by 12 gives us (4/12, 3/12, 5/12) which is a point on the standard simplex.
10 For instance, we multiply (½, ½, 0) by 12 to obtain the sequence of intervals (6, 6, 0). We then
construct a sequence of pitches whose successive notes are separated by these intervals, for instance (Fs2,
C3, Fs3) or (42, 48, 54). These values sum to 144; transposing down by four octaves gives (−6, 0, 6), which
sums to zero.
11 Suppose x and y are two points that the coordinate transformation sends to x' and y'. An afﬁne
transformation sends the point x + b(y − x) to the point x' + b(y' − x'), thus transforming a line in the
original space into a line in the second. (It is easily checked that the coordinate transformation in Figure
B5 is afﬁne.) Algebraically, afﬁne transformations represent the new coordinates as linear functions of the
old coordinates—e.g. functions like x1' = ax1 + bx2 + c, which do not involve higher powers of the original
variables x1 and x2.

407

408

appendix b

We conclude, therefore, that our fundamental region is a prism whose face is a
simplex. The lower face is determined by the equations
x1 + x2 + x3 + . . . + xn = 0 and x1 £ x2 £ . . . £ xn £ x1 + 12
This simplex is “extruded” along the line connecting (0, 0, . . . , 0) to (1, 1, . . . , 1), a process that corresponds musically to transposing upward, and algebraically to increasing the sum of the chords in the cross section
x1 + x2 + x3 + . . . + xn = c and x1 £ x2 £ . . . £ xn £ x1 + 12,
with the parameter c varying from 0 to 12. Each layer of the prism contains pitch
sequences with a different sum; we can transpose until the sum is equal to 12, at
which point we return to the chords that appear on the sum-zero face.
Fact 4 tells us that any ordered pitch sequence satisfying Eq. B.1 has exactly one
transposition in each cross section of the space. This means that no two ordered
pitch sequences in the same cross section are transpositionally related. However, the
cross sections will contain sequences that are transpositionally related when we ignore
octave and order. For suppose (x1, x2, . . . , xn) satisﬁes Eqs. B.1 and B.2. Then,
(x2 – 12/n, x3 – 12/n, . . . , xn – 12/n, x1 + 12 – 12/n)
will as well. (Those of you who have read Chapter 4 will note that this operation
combines a chromatic transposition by –12/n semitones with a scalar transposition
by one ascending step.12) As ordered pitch sequences, these are not transpositionally related, but if we disregard octave and order, they are.13 Thus, given an n-note
sequence meeting our criteria, we can easily construct another by moving the ﬁrst
note of the sequence to the end, adding 12 to it, and subtracting 12/n from every note
in the resulting sequence. For example, starting with (0, 4, 7), we generate (4 − 12/3,
7 − 12/3, 12 − 12/3) or (0, 3, 8). Repeating this procedure gives (3 − 4, 8 − 4, 12 − 4)
or (−1, 4, 8). A ﬁnal repetition returns us to (0, 4, 7), where we began. Musically, the
sequences (0, 4, 7), (0, 3, 8), and (−1, 4, 8) represent C major, Af major, and E major
triads, each in a different mode or registral inversion: (0, 4, 7) is a C major chord
whose ﬁrst note is its root, (0, 3, 8) is an Af major chord starting on its third, and (−1,
4, 8) is an E major chord starting with its ﬁfth.14 In general, every n-note chord type
will appear in each cross section n times, in each of its modes.
To determine the vertices of our cross section, we can exploit the relation with the
standard simplex. In three dimensions, the standard simplex is bounded by the points
(1, 0, 0), (0, 1, 0), and (0, 0, 1), which will correspond to the vertices of our cross section. Multiplying by 12 transforms these numbers into the interval sequences (12, 0, 0),

12 That is, it sends (x1, x2, . . . , xn) to (x2, . . . , xn, x1 + 12), transposing up by one scale step, and then subtracts 12/n from these coordinates, transposing chromatically downward by 12/n.
13 If we ignore octave and order (x1, x2, . . . , xn) is the same as (x2, . . . , xn, x1 + 12). Subtracting 12/n from
each number transposes the chord downward.
14 Remember that to ﬁnd the pitch class to which a number belongs, add or subtract 12 until it lies in
the range 0 £ x < 12. Thus the number −1 refers to the pitch class B.

Appendix B

409

(0, 12, 0), and (0, 0, 12). Each determines a unique sequence of pitches on the face that
sums to 0: (−8, 4, 4), (−4, −4, 8), and (0, 0, 0), or in scientiﬁc pitch notation (E–2, E–1,
E–1), (Gs–2, Gs–2, Gs–1), and (C–1, C–1, C–1). In other words, they represent the three
“modes” of the “scale” containing just one pitch class (Figure B6). The same procedure
of course works in other dimensions: the boundaries of the cross section can always be
determined by ﬁnding the pitch sequences summing to zero, and whose one-step scalar
intervals are (12, 0, . . . , 0), (0, 12, 0, . . . , 0), (0, 0, 12, . . . , 0), . . . , and (0, 0, . . . , 0, 12).

Two Notes Three Notes Four Notes
Five Notes
(0, 0)
(0, 0, 0)
(0, 0, 0, 0)
(0, 0, 0, 0, 0)
(–6, 6)
(–4, –4, 8) (–3, –3, –3, 9) (–2.4, –2.4, –2.4, –2.4, 9.6)
(–8, 4, 4)
(–6, –6, 6, 6) (–4.8, –4.8, –4.8, 7.2, 7.2)
(–9, 3, 3, 3)
(–7.2, –7.2, 4.8, 4.8, 4.8)
(–9.6, 2.4, 2.4, 2.4, 2.4)

The ﬁnal step is to understand the “strange” points on the boundary of our region.
We begin by considering how to attach the sum-zero face at one edge of the prism to
the opposite, sum-12 face.15 Suppose that (x1, x2, . . . , xn) lies on the face of the prism
summing to zero. Recall that the following chords all lie on the same face.
A1 = (x1, x2, . . . , xn)
A2 = (x2 – 12/n, x3 – 12/n, . . . , xn – 12/n, x1 + 12 – 12/n)
A3 = (x3 – 24/n, x4 – 24/n, . . . , xn – 24/n, x1 + 12 – 24/n, x2 + 12 – 24/n)
.
.
.
An = (xn – 12 + 12/n, x1 + 12/n, . . . , xn–1 + 12/n)
If we transpose these chords up by 12/n semitones, we obtain a series of chords that
sum to 12:
A1¢ = (x1 + 12/n, x2 + 12/n, . . . , xn + 12/n)
A2¢ = (x2, x3, . . . , xn, x1 + 12)
A3¢ = (x3 – 12/n, x4 – 12/n, . . . , xn – 12/n, x1 + 12 – 12/n, x2 + 12 – 12/n)
.
.
.
An¢ = (xn – 12 + 24/n, x1 + 24/n, . . . , xn–1 + 24/n)

15 Note that we have excluded this sum-12 face from our fundamental domain, since it contains the
same chords as the sum-0 face. However, when we are constructing the quotient space, we need to think
about how to attach various points on the boundaries. As in Figure B1d, we therefore add extra points,
declaring them to be “the same” as some that we have already included.

Figure B6
The vertices of
the zero-sum
cross section
in various
dimensions.

410

appendix b

As ordered pitch sequences, A1¢ is the transposition of A1, A2¢ is the transposition of A2,
and so on. But when we disregard octave and order, then A1 and A2¢ are the same chord,
as are A2 and A3¢, A3 and A4¢, etc. Therefore we need to imagine that the sum-zero face
of the prism should be attached to the opposite (sum-12) face with a “twist.” This
twist acts as a cyclic permutation of the simplex’s vertices, connecting Ai to A¢i + 1.
Finally, we consider the boundary points such as (x, y, y), which contain pitch
duplications. Consider a point in the interior of our simplex, such as (x1, x2 − c, x2
+ c), with c some small positive number. As c goes to zero, the point (x1, x2 − c, x2 +
c) approaches (x1, x2, x2), moving in a line toward the boundary of the cross section.
When c becomes negative, the ordered pitch sequence (x1, x2 − c, x2 + c) lies outside
of our fundamental region, since the second number is now greater than the third.
According to the algorithm in Figure B2, then, we need to reorder the sequence so
that it returns to our region. This reordering returns us to a point on the line segment
along which we have just been traveling, since (x1, x2 − (−c), x2 + (–c) ) is a reordering
of (x1, x2 − c, x2 + c). It follows that the boundaries containing pitch duplications act
like mirrors: a point moving directly toward the boundary is “reﬂected” backward
along its approaching trajectory.16
Putting it all together then, the space of n-note chords is an n-dimensional prism
whose simplicial (“simplex-shaped”) faces are glued together with a twist, and whose
remaining boundaries act like mirrors. By attributing this behavior to our boundary points, we have ﬁnally managed to convert our fundamental region—an unremarkable portion of ordinary Cartesian space—into a quotient space (or orbifold),
an exotic mathematical space with a nontrivial topology. Mathematicians would
describe our quotient space as “the n-torus modulo the symmetric group that acts
on n elements”—symbolically, Tn/Sn. Here, Tn is the mathematical symbol for the
n-torus, the space of ordered pitch-class sequences; Sn refers to the collection of operations that reorder n elements; and the division symbol instructs us to glue together
points related by the operations that follow. Thus the mathematical symbol “Tn/Sn”
means “the space that results when you start with ordered pitch-class sequences and
disregard order.” As discussed in Chapter 3, this is something very much like the space
of chords as musicians ordinarily conceive of them.17
Readers are now prepared to plot voice leadings in the space. To do this, we must
augment the algorithm in Figure B2 with two additional rules. First, when transposing or reordering the notes in a voice leading, we must always do so uniformly,
applying the same operations to both chords: if we transpose the ﬁrst note in the ﬁrst
chord up by octave, then we must transpose the ﬁrst note in the second chord up by
octave as well; similarly, if we exchange the ﬁrst and second notes in the ﬁrst chord,

16 This argument considers trajectories moving perpendicular toward the boundary. More general trajectories can be decomposed into a perpendicular and parallel components; the argument can then be
applied to the perpendicular component.
17 Of course, musicians typically consider (C, C, E, G) to be the same as (C, E, G). When modeling voice
leading, however, we often do not want to do this, as it can disrupt the relationship between distance and
voice-leading size. See Callender, Quinn, and Tymoczko 2008.

Appendix B

then we must do the same in the second. Second, we may sometimes ﬁnd that we can
move a line segment into our fundamental domain only by breaking it into pieces.
For example, suppose we would like to plot the voice leading (C4, Ef4, Gf4)®(Ef4,
Gf4, C5), or (60, 63, 66)®(63, 66, 72), which shifts the C diminished chord up by
one scale step. To get the sum of the ﬁrst chord’s notes to lie between 0 and 12, we
must transpose down by ﬁve octaves; this means we need to transpose the second
chord down by ﬁve octaves as well, producing (0, 3, 6)®(3, 6, 12). Here we encounter a problem. The ﬁrst part of this line segment—from (0, 3, 6) to just before (1, 4,
7)—lies within our region, since its chords sum to less than 12. However, the rest of
the line segment—(1, 4, 7)®(3, 6, 12)—sums to 12 or more. We therefore split the
voice leading into two parts: (0, 3, 6)®(1, 4, 7) and (1, 4, 7)®(3, 6, 12). To move the
second part of the voice leading into our fundamental region, we lower the ﬁnal note
in each chord by 12 and move it to the front of the list. (Once again, we do this uniformly, applying the same transposition and reordering to both chords.) This gives
us (−5, 1, 4)®(0, 3, 6), which is a line segment that begins on the lowest (sum-zero)
face of the prism and moves to (0, 3, 6). Our voice leading (C4, Ef4, Gf4)®(Ef4,
Gf4, C5) therefore disappears off the top face of the fundamental region, reappearing
on the bottom. A little experimentation will show that any one-step ascending scalar
transposition, in any chord space of any dimension, moves off the top face to reappear on the bottom in a very similar way.
The fundamental idea here—and it is both simple and profound—is that ordinary numbers provide a natural and musically meaningful set of geometrical coordinates, with points representing chords and line segments representing voice leadings.
Any sequence of numbers can be understood as an ordered list of pitches, while any
pair of (equal-length) sequences can be understood as a voice leading in pitch space.
When we disregard octave and order information, we are restricting our attention
to a region of Cartesian space deﬁned by Eqs. B.1 and B.2 above. This involves moving arbitrary points and line segments into our region. If we do this carefully and
thoughtfully, we realize that the boundaries of this region have special properties.
In other words, we make the transition from regions of ordinary Euclidean space to
quotient spaces proper.18

18 Note that it is often possible to work with the original Cartesian coordinates: it is obvious that the
voice leading (60, 64, 67)®(64, 60, 67) exchanges two notes, and hence bounces off a mirror boundary,
and that (60, 64, 67, 70)®(64, 67, 70, 72) is an ascending one-step scalar transposition, and hence is represented by a path that disappears off the sum-12 face to reappear on the sum-zero face, returning to its
starting point. After a little practice, you will start to feel comfortable with statements such as “there is a
tritone halfway between (C4, G4) and (Cs4, Fs4)”—and even with more difﬁcult tasks, such as imagining
the cross section of an arbitrary voice leading in three-note chord space.

411

appendix c

Discrete Voice-Leading Lattices
In recent decades, music theorists have produced a number of graphs representing
voice-leading relationships. Often, these graphs seem to imply something like the following methodology. First, one selects some interesting domain of chords and some
interesting set of voice-leading relationships among them. (For example, semitonal
voice leading among major, minor, and augmented triads.) Second, one constructs a
graph representing all of the voice-leading relationships among all of the objects in
question. Third, one interprets the resulting graph as providing a measure of distance
between the objects it contains. Thus, for example, one might use the graph to analyze music that moves between nonadjacent chords, or claim that larger leaps on the
graph are musically disfavored in some way.
However, this third step involves a subtle logical leap. For while the method generates
graphs whose local structure is perfectly clear, it does not follow that the graphs’ global
structure is equally meaningful. Consider, for example, the familiar Tonnetz—invented
by Leonhard Euler, made famous by Hugo Riemann, and resurrected by contemporary
theorists such as Lewin, Hyer, and Cohn (Figure C1).1 Two triads are adjacent on the
Tonnetz if they can be linked by what Cohn calls “parsimonious” voice leading, voice
leading in which a single voice moves, and it moves by just one or two semitones. However, there is no similarly intuitive way to characterize larger distances in the space. On
the Tonnetz, C major is two units away from F major but three units from F minor—
even though it takes just two semitones to move from C major to F minor, and three
to move from C major to F major (Figure C2). (This is precisely why F minor so often
appears as a passing chord between F major and C major.) It follows that we cannot use
the Tonnetz to model the ubiquitous IV–iv–I progression, in which the two-semitone
motion 6^ ®^5 is broken into the semitonal steps 6^ ®f^6®^5. More generally, it shows
that Tonnetz distances do not correspond to voice-leading distances. (Nor do they correspond to common tone distances: both F minor and Ef minor are three Tonnetz steps
away from C major, even though C major and F minor have one common tone, while
C major and Ef minor have none.) Indeed, it is an open question whether there is any
intuitive notion of musical distance that is being modeled here.2
1 For a history of the Tonnetz, see Mooney 1996. For a general discussion of recent work featuring various analogous discrete lattices, see Cohn 1998a.
2 Tymoczko 2009a notes that the Tonnetz may capture an acoustic conception of distance, according to
which C3 is particularly close to its second overtone G4; the point here is that this is very different from
voice-leading or common-tone distance.

Appendix C
Figure C1 Two versions of the Tonnetz. In (a) points represent notes, and chords are
represented by triangles. In (b), points represent chords, and hexagons represent single notes.
(For example, the hexagon containing C and f can be associated with the note C, common to
all six of its triads.)

A surprising number of discrete music-theoretical graphs suffer from similar
problems. For example, the graph in Figure C3 shows single-semitone voice leadings
among diminished, dominant, French sixth, and half-diminished seventh chords.3
While it would be entirely appropriate to use it to analyze a passage that moves by single-semitone voice leading between these chords, it is problematic to use it to model
voice-leading distance between nonadjacent chords: the graph contains no two-step
path between C7 and Aø7, even though the chords can be connected by two-semitone
voice leading. For another example, consider Figure C4a, which represents single
semitone voice-leading among major thirds and perfect fourths. On this graph, {C, F}

3 This graph is quite similar to Douthett and Steinbach’s “Power Towers” (1998).

413

414

appendix c
Figure C2 (a) On the Tonnetz, F major (triangle 3) is closer to C major (triangle 1) than F minor
(triangle 4) is. Consequently, the voice leading (C, E, G)®(C, F, A) is represented as a two-step
motion, while it takes at least three steps to represent (C, E, G)®(C, F, Af). (b) In actual music,
however, F minor frequently appears as a passing chord between F major and C major.

Figure C3 A graph of single-semitone voice-leading relations among diminished, dominant,
half-diminished and French sixth chords. On the graph it takes four steps to get from C7 to
Aø7, even though the chords can be connected by two single-semitone shifts.

Appendix C
Figure C4 (a) A graph of single-semitone voice-leading relations between major thirds and
perfect fourths. (b) Since it does not contain tritones, it cannot represent voice leadings such
as (C, F)®(B, Fs), which move vertically across the center of the space.

and {Fs, B} are twelve steps apart, even though the minimal voice leading between
them moves each voice by just a semitone. Once again, local voice-leading concerns
give rise to a graph whose global distances are difﬁcult to interpret.
This last example provides a key to understanding what is going on. Figure C4b
embeds the circular graph within the Möbius strip representing two-note chords,
showing that one can move from {C, F} to {B, Fs} across the center of the larger
space. We cannot take advantage of this shortcut if we stay on the discrete lattice,
because the lattice forces us to go “the long way around”—off one side of the strip
and onto the other. A little thought will show that these sorts of voice-leading “shortcuts” always pass through chords dividing the octave at least as evenly as those we
happen to be interested in. (This is obvious in two-note chord space and less than
obvious in higher dimensions; but the general principle holds there as well.) This
leads to a very useful rule of thumb: in general, we should expect that a faithful representation of voice-leading possibilities will contain whatever chords we are interested in, as well as all the chords that divide the octave at least as evenly as those chords.
Thus if we are interested in voice leading among major thirds and perfect fourths, we
should also include tritones. This is precisely why the lattices in §3.11 are all reliable:
they include the most even chords in any given scale, and hence faithfully represent
voice-leading distances.
More generally, we can specify criteria ensuring that a graph’s global structure
faithfully represents voice-leading distances:
1.

Every edge on the graph should represent voice leading in which a single
voice moves by a single scale step or chromatic semitone (a condition violated
by the Tonnetz).

415

416

appendix c

2.

3.
4.

5.

For any two of its chords, the graph should contain all the interscalar
transpositions between them (§4.9). This implies that the graph should not
present the appearance of multiple disjoint segments in a cross section of the
space of all chords, a condition violated by Figure C4b.
The chords on the graph should all have the same size.4
The paths representing these interscalar transpositions should not involve
ascending and descending motion in the same voice (a condition violated by
the Tonnetz and Figure C3 above).
The graph should not contain any multisets.

It is relatively easy to see that any graph satisfying these three requirements will faithfully reﬂect voice-leading distances, even between nonadjacent chords: condition 2
implies that the graph contains the shortest voice leading between any of its chords
(§4.9); condition 1 implies that edges have unit voice-leading length; and condition 3
implies that the edges representing an interscalar transposition do not cancel each
other out.5 The ﬁve requirements are satisﬁed by all of the lattices in §3.11.
Of course, geometry can also provide a deeper perspective on these “faithful” voiceleading graphs. For instance, Douthett and Steinbach’s “Cube Dance” (Figure C5a).

Figure C5 Douthett and Steinbach’s “Cube Dance” (a) and the lattice at the center of threenote chord space (b).

4 For discussion of the problems arising when graphs combine chords of different sizes, see Callender,
Quinn, and Tymoczko 2008 and Tymoczko 2010.
5 Note that if we are measuring paths by counting the number of edges they contain, then we are using
the “taxicab” metric of voice-leading size.

Appendix C

is virtually identical to the lattice at the center of three-note chord space, and was
discovered almost a decade before the continuous spaces of Chapter 3. However,
it turns out that we can extract much more information from the graph when we
understand how it is embedded within the continuous space. For example, geometry
tells us that the graph represents all and only the strongly crossing-free voice leadings
between its chords; that the three spatial axes correspond to motion in the three
musical voices; that these spatial axes can only be deﬁned locally, since the ﬁgure has
a global topological twist; and that two paths on the ﬁgure represent the same voice
leading if they have the same “winding number” (that is, if they take the same number of clockwise or counterclockwise steps). All of which shows that the geometrical
perspective can do more than just reveal that some graphs faithfully represent voice
leading; it can also help us use these graphs in a more sophisticated and musical
fashion.

417

appendix d

The Interscalar Interval Matrix
Chapter 4 noted that strongly crossing-free voice leadings can be decomposed into
chromatic and interscalar transpositions. As it happens, there is a useful mathematical way to represent this idea. Figure D1 depicts what I call an interscalar interval
matrix, representing the four interscalar transpositions that take a half-diminished
seventh chord to a dominant seventh chord with the same root. The numbers in
the matrix are paths in pitch-class space, showing how far and in what direction
each note moves. To combine these scalar transpositions with chromatic transpositions, we simply add a constant value to the relevant matrix row. For instance,
0, 1, 1, 0
® (C, E,G,Bf),
the ﬁrst row represents the voice leading (C,Ef, Gf,Bf) ¾¾¾¾
which sends the root of the C half-diminished chord to the root of the C dominant seventh chord; by subtracting one from the values (0, 1, 1, 0), we get (−1, 0,
-1, 0, 0, -1
0, −1), representing the voice leading (C, Ef, Gf, Bf) ¾¾¾¾
® (B, Ds, Fs, A). In
effect, we have transposed the second chord down by chromatic semitone, from C7
to B7. (The two voice leadings are individually T-related since they differ only by
the transposition of their second chord.) Every strongly crossing-free (four-voice)
voice leading from half-diminished to dominant seventh can be obtained by adding
some constant to some row of the interscalar interval matrix: for example, to obtain
0,0, -1, -1
(C, Ef, Gf, Bf) ¾¾¾¾
® (C, Ef, F, A), subtract seven from the values in the third
row. This is equivalent to combining interscalar transposition upward by two steps
with chromatic transposition downward by seven semitones.
With a little practice, we can learn to “read” these matrices, seeing at a glance the
voice-leading possibilities between all the transpositions of any two chord types. For
example, suppose we want to ﬁnd the most efﬁcient voice leading between C halfdiminished and A dominant seventh. Our matrix contains voice leadings that send
a half-diminished chord to the dominant seventh with the same root. Since we want
a voice leading that moves the root down by third, we will be subtracting three from
the numbers in some row of the matrix.1 To ﬁnd the ascending scalar transposition
that most nearly offsets descending chromatic transposition by three semitones, we

1 Note that the matrix contains ascending scalar transpositions, which we will be attempting to neutralize with descending chromatic transpositions; hence we transpose by subtracting three rather than by
adding nine.

Appendix D
Figure D1 (a) The rows of this matrix correspond to the voice leadings in (b). All of the
strongly crossing-free (four-voice) voice leadings from half-diminished to dominant seventh
can be derived by adding a constant number to some row of this matrix. For example, to
combine interscalar transposition up by two steps with chromatic transposition downward by
seven semitones, subtract 7 from the values in the third row of the matrix, as illustrated by (c).

simply look for the row of the matrix whose values come closest to three. This is
clearly the second row: subtracting three from these values gives (1, 1, 1, −1), repre1, 1, 1, - 1
® (Cs, E, G, A).2
senting (C, Ef, Gf, Bf) ¾¾¾¾
After a bit of time, this sort of computation becomes automatic; one virtually starts
1, 1, 1, - 1
to see the voice leading (C, Ef, Gf, Bf) ¾¾¾¾
® (Cs, E, G, A) directly in the matrix
in Figure D1. To test yourself, try to use the matrix to identify the most efﬁcient voice
leading from a C half-diminished chord to an Ef dominant seventh chord.3 Then use

2 Interscalar interval matrices provide another way to understand the relationship between near evenness and efﬁcient voice leading: for two nearly even chords, the rows of the interscalar interval matrix will
all be very close to a constant value, which means that the interscalar transpositions and chromatic transpositions will nearly cancel each other out. Hence we can ﬁnd reasonably efﬁcient voice leadings between
that chord and all of its various transpositions.
3 To do this, simply subtract nine from the row of the matrix whose values are closest to nine. (Again,
we want to combine a descending chromatic transposition with an ascending scalar transpositions in the
matrix, and hence will be subtracting nine rather than adding three to some row.) In this case, the relevant
row is the last one: subtracting nine from the values in the fourth row gives us (1, 0, 1, 0), representing
1,0,1,0
(C, Ef, Gf, Bf) ¾¾¾
® (Df, Ef, G, Bf).

419

420

appendix d

it to ﬁnd the minimal voice leading that maps the root of the half-diminished chord
onto the ﬁfth of some dominant seventh.4
Analogous matrices can be constructed for any pair of chords, using the following
algorithm5:
1.
2.

3.

Assign scale degree numbers to the two scales A and B.
Arrange chord A in pitch space in ascending scale degree order (i.e. with the
ﬁrst scale degree at the bottom and the last scale degree at the top) such that
the top and bottom notes are no more than an octave apart. Arrange chord B
similarly.
Write down the voice leading that maps the lowest note of A to the lowest
note of B, the second-lowest note of A to the second-lowest note of B, and
so on. Write this voice leading as a pitch-class voice leading of the form
x1 , x2 ,..., xn
® (b1 , b2 , . . . , bn ) (§2.5). The numbers above the
(a1 , a2 , . . . , an ) ¾¾¾¾¾
arrow are the ﬁrst row of the interscalar interval matrix.6

Figure D2 Constructing the interscalar interval matrix from (C, D, E, F, G, A, B) to
(C, D, E, Fs, G, A, Bf). The resulting matrix is shown in Figure D3.

4 Here, we begin with the third row of the matrix (which maps root to ﬁfth) and ask what chromatic
transposition comes closest to neutralizing these values. There are two equally good possibilities: subtracting six gives us a two-semitone voice leading from Cø7 to Fs7, while subtracting seven gives us a twosemitone voice leading from Cø7 to F7.
5 It is assumed that A and B have the same number of notes. One can always add “doublings” to the
smaller chord so that it has the same number of notes as the larger chord. However, there are multiple
ways to do this.
6 Or more mathematically: the numbers are obtained by subtracting the pitches of B componentwise
from those of A.

Appendix D

4.
5.

Transpose the lowest note of B up by octave and move it to the end of the
sequence, replacing (b1, b2, …, bn) with (b2, b3, …, bn, b1 + 12).
Repeat steps 3–4 to obtain the second row of the interscalar interval
matrix. Continue repeating until the chord B has been transposed upward
by octave.

Figure D2 generates the interscalar interval matrix that takes the C diatonic
scale to the C acoustic scale. Note that the result is affected both by how we assign
scale degrees to the two chords, and by how we arranged them register. For example, suppose we had numbered the C acoustic scale so that D was its ﬁrst scale
degree, and arranged it in register so that it began 10 semitones below middle C:
(D3, E3, Fs3, G3, A3, Bf3, C4). This would yield an interscalar interval matrix
whose ﬁrst row is (−10, −10, −10, −10, −10, −11, −11) rather than (0, 0, 0, 1, 0,
0, −1). Figure D3 compares the matrix that results with the matrix we originally
generated: each row of Figure D3b is either identical to a row in Figure D3a, or can
be obtained from one by subtracting 12. In principle, the difference between these
two matrices is immaterial; they contain the same information and can be used in
more or less the same way. However, it is in practice easier to work with the matrix
in Figure D3a.
In the special case where the second chord is the same as the ﬁrst, then we have a
scalar (rather than an interscalar) interval matrix. One can construct these matrices
in exactly the same way, though we should always label the scale degrees so that the
ﬁrst row of the matrix contains only zeros. Figure D4 generates the scalar interval
matrix that takes the dominant seventh chord to itself. Its four rows correspond to
the voice leadings at the bottom of the ﬁgure.
Again, the matrix can be used to represent every combination of scalar and chromatic transpositions. For example, to combine scalar transposition by ascending step
with chromatic transposition downward by three semitones, subtract three from the
1,0,0, -1
® (Cs, E, G, A).
second row of the matrix, giving (C, E, G, Bf) ¾¾¾

Figure D3 Two equivalent interscalar interval matrices. Each of the ﬁrst six rows in the right
matrix can be obtained by subtracting twelve from the next row down in the left matrix. The
last row of the right matrix is identical to the ﬁrst row of the left.

421

422

appendix d
Figure D4 The four voice leadings corresponding to the four rows of the scalar interval
matrix that takes (C, E, G, Bf) to itself.

0,0,0,0
(C, E, G, Bf) ¾¾¾
® (C, E, G, Bf)
4,3,3,2
(C, E, G, B f) ¾¾¾
® (E, G, Bf, C)
7,6,5,6
(C, E, G, Bf) ¾¾¾
® (G, Bf, C, E)
10,8,9,9
(C, E, G, Bf) ¾¾¾
® (Bf, C, E, G)

The key point is that these scale-theoretic ideas provide another way to think
about the geometrical spaces described in Chapter 3. Consider Figure D5, which
reproduces the cross section of three-note chord space (§3.8). The line segments
on the ﬁgure represent the three paths connecting 047 to a minor triad without
touching the boundary: (0, 4, 7)®(0, 3, 7), (0, 4, 7)®(0, 5, 8), and (0, 4, 7)®(0, 4,
9). Each line segment corresponds to a different category of interscalar transposition between major and minor triads. The ﬁrst, (0, 4, 7)®(0, 3, 7), links root to
root; the second, (0, 4, 7)®(0, 5, 8), links root to ﬁfth; and the third, (0, 4, 7)®(0,
4, 9), links root to third. In fact, there is a very close connection between the idea of
isolating the purely contrary component of a voice leading and the techniques we
are discussing here: roughly speaking, the interscalar transposition corresponds to
the pure contrary component of a crossing-free voice leading, while the chromatic
transposition corresponds to the pure parallel component.7 What is particularly
useful about the scalar approach is that it can be applied to large chords, without requiring that we try to visualize higher dimensional geometry. The interscalar

7 More precisely: each of the strongly crossing-free, purely contrary voice leadings between chord A
and a chord transpositionally related to B involves a distinct interscalar transposition. By focusing on pure
contrary voice leadings or interscalar transpositions, we select one voice leading from among a class of
individually T-related voice leadings, using it as the representative of that larger class.

Appendix D
Figure D5 The cross section of three-note chord space contains three line segments that
connect 047 to a minor triad without touching the boundary (a). Each corresponds to a
different interscalar transposition between major and minor triads (b).

interval matrix thus provides a kind of “road map” of chord space, displaying the
most commonly traveled routes between any two points. In many cases, the language of interscalar transpositions is considerably more intuitive than its higher
dimensional, geometrical equivalent. I ﬁnd it wonderful that these two languages—
one heavily geometrical, the other more recognizably musical—are essentially saying the same thing.

423

appendix e

Scale, Macroharmony, and Lerdahl’s
“Basic Space”
In some ways, Fred Lerdahl and I have very different approaches to music theory. Lerdahl postulates a kind of lossless listening in which ordinary people typically recover all of the details in a musical score; I emphasize the importance of
information loss in music perception. Lerdahl is strongly inﬂuenced by Schenker,
believing that entire tonal pieces can be described by giant, recursive “tree structures” analogous to those found in linguistics; I am skeptical of these approaches,
preferring to emphasize local harmonic norms such as “IV goes to ii but not vice
versa.” (Lerdahl does not discuss harmonic norms in Tonal Pitch Space, leading me
to suspect that he does not consider them to be particularly important.1) Finally,
Lerdahl is primarily concerned with modeling cognitive structures in the listener’s
mind, whereas I am interested in how contemporary musicians might think about
composing music.
Nevertheless, there are some ways in which our views are rather similar. On
a very general level, Lerdahl and I both present theoretical models that seek to
integrate the local (“chordal”) and larger (“scalar”) levels. Furthermore, we use
very similar graphs to represent “centricity” or pitch prominence. Figure E1 presents a five-tiered pitch-class profile that is very similar to what Lerdahl calls the
“basic space” for the key of C major; indeed, to the casual observer they are virtually indistinguishable. There are, however, two subtle but important differences
between our figures. First, Lerdahl uses his graphs to represent not just macroharmony and centricity, but also music’s scalar structure. And second, Lerdahl’s
basic space does double duty, representing both global harmonic stability and
the local harmonic expectations associated with being on the tonic chord in a
particular key.
Let’s consider these points in more detail. Lerdahl’s basic space encodes the claim
that listeners hear tonal melodies relative to ﬁve melodic “alphabets”: the chromatic
scale (level e), diatonic scale (level d), the triad (level c), the perfect ﬁfth (level b), and
the unison (level a). By contrast, the pitch-class proﬁles in Chapter 5 represent only

1 He also suggests (2001, p. 215) that terms like “tonic” and “dominant” can be translated into statements
about “prolongational position,” a position that seems to court monism (§7.6).

Appendix E
Figure E1 A ﬁve-tiered pitch-class proﬁle for the key of C major (a) and Fred
Lerdahl’s “basic space” (b).

the stability of individual notes, and do not reﬂect anything about music’s melodic
or scalar structure. I think this is an advantage of my approach. Lerdahl is surely correct to assert that traditionally tonal melodies are often interpreted relative to his ﬁve
melodic alphabets, but I am not sure that they always or necessarily are. Figure E2a
presents the end of the Chopin “black-key” etude. Intuitively, I would imagine that
listeners interpret this passage relative to the pentatonic scale, which does not constitute a distinct layer of Lerdahl’s space. The same is true of Figures E2b–c, which also
feature melodic pentatonic scales. To me, these examples strongly suggest that tonal
music sometimes uses a pentatonic “melodic alphabet”—one that is not included in
Lerdahl’s basic space.
The deep issue here, it seems to me, is that scale, macroharmony, and centricity
are in principle independent, even though they are often linked in practice. This is
precisely what allows a musician like Chopin to use pentatonic melodies to articulate
pitch-class proﬁles like the one in Figure E1a. From the contemporary composer’s
perspective, or from the standpoint of the theorist interested in charting the full
space of tonal possibilities, Lerdahl’s basic space is therefore too conﬁning, precisely
because it forces us into a relatively traditional understanding of the relation between
scale, macroharmony, centricity. By separating scale from macroharmony, we sever
the link between pitch-class proﬁles and melodic alphabets, thereby allowing ourselves to consider more ambiguous proﬁles such as that in Figure 5.6.12.
Lerdahl also means for his basic space to play two similar but related roles: it
represents both the global stability of notes within a key and also the local stability
of notes relative to a sounding tonic chord. In its ﬁrst role, the basic space expresses

425

426

appendix e
Figure E2 Pentatonic scales playing a prominent melodic role at the conclusion of Chopin’s
Op. 10 No. 5 (a), in Dvorák’s Op. 96 “American” Quartet (b), and at the opening of McCoy
Tyner’s solo on “Pursuance” (c).

thoughts like “in the key of C major, C is the most important pitch, then G, then E,
then the remaining white notes, then the black notes—no matter what chord is actually sounding.” In its second role, the basic space expresses sentiments like “when I am
hearing a C major chord in the key of C major, the C is the most stable note because
it is the root of the chord I am hearing, then G, because it is the ﬁfth of the chord that
I am hearing, then E, then the white notes, because they belong to the main scale of
the key I am in.” Lerdahl not unreasonably assumes that these two kinds of stability
should correspond: the global importance of notes relative to a key should reﬂect the
local stability of notes when the tonic chord is sounding.
But in many modern tonal styles, this requirement is inappropriate. For example,
a contemporary jazz pianist might regularly play the tonic chord of an F blues as a
stack of fourths F-Bf-Ef (Figure E3). Relative to this particular voicing of the tonic

Appendix E

F7 chord, the Bf might be conceived as more stable than the A—in fact, a melodic
A played over this voicing will produce a distinctive “bite” since it forms a semitone
with the Bf in the harmony. However, it would be odd to interpret this local chord
voicing as upsetting the global stability of notes in the key: jazz musicians conceive
of voicings as ﬂexible things that can be altered and changed spontaneously, without
restructuring the key itself. (The chord voicing does not, for example, destroy the
sense that Bf is attracted melodically to A.) Here, then, the stability of notes within
the key diverges from the local stability of notes when the tonic chord is sounding.2

Figure E3 The opening of Chick Corea’s solo on “Matrix,” from Now he sings, now he sobs
(transcribed by Bill Dobbins in Corea 1988). In jazz, the global harmonic stability of notes
need not correspond to their local stability over tonic chords: Corea often plays F-Bf-Ef for
the F7 chord, but this does not mean that Bf is globally more stable than A.

Of course, Lerdahl’s theory is optimized for the purpose of modeling listeners’
responses to classical music, in which these complications typically do not arise. My
points should therefore be taken as obstacles to extending Lerdahl’s methods to other
styles, rather than intrinsic problems within its own domain. It is also important to
reiterate that Lerdahl and I are pursuing fundamentally different aims: unlike Lerdahl, I am not trying to develop an accurate quantitative model of listeners’ responses
to the classical style in particular; instead, my goal is to develop more general representations that can help musicians think about a much wider range of tonal styles,
including those of the past hundred years. To this end, I want more ﬂexible tools that
are sensitive to the ways in which macroharmony, scale, and centricity can sometimes
diverge.

2 Jazz is ﬁlled with examples of this phenomenon—as when improvisers play the lydian mode over the
tonic triad (Chapter 10).

427

appendix f

Some Study Questions, Problems, and Activities
chapter 1
1.
2.

Compose a short etude, about a minute long, exploring one or more
combinations of the ﬁve features.
Write a simple melody exploiting a small voice leading between two closely
related scales.

chapter 2
1.
2.

3.

Using the formulas in §2.3, show that transposition and inversion are
distance-preserving functions (requires basic algebra).
Using the formulas in §2.3, show that every inversion leaves some pitch
unchanged and moves every other point by twice the distance to this “ﬁxed
point” (requires basic algebra).
Determine which (if any) combination of O, P, T, I, and C is required to
transform
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

4.
5.

(C4, E4, G4) into (A3, Cs5, E3)
(C4, E4, G4) into (Ef3, G4, C3, Ef2)
(C4, Ef4, G4, Bf4) into (Bf4, G4, G4, Ef4, C4)
(C4, D4, Ef4) into (A3, Fs2, G5)
(C4, D4, F4) into (B5, A5, Fs5)
(C4, E4, F4) into (G4, Fs4, D4, C4)

Choose a Bach chorale and write the voice leadings in the ﬁrst measure as
shown in Figure 2.7.1. Ignore nonharmonic tones.
How (if at all) are the following pitch-class space voice leadings related?
a. (C, E, G)®(Bf, Ef, G) and (C, Ef, G)®(C, E, A)
b. (C, E, G, Bf)®(B, E, Gs, B) and (C, Ef, Gf, A)®(C, E, G, G)
c. (C, E, G)®(C, E, A) and (E, G, C)®(E, A, C)
d. (Fs, A, C, E)®(Fs, A, C, D) and (D, F, Af, C)®(Ds, Fs, A, B)
e. (C, E, G, Bf)®(C, Ef, F, A) and (Fs, A, C, D)®(Fs, Af, C, Ef)

Appendix F

f.
g.
6.

Find a symmetrical chord that is very close to the following chords and
describe its symmetries. Construct a voice leading that exploits the near
symmetries of the chords below.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

7.
8.

(C, D, E, F, G, A, B)®(D, E, F, G, A, B, C) and (C, D, E, F, G,
A, B)®(C, D, Ef, F, G, A, Bf)
(C, E, G)®(C, E, Gs) and (C, Ef, G)®(C, Ef, Gf)

{E, G, B, Ds}
{C, E, G, Bf}
{C, F, Fs}
{C, Cs, D, Fs}
{C, D, Ef, F, G, Af, B}

Nearly even chords are also nearly inversionally symmetrical. Why? What
about chords whose notes are clustered very close together?
Compose a small musical etude that exploits the near symmetries of some
chord.

chapter 3
1.

Make several copies of the two-note Möbius strip (Figure 3.3.1), and draw
the following voice leadings:
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

2.

3.

4.

(Ef4, Af4)®(Ef4, Bf4)
(Ef4, Af4)®(Bf3, Ef4)
(Ef4, Af4)®(Ef4, Bf3)
(Ef4, Af4)®(Ef3, Bf4)
(C4, E4)®(A3, F4)
(Af3, Bf3)®(A3, G3)

On the two-note Möbius strip, choose two major thirds and draw two
different generalized line segments between them, neither of which touches
the mirror boundary. In ordinary musical notation, write voice leadings
corresponding to these two paths.
On the two-note Möbius strip, choose two major thirds and draw two
generalized line segments between them: one bouncing off the lower mirror
boundary and one bouncing off the upper mirror boundary. Write voice
leadings in pitch space corresponding to these two paths.
On the triangular cross section of three-note chord space (Figure 3.8.6),
represent the pure contrary component of the following voice leadings:
a.
b.
c.

(C, E, G)®(B, E, G)
(C, G, E)®(C, Af, F)
(C, F, Af)®(C, Ef, A)

429

430

appendix f

d. (C, Df, G)®(Df, C, G)
-7,1, -2
e. (G, B, D) ¾¾¾
® (C, C, C)
f. (A, C, E)®(Af, C, F)®(G, B, F)
5.

6.

7.
8.

9.

10.

On the triangular cross section of three-note chord space, choose a point
representing a minor triad. Draw the three line segments that connect this
point to major triads without touching the mirror boundary. Then come up
with diatonic voice leadings (i.e. voice leadings between chords belonging to
the same diatonic scale) whose “purely contrary” component is represented
by these line segments.
The chord {A, Cs, F, Fs} has two notes clustered together, and there is one
efﬁcient voice leading that permutes the clustered notes; the chord {A, D,
Ds, E} has three notes clustered close together, and there are ﬁve efﬁcient
voice leadings that permute the clustered notes. Explain this geometrically,
in terms of the chords’ positions in the cross section of four-dimensional
chord space. What about a chord like {A, Bf, B, C}?
Locate the inversionally symmetrical set classes in the cross section of threedimensional space.
Write out a new Möbius strip, labeling only the points contained in
seven-note equal temperament. (You can identify scale degrees using
the letters A through G, but note that this scale is not the familiar major
scale—it divides the octave into seven completely equal parts, rather than
having steps of two different sizes.) Compare the cross sections of this
space to those of the chromatic Möbius strip. Are there any interesting
differences?
(Advanced) Chapter 2 showed that the chord (B, C, E, Fs) is near its tritone
transposition. Explain this fact using the geometry of four-note chord space.
Hint: consider the two-dimensional “slice” of the space containing all chords
with both C and Fs. What does this slice look like? How is the voice leading
(C, E, Fs, B)®(C, F, Gf, Bf) represented in it?
(Advanced) Consider the slice of four-note chord space containing chords
that can be decomposed into two perfect fourths. What does it look like?
What voice leadings does it depict? How does this slice differ from the
slice containing chords that can be decomposed into a perfect fourth and
a major third? Optional: use this space to analyze a passage from Bartók’s
“Fourths,” no. 131 in the Mikrokosmos.

chapter 4
1.

2.

What is the smallest (three-voice) voice leading between the D minor and
E major triads if you measure distance according to the A harmonic minor
scale? What if you measure distance according to the chromatic scale?
Compose a brief etude using one of the scales described in §4.4.

Appendix F

3.

Figure F1, at the end of this appendix, contains several unlabeled graphs.
Select the appropriate graph and label the chords described in the following
list. In each case, measure distances using scale steps. Consult §3.11 for help.
a.
b.
c.
d.

The most even two-note chords in the acoustic scale
The most even two-note chords in the octatonic scale
The most even three-note chords in the hexatonic scale
The most even four-note chords in the octatonic scale (Note: you
may need to use multiple copies of the graph to do this
completely.)
e. The “generalized circle of ﬁfths” at the center of four-note diatonic
space. (That is, the one-dimensional space representing voice-leading
relations among the most even type of four-note diatonic chord.)
f. The two-dimensional graph representing the two most even types of
four-note diatonic chords.
g. The three-dimensional analogue of the graph in the previous problem,
containing four types of nearly even diatonic chords.
h. The most even four-note chords in the chromatic scale (don’t look back
at Chapter 3).
4.

Using Appendix D, construct the scalar interval matrix for
a.
b.
c.

5.

Use the scalar interval matrices from the previous problem to ﬁnd the most
efﬁcient voice leading between
a.
b.
c.

6.

7.

8.

the major triad considered as an object in chromatic space
the triad considered as an object in diatonic space
the acoustic scale

two major triads in chromatic space
two triads in diatonic space
two acoustic scales

Write the most efﬁcient (three-voice) voice leadings from a C major triad
to each of the twelve minor triads and catalogue them according to which
interscalar transposition is used.
Choose a sequence of ﬁve diatonic, acoustic, and harmonic scales that are
related by efﬁcient voice leading. Now chart this sequence on both the scale
lattice (Figure 4.6.1) and the alchemistical diagram (Figure 4.6.5). Use this
opportunity to familiarize yourself with the alchemistical diagram.
(Very advanced) Consider any single-step voice leading between two chords
belonging to the same scale. This voice leading deﬁnes a unique single-step
voice leading between the complements of those chords. (The complement
of a chord relative to a scale contains all the notes of the scale not in the
chord.) For instance, the diatonic voice leading (C, E, G)®(C, E, A) deﬁnes a
complementary voice leading among seventh chords (B, D, F, A)®(B, D, F, G).

431

432

appendix f

9.

This seems to show that the lattices representing complementary chords are
structurally similar, even though they have different dimension. (For instance,
the space representing diatonic triads has three dimensions, whereas that
representing diatonic seventh chords has four dimensions.) Explain.
Explain why the scales discussed in §4.4 have a compact appearance on the
Tonnetz (Figure C1a).

chapter 5
1.

Use pitch-class proﬁles to imagine one or more “generalized keys” and write
a short etude in this “key.”

chapter 7
1.
2.

3.

4.
5.

Identify the appearances of the 3 + 1 and “nonfactorizable” schemas in some
phrase of a Bach chorale.
(Advanced) Consider the nonfactorizable voice leading (C, C, E, G)
®(A, C, F, F). Show that this voice leading exploits the fact that the major
triad is near the tritone. (Hint: show that the size of the voice leading can
be continuously shrunk to zero by moving E and G closer to Fs (in the
ﬁrst chord) and A and C closer to B (in the second), while also changing
the transpositional relationship between the triads from ﬁve semitones to
six.) Can you ﬁnd analogues to this voice leading that use other three-note
chords?
(Advanced) Now consider the voice leading (C, C, E, G)®(B, D, F, F). What
near symmetries of the triad does this voice leading exploit? How can it be
shrunk to zero? Can you ﬁnd analogues to this voice leading that use other
three-note chords? (Hint: consider the triad as an object in diatonic space.)
(More advanced) Provide a similar analysis of the voice leading
(C, C, E, G)®(B, D, D, G).
Show that every instance of the “nonfactorizable” schema falls into one of
the cases considered in the previous three questions.

chapter 8
1.

Analyze the development section of the ﬁrst movement of Dvorak’s New
World Symphony, paying attention to the role of the major-third and minorthird systems.

Appendix F

chapter 9
1.

Analyze Debussy’s prelude “Les tierces alternées” (Book II, no. 11), paying
particular attention to scales.

chapter 10
1.

Transcribe and analyze a jazz solo.

Figure F1 Unlabeled graphs that can be used to represent voice leading relations among
various sorts of chords.

433

Figure F1 (Continued)

references

Agmon, Eytan. 1989. “A Mathematical Model of the Diatonic System.” Journal of Music Theory
33(1): 1–25.
Agmon, Eytan. 1991. “Linear Transformations Between Cyclically Generated Chords.” Musikometrika 46(3): 15–40.
Agmon, Eytan. 1995. “Functional Harmony Revisited: A Prototype-Theoretic Approach.”
Music Theory Spectrum 17(2): 196–214.
Agmon, Eytan. 1996. “Conventional Harmonic Wisdom and the Scope of Schenkerian Theory:
A Reply to John Rothgeb.” Music Theory Online 2(3).
Aldwell, Edward and Carl Schachter. [1969] 2002. Harmony and Voice Leading, 3rd ed. Belmont:
Wadsworth.
Antokoletz, Elliott. 1984. The Music of Béla Bartók. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Antokoletz, Elliott. 1993. “Transformations of a Special Non-Diatonic Mode in TwentiethCentury Music: Bartók, Stravinsky, Scriabin, and Albrecht.” Music Analysis 12(1): 25–45.
Babbitt, Milton. 1958. “Who Cares if You Listen?” High Fidelity 8(2): 38–40.
Babbitt, Milton. 1962. “Twelve-Tone Rhythmic Structure and the Electronic Medium.” Perspectives of New Music 1(1): 49–79.
Bach, Carl Philipp Emanuel. [1753/1762] 1949. Essay on the True Art of Playing Keyboard
Instruments. Ed. and trans. William J. Mitchell. New York: Norton.
Barnett, Gregory. 1998. “Modal Theory, Church Keys, and the Sonata at the End of the Seventeenth Century.” Journal of the American Musicological Society 51(2): 245–281.
Bartók, Béla. 1976. Essays. Ed. Benjamin Suchoff. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Beach, David. 1974. “The Origins of Harmonic Analysis.” Journal of Music Theory 18(2): 274–230.
Beach, David. 1983. “Schenker’s Theories: A Pedagogical View.” In Aspects of Schenkerian Theory, ed. David Beach, 1–38. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Berger, Arthur. 1963. “Problems of Pitch Organization in Stravinsky.” Perspectives of New Music
2(1): 11–42.
Berry, Wallace. 1976. Structural Functions in Music. New York: Dover.
Biamonte, Nicole. 2008. “Augmented-Sixth Chords vs. Tritone Substitutes.” Music Theory
Online 14(2).
Blum, Fred. 1959. “Another Look at the Montpellier Organum Treatise.” Musica Disciplina 13:
15–24.
Boretz, Benjamin. 1972. “Meta-Variations, Part IV: Analytic Fallout (1).” Perspectives of New
Music 11(1): 146–223.
Bregman, Albert. 1990. Auditory Scene Analysis: The Perceptual Organization of Sound. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Brown, Matthew. 2005. Explaining Tonality. Rochester: University of Rochester Press.
Buelow, George. 1992. Thorough-Bass Accompaniment According to Johann David Heinichen.
Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.

436

References
Burns, Edward M. 1999. “Intervals, Scales and Tuning.” In Psychology of Music, 2nd ed., ed.
Diana Deutsch, 215–264. San Diego: Academic Press.
Caballero, Carlo. 2004. “Multimodality in Fauré.” Paper presented to the joint meeting of the
Society for Music Theory and American Musicological Society, Seattle, Washington.
Cadwallader, Allen and David Gagne. 1998. Analysis of Tonal Music: A Schenkerian Approach.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Callender, Clifton. 1998. “Voice-Leading Parsimony in the Music of Alexander Scriabin.” Journal of Music Theory 42(2): 219–233.
Callender, Clifton. 2004. “Continuous Transformations.” Music Theory Online 10(3).
Callender, Clifton. 2007. “Interactions of the Lamento Motif and Jazz Harmonies in György
Ligeti’s Arc-en-ciel.” Intégral 21: 41–77.
Callender, Clifton, Ian Quinn, and Dmitri Tymoczko. 2008. “Generalized Voice Leading Spaces.”
Science 320: 346–348.
Callender, Clifton, and Nancy Rogers. 2006. “Judgments of Distance between Trichords.” In
Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Music Perception and Cognition, eds.
Mario Baroni, Anna Rita Addessi, Roberto Caterina, and Marco Costa, 1686–1691. Bologna:
The Society for Music Perception and Cognition.
Caplin, William. 1998. Classical Form: A Theory of Formal Functions for the Instrumental Music
of Haydn, Mozart, and Beethoven. New York: Oxford University Press.
Cariani, Peter. 2001. “Temporal Codes, Timing Nets, and Music Perception.” Journal of New
Music Research 30(2): 107–135.
Carey, Norman and David Clampitt. 1989. “Aspects of Well-Formed Scales.” Music Theory
Spectrum 11(2): 187–206.
Carpenter, Ellon. 1995. “Russian Theorists on Modality in Shostakovich’s Music.” In Shostakovich Studies, ed. David Fanning, 76–112. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Clark, Suzannah. 2002. “Schubert, Theory and Analysis.” Music Analysis 21(2): 209–243.
Clough, John and Jack Douthett. 1991. “Maximally Even Sets.” Journal of Music Theory 35:
93–173.
Clough, John, Nora Engebretsen, and Jonathan Kochavi. 1999. “Scales, Sets, and Interval Cycles:
A Taxonomy.” Music Theory Spectrum 21(1): 74–104.
Clough, John and Gerald Myerson. 1985. “Variety and Multiplicity in Diatonic Systems.” Journal of Music Theory 29(2): 249–270.
Cohn, Richard. 1991. “Bartók’s Octatonic Strategies: A Motivic Approach.” Journal of the American Musicological Society 44: 262–300.
Cohn, Richard. 1992a. “The Autonomy of Motives in Schenkerian Accounts of Tonal Music.”
Music Theory Spectrum 14(2): 150–170.
Cohn, Richard. 1992b. “Transpositional Combination of Beat-Class Sets in Steve Reich’s PhaseShifting Music.” Perspectives of New Music 30(2): 146–177.
Cohn, Richard. 1996. “Maximally Smooth Cycles, Hexatonic Systems, and the Analysis of LateRomantic Triadic Progressions.” Music Analysis 15(1): 9–40.
Cohn, Richard. 1997. “Neo-Riemannian Operations, Parsimonious Trichords, and their ‘Tonnetz’ Representations.” Journal of Music Theory 41(1): 1–66.
Cohn, Richard. 1998a. “Introduction to Neo-Riemannian Theory: A Survey and a Historical
Perspective.” Journal of Music Theory 42(2): 167–180.
Cohn, Richard. 1998b. “Square Dances with Cubes.” Journal of Music Theory 42(2): 283–296.
Cohn, Richard. 1999. “As Wonderful as Star Clusters: Instruments for Gazing at Tonality in
Schubert.” Nineteenth-Century Music 22(3): 213–232.

References
Cohn, Richard. 2000. “Weitzmann’s Regions, My Cycles, and Douthett’s Dancing Cubes.” Music
Theory Spectrum 22(1): 89–103.
Cohn, Richard. 2003. A Tetrahedral Model of Tetrachordal Voice-Leading Space. Music Theory
Online 9(4).
Cohn, Richard. 2007. “Review of Fred Lerdahl’s Tonal Pitch Space.” Music Theory Spectrum
29(1): 101–114.
Corea, Chick. 1988. Now He Sings, Now He Sobs. Transcr. Bill Dobbins. Rottenberg: Advance
Music.
Cook, Nicholas. 1987. “The Perception of Large-Scale Tonal Closure.” Music Perception 5(2): 197–205.
Cook, Nicholas. 1994. “Music and Psychology: A Mutual Regard?” In Musical Perceptions, ed.
Rita Aiello and John Sloboda, 64–95. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cook, Robert. 2005. “Parsimony and Extravagance.” Journal of Music Theory 49(1): 109–140.
Crocker, Richard. 1962. “Discant, Counterpoint, and Harmony.” Journal of the American Musicological Society 15(1): 1–21.
Crowder, Robert, J. Steven Reznick, and Stacey L. Rosenkrantz. 1991. “Perception of the Major/Minor
Distinction: V. Preferences among Infants.” Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society 29: 187–188.
Dahlhaus, Carl. 1990. Studies in the Origins of Harmonic Tonality. Trans. Robert Gjerdingen.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
De La Grange, Henry-Louis. 1973. Mahler. New York: Doubleday.
Deutsch, Diana and John Feroe. 1981. “The Internal Representation of Pitch Sequences in
Tonal Music.” Psychological Review 88: 503–522.
Diamond, Jared. 1997. Guns, Germs, and Steel. New York: Norton.
Douthett, Jack and Peter Steinbach. 1998. “Parsimonious Graphs: A Study in Parsimony, Contextual Transformations, and Modes of Limited Transposition.” Journal of Music Theory
42(2): 241–263.
Dowling, W. Jay and Dane L. Harwood. 1986. Music Cognition. San Diego: Academic Press.
Dubiel, Joseph. 1997. “What’s the Use of the Twelve-Tone System?” Perspectives of New Music
35(2): 33–51.
Dufﬁn, Ross. 2006. How Equal Temperament Ruined Harmony (and Why You Should Care).
New York: Norton.
Fétis, François-Joseph. [1840] 1994. Esquisse de l’Histoire de l’Harmony. Trans. Mary Arlin.
Stuyvesant: Pendragon.
Feynman, Richard. 1994. The Character of Physical Law. New York: Modern Library.
Forte, Allen. 1955. Contemporary Tone Structures. New York: Columbia University Press.
Forte, Allen. 1973. The Structure of Atonal Music. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Forte, Allen. 1987. “Liszt’s Experimental Music and the Music of the Early Twentieth Century.”
Nineteenth-Century Music 10: 209–228.
Forte, Allen. 1990. “Musorgsky as Modernist: The Phantasmic Episode in Boris Godunov.”
Music Analysis 9: 3–45.
Forte, Allen. 1991. “Debussy and the Octatonic.” Music Analysis 10: 125–169.
Frankenhauser, Gabe. 2008. “Flat Primary Triads, Harmonic Refraction, and the Harmonic
Idiom of Shostakovich and Prokoﬁev.” In Musical Currents from the Left Coast, eds. Jack Boss
and Bruce Quaglia. Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.
Fuller, Ramon. 1975. “A Structuralist Approach to the Diatonic Scale.” Journal of Music Theory
19(2): 182–210.
Gann, Kyle. 2006. Music Downtown: Writings from the Village Voice. Berkeley: University of
California Press.

437

438

References
Gauldin, Robert. 1997. Harmonic Practice in Tonal Music. New York: Norton.
Gervais, Françoise. 1971. “Etude Comparée des Langues Harmoniques de Fauré et de Debussy.”
La Revue Musicale 272–273: 3–152, 7–131.
Gjerdingen, Robert. 2007. Music in the Galant Style. New York: Oxford University Press.
Golab, Marceij. 1995. Chopins harmonik: Chromatik in ihrer Beziehung zur Tonalität. Köln: Bela Verlag.
Gut, Serge. 1976. “La Notion de Consonance Chez les Théoriciens du Moyen Age.” Acta Musicologica 48(1): 20–44.
Hall, Rachel. 2009. “Geometrical models for modulation in Arab music.” Paper presented to the
national meeting of the Society for Music Theory, Montreal.
Hall, Rachel, and Dmitri Tymoczko. 2007. “Poverty and polyphony: a connection between
music and economics.” Paper presented to the 2007 Bridges Conference on Mathematical
Connections in Art, Music, and Science, Donostia, Spain.
Hansen, Finn. 1996. “The Tristan Chord Is Nothing but a Tritone Substitution of the Characteristic Subdominant.” In Jan Maegaard Festschrift, ed. Mogens Andersen, Niels Bo Foltmann, and Claus Røllum-Larsen, 165–183. Copenhagen: Engstrom and Sodring.
Harrison, Daniel. 1994. Harmonic Function in Tonal Music: A Renewed Dualist Theory and an
Account of Its Precedents. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Harrison, Daniel. 1995. “Supplement to the Theory of Augmented-Sixth Chords.” Music Theory Spectrum 17(2): 170–195.
Harrison, Daniel. 2003. “Rosalia, Aloysius, and Arcangelo: A Genealogy of the Sequence.” Journal of Music Theory 47: 225–272.
Helmholtz, Hermann von. [1863] 1954. On the Sensation of Tone. New York: Dover.
Herresthal, Harald. 2005. “Edvard Grieg und Frankreich: Zur Grieg-Rezeption.” MusikKonzepte 127: 23–44.
Hindemith, Paul. [1937] 1984. The Craft of Musical Composition, vol. 1. Trans. Arthur Mendel.
London: Schott.
Holloway, Robin. 1982. Debussy and Wagner. New York: Da Capo.
Hook, Julian. 2007a. “Cross-Type Transformations and the Path Consistency Condition.” Music
Theory Spectrum 29(1): 1–39.
Hook, Julian. 2007b. “Enharmonic Systems: A Theory of Key Signatures, Enharmonic Equivalence, and Diatonicism.” Journal of Mathematics and Music 1: 99–120.
Hook, Julian. 2008. “Signature Transformations.” In Music Theory and Mathematics: Chords,
Collections, and Transformations, eds. Jack Douthett, Martha M. Hyde, and Charles J. Smith,
137–160. Rochester: University of Rochester Press.
Hostinský, Ottokar. 1879. Die Lehre von den musikalischen Klangen. Prague: H. Dominicus.
Howat, Roy. 1983. Debussy in Proportion. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Hulse, Stewart H., Daniel J. Bernard, and Richard F. Braaten. 1995. “Auditory Discrimination
of Chord-Based Spectral Structures by European Starlings (Sturnus vulgaris).” Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General 124: 409–423.
Huovinen, Erkki. 2002. Pitch-Class Constellations: Studies in the Perception of Tonal Centricity.
Turku: Acta Musicologica Fennica.
Huron, David. 1994. “Interval-Class Content in Equally-Tempered Pitch-Class Sets: Common
Scales Exhibit Optimum Tonal Consonance.” Music Perception 11(3): 289–305.
Huron, David. 2001. “Tone and Voice: A Derivation of the Rules of Voice-Leading from Perceptual Principles.” Music Perception 19(1): 1–64.
Huron, David. 2007. Sweet Expectation: Music and the Psychology of Expectation. Cambridge:
MIT Press.

References
Hyer, Brian. 2002. “Tonality.” In The Cambridge History of Western Music Theory, ed. Thomas
Christensen, 726–752. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Isacoff, Stuart. 2001. Temperament: The Idea That Solved Music’s Greatest Riddle. New York:
Knopf.
Izumi, A. 2000. “Japanese Monkeys Perceive Sensory Consonance of Chords.” Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 108: 3073–3078.
Joseph, Charles. 1978. “Architectural Control in Josquin’s Tu pauperum refugium.” College
Music Symposium 18: 189–195.
Judd, Cristle Collins. 2006. Reading Renaissance Music Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kallberg, Jeffrey. 1985. “Chopin’s Last Style.” Journal of the American Musicological Society
38(2): 264–315.
Kaye, Philip. 1989. The “Contenance Angloise” in Perspective: A Study of Consonance and Dissonance in Continental Music, c. 1380–1440. New York: Garland.
Kindermann, William and Harold Krebs, eds. 1996. The Second Practice of Nineteenth Century
Tonality. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Kopp, David. 1997. “Pentatonic Organization in Two Piano Pieces of Debussy.” Journal of Music
Theory 41(2): 261–287.
Kopp, David. 2002. Chromatic Transformations in Nineteenth-Century Music. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Kostka, Stefan and Dorothy Payne. 2003. Tonal Harmony, 4th ed. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Krumhansl, Carol. 1990. Cognitive Foundations of Musical Pitch. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Krumhansl, Carol. 2004. “The Cognition of Tonality: As We Know it Today.” Journal of New
Music Research 33(3): 253–268.
Krumhansl, Carol L. and Mark A. Schmuckler. 1986. “Key-Finding in Music: An Algorithm
Based on Pattern Matching to Tonal Hierarchies.” Paper presented to the 19th annual Mathematical Psychology Meeting, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Krumhansl, Carol L. and Roger Shepard. 1979. “Quantiﬁcation of the Hierarchy of Tonal Functions within a Diatonic Context.” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance 5: 579–594.
Kurth, Ernst. 1920. Romantische Harmonik und ihre Krise in Wagners ‘Tristan.’ Berlin: Max
Hesses Verlag.
Larson, Steve. 1992. “Scale-Degree Function: Cognition Research and Its Application to AuralSkills Pedagogy.” CRCC technical report no. 67. Bloomington: Indiana University, Center for
Research on Concepts and Cognition.
Lendvai, Erno. 1971. Béla Bartók: An Analysis of His Music. London: Kahn & Averill.
Lerdahl, Fred. 1988. “Cognitive Constraints on Compositional Systems.” In Generative Processes in Music, ed. John Sloboda, 231–259. New York: Oxford University Press.
Lerdahl, Fred. 2001. Tonal Pitch Space. New York: Oxford University Press.
Lester, Joel. 1974. “Root-Position and Inverted Triads in Theory around 1600.” Journal of the
American Musicological Society 27(1): 110–119.
Lester, Joel. 1992. Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Levine, Mark. 1989. The Jazz Piano Book. Petaluma: Sher Music.
Lewin, David. 1987. Generalized Musical Intervals and Transformations. New Haven: Yale University Press.

439

440

References
Lewin, David. 1998. “Some Ideas about Voice-Leading between PCSets.” Journal of Music Theory 42(1): 15–72.
Lowinsky, Edward. 1961. Tonality and Atonality in Sixteenth-Century Music. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Marshall, Albert and Ingram Olkin. 1979. Inequalities: Theory of Majorization and Its Applications. New York: Academic Press.
Marvin, Elizabeth West and Alexander Brinkman. 1999. “The Effect of Modulation and Formal
Manipulation on Perception of Tonic Closure by Expert Listeners.” Music Perception 16(4):
389–408.
Masson, Charles. [1697] 1969. Nouveau Traité des Regles pour la Composition de la Musique.
New York: Da Capo.
Mathieu, William. 1997. The Harmonic Experience: Tonal Harmony from its Natural Origins to
Its Modern Expression. Rochester, Vt.: Inner Traditions.
Mazzola, Guerino, et al. 2002. The Topos of Music. Basel: Birkhauser.
McDermott, Josh, and Marc Hauser. 2005. “The Origins of Music: Innateness, Uniqueness, and
Evolution.” Music Perception 23(1): 29–59.
McGowan, James. 2005. “Dynamic Consonance in Selected Piano Performances of Tonal Jazz.”
PhD diss., Eastman School of Music.
Meeus, Nicolas. 2000. “Toward a Post-Schoenbergian Grammar of Tonal and Pre-tonal Harmonic Progressions.” Music Theory Online 6(1).
Miller, George. 1956. “The Magical Number, Seven Plus or Minus Two.” The Psychological
Review 63(2): 81–97.
Mitchell, William. 1962. “The Study of Chromaticism.” Journal of Music Theory 5: 2–31.
Mitchell, William. 1973. “The Tristan Prelude: Techniques and Structure.” Music Forum 1:
162–203.
Mooney, Kevin. 1996. “The ‘Table of Relations’ and Music Psychology in Hugo Riemann’s Harmonic Theory.” PhD diss., Columbia University.
Morris, Patrick. 1987. “Steve Reich and Debussy: Some Connexions.” Tempo 160: 8–14.
Morris, Robert. 1998. “Voice-Leading Spaces.” Music Theory Spectrum 20(2): 175–208.
Morton, David. 1976. The Traditional Music of Thailand. Berkeley: University of California
Press.
Narmour, Eugene. 1990. The Analysis and Cognition of Basic Melodic Structures: The Implication-Realization Model. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Norman, Philip. 1945. A Quantitative Study of Harmonic Similarities in Certain Speciﬁed Works
of Bach, Beethoven, and Wagner. Boston: Carl Fischer.
Norton, Richard. 1984. Tonality in Western Culture. University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press.
O’donnell, Roy. 1974. “Syntactic Differences between Speech and Writing.” American Speech
49(1–2): 102–110.
Parks, Richard. 1976. “Voice Leading and Chromatic Harmony in the Music of Chopin.”
Journal of Music Theory 20(2): 189–214.
Parks, Richard. 1989. The Music of Claude Debussy. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Patel, Aniruddh. 2008. Music, Language, and the Brain. New York: Oxford University Press.
Patrick, James. 1983. “Al Tinney, Monroe’s Uptown House, and the Emergence of Modern Jazz
in Harlem.” Annual Review of Jazz Studies 2: 150–179.
Perle, George. 1984. “Scriabin’s Self-Analyses.” Music Analysis 3: 101–122.
Perle, George. 1996. The Listening Composer. Berkeley: University of California Press.

References
Piston, Walter. 1941. Harmony. New York: Norton.
Pople, Anthony. 2001. “Styles and Languages at the Turn of the Century.” In The Cambridge
History of Nineteenth-Century Music, ed. Jim Samson, 601–620. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Powers, Harold. 1958. “Mode and Raga.” The Musical Quarterly 44(4): 448–460.
Powers, Harold. 1981. “Tonal Types and Modal Categories in Renaissance Polyphony.” Journal
of the American Musicological Society 34(3): 428–470.
Powers, Harold. 1992. “Is Mode Real? Pietro Aron, the Octenary System, and Polyphony.” Basler
Jahrbuch für Historische Musikpraxis 16: 9–52.
Pressing, Jeff. 1978. “Towards an Understanding of Scales in Jazz.” Jazz Research 9: 25–35.
Pressing, Jeff. 1982. “Pitch Class Set Structures in Contemporary Jazz.” Jazz Research 14: 133–72.
Pressing, Jeff. 1983. “Cognitive Isomorphisms Between Pitch and Rhythm in World Musics:
West Africa, the Balkans and Western Tonality.” Studies in Music 17: 38–61.
Proctor, Gregory. 1978. “Technical Bases of Nineteenth-Century Chromaticism.” PhD diss.,
Princeton University.
Quinn, Ian. 1996. “Fuzzy Transposition of Pitch Sets.” Paper presented to the national meeting
of the Society for Music Theory, Baton Rouge, Louisiana.
Quinn, Ian. 2001. “Listening to Similarity Relations.” Perspectives of New Music 39(2):
108–158.
Quinn, Ian. 2002. “Foundations of Steve Reich’s Later Harmonic Practice: The Variations and
Tehilim.” Paper presented to the national meeting of the Society for Music Theory, Columbus, Ohio.
Quinn, Ian. 2005. “Harmonic Function without Primary Triads.” Paper presented to the
national meeting of the Society for Music Theory, Boston, Massachusetts.
Quinn, Ian. 2006. “General Equal-Tempered Harmony.” Perspectives of New Music 44(2): 5–60.
Quinn, Ian. 2007. “General Equal-Tempered Harmony: Part II.” Perspectives of New Music
45(1): 6–65.
Raffman, Diana. 2003. “Is Twelve-Tone Music Artistically Defective?” Midwest Studies in Philosophy 27: 69–87.
Rahn, Jay. 1991. “Coordination of Interval Sizes in Seven-Tone Collections.” Journal of Music
Theory 35(1–2): 33–60.
Rameau, Jean Paul. [1722] 1971. Treatise on Harmony. Trans. Philip Gossett. New York: Dover.
Randel, Don. 1971. “Emerging Triadic Tonality in the Fifteenth Century.” The Musical Quarterly 57(1): 73–86.
Raphael, Christopher and Joshua Stoddard. 2004. “Functional Harmonic Analysis Using
Probabilistic Models.” Computer Music Journal 28(3): 45–52.
Rappaport, David. 2006. “Musical Scales, Integer Partitions, Necklaces, and Polygons.” Proceedings of the 2006 Bridges Conference on Mathematical Connections in Art, Music, and Science,
ed. Reza Sarhangi and John Sharp, 595–598. St. Albans: Tarquin.
Reti, Rudolf. 1958. Tonality Atonality Pantonality. London: Rockliff.
Ricci, Adam. 2004. “A Theory of the Harmonic Sequence.” PhD diss., Eastman School of
Music.
Riemann, Hugo. 1893. Vereinfachte Harmonielehre. London: Augener.
Riley, Matthew. 2004. “The ‘Harmonic Major’ Mode in Nineteenth-Century Theory and Practice.” Music Analysis 23(1): 1–26.
Rivera, Benito. 1979. “Harmonic Theory in Musical Treatises of the Late Fifteenth and Early
Sixteenth Centuries.” Music Theory Spectrum 1: 80–95.

441

442

References
Roeder, John. 1984. “A Theory of Voice Leading for Atonal Music.” PhD diss., Yale University.
Roeder, John. 1987. “A Geometric Representation of Pitch-Class Series.” Perspectives of New
Music 25(1–2): 362–409.
Roeder, John. 1994. “Voice-leading as Transformation.” In Musical Transformation and Musical Intuition: Eleven Essays in Honor of David Lewin, ed. Raphael Atlas and Michael Cherlin,
41-58. Roxbury: Ovenbird.
Rothstein, William. 1992. “The True Principles of Harmony: Or, Schulz, Schenker, and the Stufe.”
Paper presented to the Second International Schenker Symposium, New York, New York.
Russ, Michael. 2007. “Some Observations on PM,N Relations Between Set Classes.” Music Analysis 26(1–2): 111–158.
Russell, George. 1959. The Lydian Chromatic Concept of Tonal Organization for Improvisation.
Brookline: Concept.
Russom, Philip Wade. 1985. “A Theory of Pitch of Pitch Organization for the Early Music of
Maurice Ravel.” PhD diss., Yale University.
Sadai, Yizhak. 1980. Harmony in Its Systemic and Phenomenological Aspects. Jerusalem: Yanetz.
Salzer, Felix. [1952] 1982. Structural Hearing. New York: Dover.
Salzer, Felix and Carl Schachter. [1969] 1989. Counterpoint in Composition. New York: Dover.
Samson, Jim. 1977. Music in Transition: A Study of Tonal Expansion and Atonality, 1900–1920.
New York: Norton.
Santa, Matthew. 1999. “Deﬁning Modular Transformations.” Music Theory Spectrum 21(2):
200–229.
Schachter, Carl. 1994. “The Prelude in E Minor Op. 28 No. 4: Autograph Sources and Interpretation.” Chopin Studies 2: 161–182.
Schenker, Heinrich. 1930. Das Meisterwerk in der Musik, vol. 3. Munich: Drei Masken Verlag.
Schenker, Heinrich. [1935] 1956. Der freie Satz. Ed. Oswald Jonas. Vienna: Universal.
Schenker, Heinrich. 1996. The Masterwork in Music: Volume 2, 1926: A Yearbook. Ed. William
Drabkin. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Schenker, Heinrich. 1997. The Masterwork in Music: Volume 3, 1930: A Yearbook. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Schenker, Heinrich. 2001. Free Composition. Hillsdale: Pendragon.
Schoenberg, Arnold. [1954] 1969. Structural Functions of Harmony. Ed. Leonard Stein.
New York: Norton.
Schoenberg, Arnold. [1950] 1975. Style and Idea: Selected Writings of Arnold Schoenberg. Ed.
Leonard Stein, trans. Leo Black. New York: St. Martins Press.
Schoenberg, Arnold. [1911] 1983. Theory of Harmony. Berkeley: University of California
Press.
Sethares, William. 1999. Tuning, Timbre, Spectrum, Scale. New York: Springer.
Simms, Bryan. 1975. “Choron, Fétis, and the Theory of Tonality.” Journal of Music Theory
19(1): 112–138.
Slonimsky, Nicolas. [1937] 1994. Music Since 1900. New York: Schirmer.
Smith, Charles. 1986. “The Functional Extravagance of Chromatic Chords.” Music Theory Spectrum 8: 94–139.
Starr, Daniel and Robert Morris. 1977. “A General Theory of Combinatoriality and the Aggregate (Part I).” Perspectives of New Music 16(1): 3–35.
Stein, Beverly. 2002. “Carissimi’s Tonal System and the Function of Transposition in the Expansion of Tonality.” The Journal of Musicology 19(2): 264–305.
Strickland, Edward. 2000. Minimalism: Origins. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

References
Straus, Joseph. 2003. “Uniformity, Balance, and Smoothness in Atonal Voice Leading.” Music
Theory Spectrum 25(2): 305–352.
Straus, Joseph. 2005. Introduction to Post-Tonal Theory. Upper Saddle River: Pearson Prentice
Hall.
Stuckenschmidt, Hans Heinz. 1965. “Debussy or Berg? The Mystery of a Chord Progression.”
The Musical Quarterly 51(3): 453–459.
Sutcliffe, W. Dean. 1996. “Grieg’s Fifth: The Linguistic Battleground of ‘Klokkeklang.’ ” The
Musical Quarterly 80(1): 161–181.
Taruskin, Richard. 1985. “Chernomor to Kashchei: Harmonic Sorcery; or, Stravinsky’s ‘Angle.’”
Journal of the American Musicological Society 38: 262–300.
Taruskin, Richard. 1987. “Chez Petrouchka: Harmony and Tonality Chez Stravinsky.” Nineteenth Century Music 10: 265–286.
Taruskin, Richard. 1996. Stravinsky and the Russian Traditions. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Taruskin, Richard. 2005. The Oxford History of Western Music. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Taube, Heinrich. 1999. “Automatic Tonal Analysis: Toward the Implementation of a Music
Theory Workbench.” Computer Music Journal 23(4): 18–32.
Temperley, David. 2007. Music and Probability. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Terhardt, Ernst. 1974. “Pitch, Consonance, and Harmony.” Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America 55: 1061–1069.
Thomson, William. 1991. Schoenberg’s Error. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Thomson, William. 1999. Tonality in Music: A General Theory. San Marino: Everett Books.
Trainor, Laurel J. and Becky M. Heinmiller. 1998. “The Development of Evaluative Responses
to Music: Infants Prefer to Listen to Consonance over Dissonance.” Infant Behavior and
Development 21: 77–88.
Trainor, Laurel J., Christine D. Tsang, and Vivian H. W. Cheung. 2002. “Preference for Sensory
Consonance in 2- and 4-Month-Old Infants.” Music Perception 20: 187–194.
Tramo, Mark Jude, Peter Cariani, Cris Koh, Nikos Makris, and Louis Braida. 2005. “Neurophysiology and Neuroanatomy of Pitch Perception: Auditory Cortex.” Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences 1060: 148–174.
Tymoczko, Dmitri. 1997. “The Consecutive-Semitone Constraint on Scalar Structure: A Link
Between Impressionism and Jazz.” Integral 11: 135–179.
Tymoczko, Dmitri. 2002. “Stravinsky and the Octatonic: A Reconsideration.” Music Theory
Spectrum 24(1): 68–102.
Tymoczko, Dmitri. 2003a. “Octatonicism Reconsidered Again.” Music Theory Spectrum 25(1):
185–202.
Tymoczko, Dmitri. 2003b. “Progressions Fondamentales, Functions, Degrés: une Grammaire
de l’Harmonie Tonale Élémentaire.” Musurgia 10(3–4): 35–64.
Tymoczko, Dmitri. [2007] 2004. “Scale Networks in Debussy.” Journal of Music Theory
48(2): 215–292.
Tymoczko, Dmitri. 2005. “Voice Leadings as Generalized Key Signatures.” Music Theory Online
11(4).
Tymoczko, Dmitri. 2006. “The Geometry of Musical Chords.” Science 313: 72–74.
Tymoczko, Dmitri. 2007. “Recasting K-nets.” Music Theory Online 13(3).
Tymoczko, Dmitri. 2008a. “Lewin, Intervals, and Transformations: A Response to Hook.” Music
Theory Spectrum 30(1): 164–168.

443

444

References
Tymoczko, Dmitri. 2008b. “Scale Theory, Serial Theory, and Voice Leading.” Music Analysis
27(1): 1–49.
Tymoczko, Dmitri. [2010] 2008c. “Set-Class Similarity, Voice Leading, and the Fourier Transform.” Journal of Music Theory 52(2): 251–272.
Tymoczko, Dmitri. 2009a. “Three Conceptions of Musical Distance.” In Mathematics and
Computation in Music, eds. Elaine Chew, Adrian Childs, and Ching-Hua Chuan, 258–273.
Heidelberg: Springer.
Tymoczko, Dmitri. [2010] 2009b. “Generalizing Musical Intervals.” Journal of Music Theory
53(2): 227–254.
Tymoczko, Dmitri. 2010. “Geometrical Methods in Recent Music Theory.” Music Theory Online
16(1).
Tymoczko, Dmitri. Forthcoming. “Dualism and the Beholder’s Eye.” In Riemann Perspectives,
ed. Alex Rehding and Ed Gollin. New York: Oxford.
van der Merwe, Peter. 1989. Origins of the Popular Style. New York: Oxford.
van den Toorn, Pieter. 1983. The Music of Igor Stravinsky. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Vos, Piet and Jim Troost. 1989. “Ascending and Descending Melodic Intervals: Statistical Findings and Their Perceptual Relevance.” Music Perception 6: 383–396.
Weeks, Jeffrey. 2002. The Shape of Space. New York: Marcel Dekker.
Weitzmann, Carl Friedrich. 1853. Der übermässige Dreiklang. Berlin: T. Trautweinschen.
Weitzmann, Carl Friedrich. 1860. “Erklärende Erläuterung und musikalisch-theoretische
Begründung der durch die neuesten Kunstschöpfungen bewirkten Umgestaltung und
Weiterbildung der Harmonik,” Neue Zeitschrift für Musik 52: 1–3, 9–12, 17–20, 29–31, 37–39,
45–46, 53–54, 65–66, 73–75.
Wessel, David. 1979. “Timbre Space as a Musical Control Structure.” Computer Music Journal
3(2): 45–52.
Whittall, Arnold. 1975. “Tonality and the Whole-Tone Scale in the Music of Debussy.” The
Music Review 36: 261–271.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. 1953. Philosophical Investigations. Trans. G. E. M. Anscombe. Oxford:
Basil Blackwell.
Wright, Anthony A., Jacquelyne J. Rivera, Stewart H. Hulse, Melissa Shyan, and Julie Neiworth.
2000. “Music Perception and Octave Generalization in Rhesus Monkeys.” Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 129: 291–307.
Yasser, Joseph. 1975. Theory of Evolving Tonality. New York: Da Capo.
Zentner, Marcel R. and Jerome Kagan. 1996. “Perception of Music by Infants.” Nature 383: 29.
Zentner, Marcel R. and Jerome Kagan. 1998. “Infants’ Perception of Consonance and Dissonance in Music.” Infant Behavior and Development 21: 483–492.
Zimmerman, Daniel. 2002. Families Without Clusters in the Early Works of Sergei Prokoﬁev. PhD
diss., University of Chicago.

index

Ad Organum Faciendum, Allelujia Justus et Palma,
76–77, 113, 197–200
Adams, John, 140, 188, 191, 223, 352, 389
Nixon in China, 320
Aldwell, Edward, 218n26, 232n13
Alteration, chordal, §10.4, 160, 217–224, 232, 242,
268–275, 282, 326–332, 336–338, 341, 349,
356, 377–378, 384, 388
Andreissen, Louis, 389
Atonality, §5.8, 3, 7–10, 21, 24–25, 52, 127, 154,
160–163, 177–180, 225, 272, 306–307, 345,
351, 389, 391–395
Augmented sixth, §8.2, 106, 219, 222, 229n10,
268–270, 276–279, 291, 300, 303, 363–365
Augmented triad, 21, 53–55, 60, 85–87, 104–106,
125, 217–218, 221, 271, 329, 342, 371, 382,
386–387, 412,
“Avoid” notes, 354–357, 365–366
Babbitt, Milton, 24n25, 25, 26n28, 185–186, 188,
190, 335n24
Bach, Carl Philipp Emanuel, 238
Bach, Johann Sebastian, 24, 168–169, 208, 211,
228–230, 233, 237, 378, 389, 395
Art of Fugue, BWV 1080, 244
Brandenburg Concerto III, BWV
1038, 234
Chorales, 97n28, 207, 225–230
Auf, auf, mein Herz, und du mein ganzer Sinn,
BWV 268, 228
Ein’ feste Burg ist unser Gott, BWV 80, 213–214
Für Freuden laßt uns springen, BWV 313, 282
Herr Christ, der ein’ge Gott’s sohn, BWV 96, 212
Nun lob’ mein’ Seel’ den Herren, BWV 389, 50
O Herzensangst, BWV 400, 49
Duetto, BWV 803, 228
Goldberg Variations, BWV 988, 234
Mass in B minor, BWV 232, 245, 291n24
Two-Part Inventions
D minor, BWV 775, 142
F major, BWV 779, 158–159, 234
Bb major, BWV 785, 240
Well-Tempered Clavier, 169, 249–252
Book I: D major, BWV 851, 240; F minor,
BWV 857, 244
Book II: G major, BWV 884, 245; A minor,
BWV 889, 33–34; Ab major, BWV 886,
242–243
Baroque, 23, 97, 160, 195, 198, 225, 241, 249,
262–263, 281

Bartók, Béla, 14n18, 186, 189, 191, 357–359
Battlestar Galactica, 321
Beatles, 3
“Glass Onion,” 99
“Help!,” 346–347
Sergeant Pepper, 225
Bebop, 291n23, 349, 391
Beethoven, Ludwig van, 23–25, 258n34
Sonatas, 249–251
F major, Op. 2, No. 1, 270n4
C minor, Op. 10, No. 1, 265
D major, Op. 28, 227n3
Eb major, Op. 31, No. 3, 48
F major, Op. 54, 48n26, 282n14, 291–292
Bb major, Op. 106, 160
Berg, Alban, 371n21
Blues, 272n5, 274, 349, 355, 374, 378, 385–387,
426
Boulez, Pierre, 25
Brahms, Johannes, §8.3, 268, 303, 307, 389
Four Pieces, Op. 119, 234
Intermezzo, Op. 76, No. 4, 47–48, 277–278;
Op. 116, No. 5, 77–79
Piano Concerto, Op. 83, 272–276
Piano Quartet, Op. 60, 87–88, 113
Piano Quintet, Op. 34, 245
Six Pieces, Op. 118, 160
Brown, Matthew, 3n1, 256n42
Bryars, Gavin, 188
Cadence, 168, 198, 201, 207–209, 270, 391
Cadwallader, Allen, 259–260
Cage, John, 3, 25, 390
Callender, Clifton, 36n13, 42n20, 50n28, 65n1,
77n12, 89n20, 112n45, 126n18, 133n26,
231n11, 287n21, 336n25, 298n3, 410n17,
416n4
Cardinality change, 36–45, 102
Centricity, §5.6–5.7, 4, 7, 11, 15–16, 25–28, 154,
179–183, 188n31, 190–191, 198, 201, 212,
264, 306–307, 348, 394, 424–427
See also Pitch-class space
Chart of the regions, 246–247, 252
Chopin, Frédéric, §8.4, 3, 21, 97–102, 187,
214–216, 219–220, 225, 299, 301, 303, 314,
328–329, 332, 425
Etudes
Op. 10, 161; No. 2, 161; No. 5, 312–313, 426;
No. 6, 161
Op. 25, 161

446

Index
Chopin, Frédéric (continued)
Mazurkas
Op. 6, No. 1, 290
Op. 7, No. 2, 290
Op. 41, No. 1, 312–313
Op. 68, No. 4, 27, 285–289, 291
Nocturnes
Op. 9, No. 1, 375; No. 2, 375
Op. 27, No. 1, 270; No. 2, 101, 290
Preludes
Op. 28, No.4, 27, 235, 268, 287–293, 299, 301,
304; No. 9, 218
Chord-ﬁrst composition, §9.2, 308, 313
ChordGeometries Software, 75n11
Chord space, 65, 105, 108–111, 220, 253, 363
two-dimensional, §3.3–3.4, 118, 198, 262, 362,
415, 423
three-dimensional, §3.8, 202–206, 255–257,
281–284, 416–417, 422–423
higher dimensional, §3.9, 103, 110–114, 117,
146, 190, 288, 291–295, 301–304, 317,
326n15, 329–331, 401–411
Chord type, 28, 36–40, 51–52, 65n1, 82–83, 90,
96, 119–120, 150–156, 164, 166, 182–188,
300, 307, 329n16, 408, 418
Chromaticism, §5.1–5.8, §6.6, §8.1–8.8, 21, 46,
52, 97–99, 116–120, 195, 224–225, 317–318,
332, 352, 371–372, 379, 382, 393–394,
Circle of ﬁfths, §7.5, 19, 108–112, 132–134, 205,
247, 333n23
Circle of thirds, §7.1–7.5, 19–20, 205–206, 342
Circular pitch-class space, §2.2–2.7, 53, 56, 64, 72,
112–114, 117–118, 147, 281, 402–403
Clark, Suzannah, 303, 341n30
Clementi, Muzio
Sonatas
Op. 25, No. 2, 141–142, 282n14; No. 6, 18
Clough, John, 60n34, 107n41, 117n2, 127n18
Cobain, Kurt, 99
Cohn, Richard, 5, 14, 26n29, 60n34, 64n40, 65n1,
85n18, 89n20, 126n18, 217n24, 264n41, 303,
305, 335,n24, 345n34, 412
Coltrane, John, 24, 195, 246, 358, 389–390, 395
“Giant Steps,” 164–167
Consonance, 198–203, 354n2, 391
acoustic, §2.10, 6–11, 25–28, 123, 181, 197, 264,
392
Copland, Aaron, 168
Corea, Chick
“Now he sings, now he sobs,” 427
Counterpoint, §1.3.1, §2.9, §6.2, §7.6, 64, 76, 79,
123, 191, 195–196, 201–205, 211n20, 212,
224–225, 231, 243, 268, 304–308, 314–315,
328, 378
Cycle
harmonic, 48, 210, 227–236, 260, 264–265,
284–287, 291
intervallic, 100n32, 107–111, 124–125, 253
Davis, Miles, 175–176, 223, 308, 357
“Freedom Jazz Dance,” 176, 349–350, 359, 389

Debussy, Claude, 16, 27, 140, 162–164, 168,
179–180, 188, 223, 252, 308, 320, 348–349,
351–352, 366n14, 371–372, 389, 395
“La ﬁlle aux cheveux de lin,” 128, 165–167
“Mouvement,” 136–137
Nocturnes, 139n29, 141, 143–144, 316–317,
355–356
Pélleas et Mélisande, 272–276
Prelude to “The Afternoon of a Faun,” 47–48,
318, 356, 373
Préludes, 161
“Des pas sur la neige,” 322–328, 340
“La danse de Puck,” 372–373
“Le vent dans la plaine,” 18–19
“Les collines d’Anacapri,” 311–312
“Voiles,” 155, 188
Six epigraphs antiques, 373
Decemberists, 282n14
“Here I Dreamt I was an Architect,” 128
Developing variation, 87
Dissonance, §2.10, 155, 178, 182, 190, 197, 201,
342, 377
Douthett, Jack, 85n18, 103n34, 107n41, 413n3,
416
Dufay, Guillaume, 203–204, 207–208, 237
Dvořák, Antonín
String Quartet, Op. 96, 426
Ellington, Duke, 224, 390
Equivalence classes, 35–36, 42n18,
Euler, Leonhard, 412
Evans, Bill, 5, 224, 352, 357
“Oleo,” 378–387, 389
“Turn Out the Stars,” 223
Even division of the octave, 62–63, 80, 123,
302–303
Extended common-practice, §6.1–6.8, 27, 186,
318, 339, 351, 388–389, 394
Fauré, Gabriel, 187
Pavane, 240
Fétis, François-Joseph, 3n1, 240
Feynman, Richard, 114
Folk music, 3, 187, 226, 347–348
Forte, Allen, 126n18, 164, 166, 182, 189n32
Fourier, Jean-Baptiste, 61–62
Franklin, Aretha, 283
Fuller, Roman, 179
Functional harmony, §6.4, §7.1–7.6, 187, 201, 210,
217, 222–223, 272, 276–283, 300–305, 341,
345, 354, 360, 366, 369, 376–377, 388, 393
See also Circle of thirds; Thirds-based grammar
Gagné, David, 259–260
Geometry, §3.1–3.13
coordinate, 71, 106n39, 397, 406–407, 411
cross-section, 73, 75n9, 81–97, 406–411,
416, 422
Euclidean, 65, 70n2, 72, 97n27, 106, 397–398,
401–405, 411
generalized triangle, 95–96

Index
line-segment, 66, 72–96, 134, 198–199, 392,
397–411, 422–423
matrix, 418–423
metric, 50, 97n27, 116, 121, 248n26, 397–400
Möbius strip, 19, 65, 69, 71 fn.3, 72–78,
81–86, 93, 108, 114, 117, 198–200, 224, 361,
398–399, 415
prism, 85–86, 93–96, 406
quotient space, 293, 401–403, 409n15
reﬂection, 33
simplex, 95, 406–410
tesseract, 106–107, 284–291, 331
translation, 33
See also Chart of the regions; ChordGeometries
software; Chord space; Circle of ﬁfths; Circle
of thirds; Tonnetz; Voice-leading, lattices
Gershwin, George, 349, 355, 378
Gesualdo, Carlo, 160, 188
Glass, Philip, 188, 320–322
Einstein on the Beach, 321
Gofﬁn, Gerry, and Carole King, 283
Goldilocks principle, 123, 208n16
Górecki, Henryk, 188
Goudimel, Claude, 237
Grieg, Edvard, 179n21, 316, 352
Holberg Suite, Op. 40, 257–258
Lyric Pieces
Op. 54, No. 1, “Shepherd’s Boy,” 186; No. 6,
“Bell Ringing,” 341–345
Op. 62, No. 5, “Vision,” 314–316
Op. 64, No. 4, “Salon,” 355
Hancock, Herbie, 175–176, 349–350
“Eye of the Hurricane,” 128
Harmonic consistency, 4–15, 25–28, 53, 60–64,
79–81, 123, 148, 181–197, 201–203, 212, 258,
264, 285, 392
Harrison, Daniel, 224n31, 238n21, 275n8, 256n7,
Haydn, Franz Joseph, 227n3, 249
Sonatas, 251, 279
E minor, Hob. XVI/34, 240
D major, Hob. XVI/42, 245
Eb major, Hob. XVI/49, 280
Helmholtz, Hermann von, 61n36, 62, 179n21
Hendrix, Jimi, 87, 284
Herbert, Victor
“The Serenade,” 292
Hindemith, Paul, 8, 189n32, 357, 359
Hyer, Brian, 3n1, 412
Impressionism, 3, 186, 317, 345, 351–352, 388,
391, 394
Improvisation, 285–289, 358, 365, 387
Inversion, 33–45, 56–61, 116, 126, 128, 166, 400
individually related, 45–47
nearly related, 52–3, 59, 61
pitch-space, 33n7
registral, 33n7, 408
scalar, 119–121
and sequences, 241–242
uniformly related, 45–47, 57–58

Janáček, Leoš, 223
“On an Overgrown Path,” Series II, No. 1,
326–329
Jarrett, Keith
“You and The Night and The Music,” 358–359
Jazz, §10.1–10.8, 3–4, 15, 52–55, 102, 140, 175, 181,
186–189, 213, 215, 223–225, 235, 246, 263,
269, 278, 289–291, 308, 338, 341, 345, 349–351
“fundamental theorem of,” 156
Josquin des Prez, 195, 202–204, 208, 237
“Magnus es tu, Domine,” 200–201, 206, 212, 225
Missa l’homme armé, 66–67
Keys, 156, 172–176, 181, 187–191, 212–221, 258,
374–377
distance, 195, 216, 226, 246–252, 312, 394
generalized, 16–17, 26, 154
Kopp, David, 303, 311n3
Krumhansl, Carol, 3n1, 170n13, 175n17, 246
Kundera, Milan, 391
Lachenmann, Helmut, 352
Lansky, Paul, 26n29, 320
Lassus, Orlande de, 148n38, 203–204, 208, 237
Lerdahl, Fred, 23n25, 24n27, 170n13, 172, 185,
185n27, 246, 259n36, 265n42, 303, 424–427
Lewin, David, 41n17, 42n20, 412
Ligeti, György, 7, 14n18, 53, 190–191, 342
Piano Concerto, 128
Lippius, Johannes, 196
Liszt, Franz
Années de pèlerinage, 186
Macroharmony, §1.1–1.5, §5.1–5.8, 121–130,
197, 200–201, 212, 214, 221, 264, 306–307,
342n33, 370, 384, 392–394, 424–427
consistency, 156, 164–169, 182
global proﬁle, 164–167, 190, 393
pitch-class circulation, 158–160, 184–185
pitch-class proﬁle, 171–182, 425
small-gap, 156–158
Mahler, Gustav, 191
Marsh, Wayne
“Smog Eyes,” 374
Mediant, 226, 282, 303–304
See also Circle of thirds; Thirds-based grammar
Messiaen, Olivier, 191, 351
modes, 210
Quartet for the End of Time, 189
Vingt regards sur l’enfant-Jésus, 189, 190
MIDI, 97n29, 148n37, 203n11, 249n28
Minimalism, 3, 4, 18, 26n29, 169, 172n15, 186,
223, 225, 267, 320
Mode mixture, 218n26–27, 268
Modulation, 17–19, 116, 129–132, 139, 160, 164,
187, 195–196, 212–216, 219, 224–225, 229n8,
246–252, 257–258, 264–266, 307–313,
332–333, 337–338
pivot chord, 300n30, 301
See also Chord-ﬁrst composition; Scale-ﬁrst
composition; Voice-leading

447

448

Index
Monteverdi, Claudio, 388
Morton, Jelly Roll
“Shreveport Stomp,” 292
Motion
conjunct, 4–14, 25–28, 183, 190, 197–198, 392
contrary, 66–67, 71–74, 77–85, 89–93, 96,
100–102, 113–114, 118, 153, 179, 197–198,
209, 360, 377, 422, 429–430
oblique, 66, 71, 80
parallel, 49, 66–67, 74, 79, 81–86, 90–91, 96,
100–102, 113, 118, 122–123, 148, 153, 197,
200–202, 206n14, 208–213, 225, 229n10,
230, 241, 246–248, 261, 296, 314, 319, 332,
335, 341, 422
root, 99–100, 208, 217n25, 227n3, 251, 289, 346
Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus, 24, 131, 188, 227n3,
243, 228–230, 242, 249, 251–252, 261–262,
400n11
“Ah, vous dirai-je, Maman,” K. 265, 259, 261
Fantasy, K. 475, 48, 101, 278n11
Sonatas, 97n28, 228–230, 240–242, 251, 262,
270n4,
C major, K. 279, 242, 260
F major, K. 280, 282
G major, K. 283, 129
A minor, K. 310, 160
F major, K. 533, 222
Symphonies
No. 40, K. 550, 290–292
No. 41, Jupiter, K. 551, 175
Mussorgsky, Modest, 187, 351
Nancarrow, Conlon, 7, 26n29, 342
Narmour, Eugene, 5 fn.3, 7n10
Neapolitan, 215, 268, 271
Neo-classicism, 168
Neo-romanticism, 186
Nirvana
“Heart-Shaped Box,” 98–100
Nyman, Michael, 223
The Piano
“The Mood that Passes Through You,” 318–319
Ockeghem, Johannes, 203–204, 207–208, 237
Octave shift, 38–45, 145
Omnibus progression, 101
OPTIC symmetries, 38–44, 116
See also Cardinality change; Inversion; Octave
shift; Permutation; Transposition
Palestrina, Giovanni Pierluigi da, 5, 188, 203–204,
207–208, 211, 224, 237
“Adoramus Te,” 148–149
Pope Marcellus Mass, 159–161
Pärt, Arvo, 3, 188
Partials, 61–62, 126n16,
Permutation, 36–45, 58–61, 190, 332
Philidor, François-André, 254
“Art of Modulation,” 257
Piston, Walter, 168, 224n31, 387–388

Pitch-class space, 28, 30–45, 53, 56–65, 71–75,
82–97, 102, 112–122, 144, 196, 305, 407, 418
See also Macroharmony
Pitch space, 33, 42–46, 63, 67–68, 144–145, 319,
399n8, 401–403, 411
Pollock, Jackson, 392
Polytonality, 16, 168, 172, 189–190, 332n19, 342,
344, 347n39, 348, 351, 374–378, 388
Powers, Harold, 7, 171n15, 172n16, 211n21
Probability, 24, 149, 176, 229–230
Proctor, Gregory, 182n23, 217n24, 302–303
Prokoﬁev, Sergei, 322
Five Poems of Anna Akhmatova, Op. 27,
137–140
Overture on Hebrew Themes, Op. 34, 320–321
Ten Pieces, Op. 12, 139n29
Quinn, Ian, 36n13, 42n20, 51n29, 65n1, 77n12,
112n45, 126n18, 226n2, 231n11, 336n25,
410n17, 416n4
Raffman, Diana, 185, 185n27,
Rameau, Jean-Philippe, 36, 196, 227n5, 258
Ravel, Maurice, 140, 181, 252, 345, 371–372, 389
Gaspard de la nuit, 309–311, 373
Jeux d’eau, 356
Le Tombeau de Couperin, 355–356, 364
Pavane pour une Infant Défunte, 356
String Quartet, 221–224
Reger, Max, 160, 188
Nine Pieces, Op. 129, 181–182
Variations and Fugue, Op. 73, 182
Reich, Steve, 26n29, 27, 102, 140, 144, 188, 223,
252, 308, 320, 342, 349, 351, 352, 389
City Life, 344–345
The Desert Music, 336–340, 355–356
Different Trains, 155, 356
New York Counterpoint, 331–326
Variations for Winds, Strings, and Keyboards,
144
Renaissance, §6.3, 3, 7, 15, 148n38, 172n16, 181,
195, 224–226, 237, 264
Riemann, Hugo, 46n23, 232n13, 258, 391n1, 412
Riley, Terry, 188
Rimsky-Korsakov, Nikolai, 126, 187
Roberts, Billy, 284
Rock, 3–4, 181, 186, 188, 211–213, 224–225, 263,
340–341, 346
Rogers, Richard
“The Sound of Music,” 116
Rollins, Sonny
“Oleo,” 378–379
Rothstein, William, 262
Salzer, Felix, 200n6, 213n23, 258n34
Satie, Erik, 160
Sonneries de la Rose + Croix, 165–167
Scalar distance, 117–120, 131,
Scale, §1.1–1.5, §4.1–4.10, §9.1–9.5, 365–369,
424–427

Index
acoustic, 126, 132–136, 140, 143, 186, 188,
222, 310, 312, 319, 325–326, 333–340, 345,
366–369, 371
blues, 349
chromatic, 15–16, 20, 29, 60n34, 104, 105n38,
115, 117, 188, 217
diatonic, 51, 101, 107, 112, 117, 126, 129,
135–140, 143, 168, 188, 217, 310, 312–313,
315, 325–326, 333–340, 343–345, 359–360,
369
gypsy, 117, 186, 222, 326–328, 369
harmonic major, 126, 132–135, 168, 188, 248,
310, 327–328, 367
harmonic minor, 126, 132–135, 168, 188, 248,
313, 327–328, 343, 369, 383
hexatonic, 104, 125, 134–136, 188, 369
interscalar interval matrix, 418–423
lattice, 111, 137, 213–214, 225, 248, 252–255,
309, 311, 325, 333–338, 343–344
lydian dominant, 366–373
major, 248–249, 319–320, 341
minor, 138, 168, 248–249, 319–320, 324, 330,
350
modes, 173, 187, 310, 313, 319, 323–324,
327–328, 330, 341–350, 365–371
non-octave repeating, 117n3
octatonic, 107, 117, 125, 134–140, 168, 188,
200, 223, 350, 366–369, 377, 383, 385
octave-repeating, 117–118, 123–124,
pentatonic, 60, 102, 117, 127, 188, 312,
359–360, 369, 426
polyscalar, 366, 374
uneven, 122
whole tone, 115, 117, 125, 134, 136, 188, 223,
313, 325–328, 333–340, 366–369
See also Voice-leading
Scale degrees, 119–121, 130–131, 141–146,
172–174, 269–272, 311, 314, 326, 330, 332,
337n27, 345, 354, 356n7, 362, 365, 374
Scale-ﬁrst composition, §9.3, 308, 313
Scale steps, 15, 104–115
Schachter, Carl, 200n6, 218n26, 232n13,
287n21
Schenker, Heinrich, §7.6, 18–19, 27, 179, 213,
213n23, 280, 391n1, 424
Schoenberg, Arnold, 10n15, 11n17, 16, 25, 40,
160, 179–183, 188–190, 227n5, 268, 303, 352,
387–390, 395n3
Erwartung, Op. 2, 272–282
Three Piano Pieces, Op. 11, 162–167, 182–185
Schubert, Franz Peter, 3, 27, 46, 87, 97, 99, 101,
188, 220, 225, 268, 280–283, 291n24, 320,
322, f341n30, 389
Quartett-Satz, D. 703, 283–284
Schwanengesang, D. 957, 272–276
Sonatas
D major, D. 850, 281, 302–304
Bb major, D. 960, 101, 312–313
String Quintet, D. 956, Op. posth., 219, 270
Schumann, Robert, 217, 225

Carnaval, Op. 9, 99–100, 214–216
Scriabin, Alexander, 186
Etudes, Op. 65, No. 3, 355
Poem of Ecstasy, Op. 54, 270–271
Preludes, Op. 48, No. 2, 308–309
Seger, Bob
“Turn the Page,” 339–341
Sequence, §7.3, 5–10, 37–49, 59, 87–88, 97n28,
102–107, 129, 139, 155, 183–185, 219, 227n3,
229–230, 244, 255, 265, 282–290, 336, 360,
384, 387, 401–411
ascending ﬁfths, 108–109, 279–280
descending ﬁfths, 236, 239, 243, 245, 291, 364,
371–373
descending third, descending ﬁfth, 239
descending thirds, 233–234, 238–239
down a third, up a step, 239–245, 278,
down two thirds, down a ﬁfth, 239–240
the eighteen diatonic sequences, 241
“Sequential tonality,” 241
Serialism, 26, 390
Set theory, 25–27, 71, 81n13, 86, 144, 190, 203,
401–411
multi-set, 40, 58, 72n4, 254n31, 416
set-class, 37–44, 51, 54, 59, 83, 89n20, 119–121,
158, 164, 166, 182, 368–369
subset, 127n19, 168, 275, 303, 309–313, 322,
341–349, 368
superset, 168
Shorter, Wayne, 175–176, 350
Shostakovich, Dmitri, 18, 102, 163–164, 181, 186,
188, 191, 252, 322, 338n28, 351, 376n22
Piano Quintet, Op. 57, 272
Preludes and Fugues, Op. 87, 161–162, 168–169,
321, 337
No. 4, 140–141
No. 7, 143–145
No. 13, 329–332
Sidestepping, 374–378, 383
Similarity relationships, 47–52, 112, 231–232, 394
Steinbach, Peter, 85n18, 103n34, 413n3, 416
Stockhausen, Karlheinz, 25, 190
Strauss, Johann, 351
Strauss, Richard, 181
Salome, 305
Till Eulenspiegel, 222, 270, 363–364
Stravinsky, Igor, 8, 18, 27, 137, 140, 163–164, 186,
189, 191, 322, 349, 357, 359, 387
Histoire du Soldat, 172–174, 343–345
Rite of Spring, 143, 155, 161–162, 168, 346–348
Substitution, 244, 298
third, 102, 232, 239n22, 242–245, 283, 289, 298,
319, 363, 386–387
tritone, 55, 102, 215, 269, 278, 289, 291,
298–299, 360–386, 390
Symmetry, 28, 35, 97, 102, 133, 227–229, 240, 250,
258n33, 281, 303, 307, 386
near, 15, 53–54, 58–59, 60n33, 190, 220, 281,
361, 393
See also OPTIC symmetries

449

450

Index
Tallis, Thomas, 203–204, 208, 237
Temperley, David, 23n25, 266n44, 354n5
ter Veldhuis, Jacob, 188
Thirds-based grammar, 226–230, 238
See also Circle of thirds; Sequences
Tinney, Al, 281n23
Tonality, §1.1–1.5, §7.1–7.6, 61, 131, 140, 154,
172–177, 180–185, 188–196, 210–213,
221–225, 272–280, 306–307, 349, 351, 365,
377, 388–395
See also Functional harmony
Tonnetz, 412–416
Transposition, §2.3–3.10
chromatic, 120n9, 121–122, 140–142, 150–153,
157, 187, 348, 393, 408, 418–422
individually related, 45–48, 83–85, 92, 150,
273–274, 278, 299–300, 364, 400, 418, 422n7
interscalar, 140–153, 296, 317, 326, 393, 416–423
scalar, 113, 119–123, 140–152, 157, 187, 203,
408, 411, 418–422
uniformly related, 45–46, 410–411
Tuning and temperament, 14, 20, 29, 51, 60, 63,
72n5, 73, 80, 86, 88, 90n21, 102–105, 101,
110, 117n4, 124–129, 132n25, 246–247 196,
359
Twelve-tone, 159, 183, 225, 305
Tymoczko, Dmitri
Cathedral, 178
Tyner, McCoy
“Passion Dance,” 376
“Pursuance,” 426
Varèse, Edgard, 3, 25
Vial, F.G., 246
Voice-leading
bijective, 133n26, 146n34, 400n10
and “cancelling out,” 151–152
chromatic, 21, 60n34, 124, 128, 292, 305, 372
conventions, 213
efﬁcient, 79–81, 139, 190, 200, 235, 295–297,
309, 313–314, 318, 381, 388
and guitar ﬁngerings, 207
lattices, 67–68, 74, 76, 78, 80, 82, 84, 88, 91–93,
98, 103–112, 136, 199, 248, 253–257, 273,

281, 284, 289, 291, 295, 311, 313, 317, 325,
329–330, 335, 339, 343, 345, 362, 399,
414–416
“left hand voicing,” 353–355
minimal, 52, 55, 146–152, 231, 235, 293,
347n39, 400, 415
near stepwise, 198–199
nonfactorizable, 236–238
and probability, 149
quartal voicing, 357–359, 388
and scales, 129, 135, 248–250, 310–311,
325–326, 328, 330, 335, 339, 343, 422
schemas, 273–277, 297–298, 353–357, 361–362,
388
semitonal, 46–47, 80, 87, 137, 287n21, 299, 308,
312, 314, 319, 325, 340n29, 347n39, 361–362,
373, 397, 412–415
single-step, 20, 103–104, 107–109, 118n5, 205,
231–232, 252–253, 414–415
“three plus one schema,” 204, 208, 236–238
voice crossing, 47n25, 50, 90, 92, 145–149, 206,
220, 236, 272–274, 293–297, 300, 398–399
voice exchange, 215, 259
voice transfer, 280
See also Modulation; Motion; Sequences;
Substitution
Wagner, Richard, 3, 21, 102, 181, 188, 303,
306–308, 317–318, 322, 389
Das Rheingold, 53, 101
Parsifal, 222
Tristan und Isolde, 27, 39, 47–48, 53, 58,
151–153, 160, 235, 268, 272–279, 291n24,
294–302, 305, 364
Weber, Gottfried, 246–248, 250, 252, 258
Webern, Anton, 25
Piano Variations, Op. 27, 159–163, 183
Weitzmann, Carl Friedrich, 85n18, 126, 217n24
Who, The
“I Can’t Explain,” 131, 339–341
Xenakis, Iannis, 3, 7, 25, 352
“You tell me your dream, I’ll tell you mine,” 217

