City Research Online
City St George’s, University of London

Citation: Voss, A. (1992). Magic, astrology and music: the background to Marsilio
Ficino's astrological music therapy and his role as a Renaissance magus.
(Unpublished Doctoral thesis, City University London)
This is the accepted version of the paper.
This version of the publication may differ from the final published version. To cite
this item please consult the publisher's version.

Permanent repository link: https://openaccess.city.ac.uk/id/eprint/7977/

Copyright and Reuse: Copyright and Moral Rights remain with the author(s) and/or
copyright holders. Copies of full items can be used for personal research or study,
educational, or not-for-profit purposes without prior permission or charge, unless otherwise
indicated, provided that the authors, title and full bibliographic details are credited, a
hyperlink and/or URL is given for the original metadata page and the content is not changed
in any way. For full details of reuse please refer to City Research Online policy.
City Research Online:

http://openaccess.city.ac.uk/

publications@citystgeorges.ac.uk

MAGIC.

ASTROLOGY

AND

MUSIC

THE BAQOUND TO MARSILIO FICINO ASOLIOGICAL !&JSIC THERAPY
AND HIS ROLE AS A RE4AISSPNCE MAG'JS

ANGELA M. VOSS

Ph.D. Thesis

Music Department, Cit y University

June 1992

O2O25249

TT
I

4

f

7" /;çi" -

11
•

•

,•'

•-

•..

rb\

j_/'/

_________

I

- t I ii . ,--

-

ii

1-

,d

;;;4 ;i

•

-

I_

,

*

4

-I
/

II

,I
'I
-.

I.**;•:

I

/

1

;(

•

.•I

ii

,

jI
P4

I/f
I

1

•

1

/

Ii I.

;7

•

- .- — —
•

•

/'/ i
/1

I

I

4

j

*

.'- ,d.L._

•

Busto di Marsil,o Ficino, Andrea di Piero Ferrucci (1522). Firenze,

Santa Maria dcl Fiore.

Acknowledgements
Abstract
INTRODUc'rI ON
References to Introduction

page 4
5
6
13

CHAPTER ONE: MtJSICA MUNDANA
Prsca Theo1o g a - Ficino's Ancient Authorities
Part One: Plato
1.1. Prologue
1.2. The Timaeus and Pythagorean harmonia
1.3. The World-soul

16
21

1.4. Husica mundana
1.5. The Epinoinls

29
34

Part Two: Hermes
1.6. The Corpus Hermeticuin
1.7. Hermes and mythology
1.8. The aichemical Mercurius

24

41
44

1.10. The Sun

46
51
55

Part Three: Plotinus
1.11. The cosmic ballet

60

References to chapter one

69

1.9. The Plrnander

CHAPTER TWO: !IUSI CA HUMANA
Natural and Spiritual Ma gic in the Platonic Tradition
Part One: Philosophical Magç
2.1. IntroductIon
2.2. Magic and mysticism
2.3. Plato and magic
2.4. Daemons
2.5. Divine frenzy
2.6. Pythagorean music therapy
2.7. Ritual and education
2.8. Plotinus
2.9. Images
2.10. Earthly beauty

87
89
95
99
101
105
107
109
115
121

Part Two: Practical Magic
2.12. Theurgy
2.13. InvocatIons
2.14. Time
2.15. Statue-magic
2.16. Divination
2.17. Astrology
2.18. Conclusion: cognition

123
126
130
136
142
146
149

References to chapter two

155
-2-

CHAPTER THREE: FICINO AND ASTROLOGY
Part One: On the Knowled ge of Divine Things
3.1. Notio
3.2. Divinatory and 'scientific' astrology
3.3. Ptolemaic astrology
3.4. Arabic astrology
Part Two: Ficino and Determinism
3.5. 'The affinity of nature'

171.

179
182
185

3.7. Fate and free-will
3.8. The rational soul
3.9. Contingency
3.10. Providence
3.11. 'Petty ogres'
3.12. Signification
3.13. Portents
3.14. Prediction

190
192
194
205
208
209
212
215
220
221

References to chapter three

231

3.6. The Disputatlo contra ludicium astrologorum

CHAPTER FOUR: MARSILIO FICINO, THE SE(X)ND ORPHEUS
Part One: Natural Magic
254
4.1. Ficino, doctor of souls
260
4.2. Spiritus
263
4.3. The alchernical conlunctio
4.4. Sympathetic magic in De vita coel I tus comparanda 268
278
4.5. Images
4.6. The power of words and song
281
Part Two: Musica Instrumenta1I
4.8. The Orphic hymns
4.9. Harmonia
4.10. Ficino as lrnprovvlsat ore
4.11. Performance practice
4.12. Musical form

288
292
296
309
312
323

References to chapter four

330

Appendix 1
Appendix 2

368
370

BIBLIOQAPHY

377

4.7. Orpheus redlvlvus

-3-

A(NOWLEDG1ENTS

I should like to thank the following people, without whose help,
encouragement and constant faith in my work this thesis would never have
been completed:
Peter Arnmann, Dr. charles Burnett at the Warburg Institute, Noel Cobb,
Geoffrey Cornelius, Graeme Tobyn and the Latin translation group at the
Company of Astrologers, Darby Costello, Dr. Patrick Curry, Professor
Joscelyn Godwin, Peter Kingsley, the Latin translation group of the School
of Economic Science, Eva Loewe and the Lacemakers group of the London
Convivium for Archetypal Studies, Dr. Thomas Moore, Andrew Mouldey, Linda
Proud, Kathleen Raine, Anthony Rooley, Pfofessor Malcolm Thoup at the City
University, and especially Philip Weller for many hours of discussion,
translation and moral support.

I grant powers of discretion to the University Librarian to allow this
thesis to be copied in whole or in part without further reference to me.
This permission covers only single copies made for study purposes, subject
to normal conditions of acknowledgement.

-4-

ABSTRACT
This thesis is structured in four substantial chapters with subsections. The first two cover the background to Ficino's thought, the
second two present his own attitudes towards magic, astrology and music.
chapter one is concerned with aspects of xnusica inundana as represented
by Ficino's three main authorities, Plato, Hermes Trismegistus and
Plotinus. Firstly I present the fundamental ideas underlying Ficino's mode
of thought and musical practice: the structure of the cosmos, Pythagorean
harmonia arid the human soul as microcosm, concluding with the nature of
Platonic wisdom. Secondly I consider the role of Hermes and the Hermetic
texts with their emphasis on intuitive revelation, aichemical
transformation and the imagination. From, this synthesis of the
intellectual and the intuitive emerges Plotinus, whose understanding of
cosmic sympathy and resonance has profound implications for a significatory
attitude towards astrology.
chapter two moves on to musica humana, and the magical means by which
the Pythagorean and Platonic traditions aspired to bring the human soul
into harmony with the cosmos. I discuss the nature of magic and mysticism,
of occult ritual and the value of a symbolic mode of perception. The first
half deals with Platonic and Plotinian attitudes towards magic, which were
predominantly spiritual; the second half considers the practical magical
rituals of theurgy, as revealed through the writings of the neo-platonists
Iainblichus and Proclus and the Chaldaean Oracles. The central notion, that
of time and its two orders, leads to a consideration of astrology as
divination and a conclusion on the way of being and perception on which the
efficacy of 'magic' depends.
The second half of the thesis is directly concerned with Ficino's own
synthesis of this material. Chapter three firstly presents his formulation
of ways of knowing as found in the lamblichus Commentary, then considers
the implications of this for his attitude towards astrology. The
'scientific' astrology of Ptolemy and the syncretic tradition of the Arabs
leads to a presentation of the dilemma between the scientific and
divinatory approaches. I then discuss Ficino's reaction to astrological
determinism and his own views in relation to his Disputatio contra iudicium
astrologorum and Commentary on Plotinus.
Finally, chapter four brings both astrology and music Into focus as the
ingredients of Ficino's practices of natural magic. I discuss his ideas
concerning the nature of hearing, the function of the musician and the
concepts of spiritus and anhrna mundi in connection with the sympathetic
magic of De vita coelltus comparanda. Ficino's attitude towards the power
of words and song and his rules for composing astrological music lead us to
the final section on muslca Instrurnentalis - Ficino's role as the 'second
Orpheus'. Contemporary anecdotes, the importance of Orpheus as a model and
the rediscovery of the Orphic hymns precede a more historical discussion of
Ficino as a music theorist and improvisor within the context of 15th
century Italian musical culture. I speculate on his instrument,
Renaissance performance practice and musical repertoire, concluding with
examples of relevant musical forms.
-5-

It1TROD(JCTI ON

In the Prooeiium to his great Tbeologla Platonica, Ficino tells the
reader how he has felt called upon to explain his synthesis of Platonism
and Cristianity to those who "separate the study of philosophy from holy
religion".(l) Ficino's vocation was to bring theory and practice,
intellect arid will, knowledge and experience into a harmony which
transcended all opposition, and he sought to achieve this through a ritual,
symbolic use of both astrology and music in a therapeutic context of
natural magic'.

-,

The writing of this thesis has, in many ways, been a personal journey
of deepening experience and psychological integration. Over the past seven
years (a cycle of Saturn) Marsilio Ficino has assumed the role of a daimon,
leading me to confront the most difficult and complex issues in my life and
somehow asking to be put to rest. I embarked on this task without knowing
exactly what he was asking of me - I now realise that the process has been
an alchemical one of unification, with both internal and external purposes.
As a practising astrologer I had always felt very strongly that Ficino's
attitude towards astrology had been, on the whole, misrepresented by
scholars, and that an attempt should be made to bridge the seemingly
Irreconcilable gulf between the practising astrologers and the academic
historians who write about it. In the course of translating Ficino's
Dlsputatlo contra 1udlciu astrologorum, Llber de Sole and excerpts from
his Couaentaries on Plot inus and lamblichus, I became aware that the
essential problem was not one of wilful antagonism, but of the
misapprehension of the mode of perception required to enter into Ficino's
way of understanding the world. For Ficino, there had to be a way of
combining, as In astrological practice itself, the fluid, subjective
'irrational' content of qualitative experience within the the firm outer
framework of an objective structure. In this sense, I humbly attempt to
imitate Ficino himself, who constantly sought to lead his readers to a
participatory awareness of the dimension of life coiiuuonly regarded as
'occult, and to a valuation of that dimension as equally essential to
psychological and physical health as that of rational objectivity.

-6-

In Plato and Hermes Trismegistus, Ficino found supreme representatives
of the ways of being he strove to integrate: intellectual rigour and
clarity and intuitive, mystical revelation. In the writings of Plotinus,
thirty years later, he found a synthesis of the two and a supreme
justification for astrology as a divinatory, not a 'pseudo-scientific',
art. Out of this emerged his extraordinary feat of the imagination, the
Liber de vita, in which the reader is encouraged towards health of mind,
soul and body through a diet of philosophical contemplation, magical
practices and rituals, astrological awareness and musical activity. rt is

here that Ficino formulates his unique astrological music-therapy, a
consideration of which will form the culmination of this thesis.

The theme of the three musics, undana, huRana and instru.entalis(2) is
a constant unifying motif throughout my work. For the Platonist, life
itself is music - instrumental and vocal music merely imitating the true
music of the cosmos, which finds its counterpart in the motions of the
human soul. True music is harmony of thought, word and deed, and this may
be fostered through the right use of audible music and song, if it is
performed with a ritual attitude of religious intent. Ficino's 'new'
therapeutic combination of music and astrology recovers a lost dimension that of the divinatory 'moment' which allows the individual "a free
participation in destiny".(3) This was of course a hall-mark of the
Renaissance - a re-birth of faith in man's capacity to overcome the
limitations of a fate-bound existence and be master of himself, in
celebration of his own 'divine' potential. Ficino's vocation was to lead
men to this realisation through exhorting them to "see with different
eyes", to develop what we might term a symbolic attitude towards life, to
understand that to see astrology and audible music as .etaphors for reality
is to facilitate a harmonising of the soul which can only lead to true
happiness. Bearing this in mind, I make no apology for frequent reference
to the work of C.G. Jung, who has perhaps been the greatest twentiethcentury spokesman for the very union of mind and soul to which Ficino
dedicated his life. In Jung's writings I have found a constant source of
Inspiration, clarifying and illuminating - In psychological terms Ficino's aichemical quest.

-7--

To illustrate the imbalance this thesis seeks to redress, I shl
consider, for the remainder of the Introduction, some modern
interpretations and criticisms of Ficino's attitude towards astrology; in
particular, the impressive new translation of Ficino's Liber de vita cdtd
by Carol Kaske and John Clark. This will, I hope, help to clarify the
issue and set a perspective for the reading of the rest of the work.

Despite Marsilius Ficinus florentinus heading Luca Gaurico's list of
late 15th century Florentine astrologers, (4) Ficino's integrity and
authority as an astrologer are by no means affirmed by modern scholarship.
We find bewildered criticisms, condemnations and misrepresentations of his
views by scholars who refer to his "oscillations", "inconsistent
views", (5), "self-contradiction", (6), "scewhat double-faced attitude", (1)
"vacillation on the subject of j udicial astrology",(B) "peculiar
adaptations of astrology" and even his "relapse into superstition".(9)
Such remarks stem mainly from the seeming contradiction in the sequence of
his writings concerning his evident enthusiasm for astrology in the
everiay life of himself and his friends, and his apparently wholesale
rejection of astrological practices in the Disputatio contra iudicium
astrologurn of 1477 and the Commentary on Plotinus'

Enneads II of ten years

later. The Disputatio appears to be a polemical attack on astrologica
determinism, but Ficino's attack goes deeper than that; for he understood
such determinism to be the the result of a naive, unseif-critical
complacency on the part of certain astrologers. In particular, he attacked
their wilful, short-sighted use of the faculty of iudgement (iudicium) when
making astrological predictions or observations. He does not take issue
with the very possibility of making astrological interpretations and
judgements - never denying the 'mirroring' of the heavens by the msterial
world - but with the lack of subtlety and imagination - a 'symbolic
attitude' - in a literal, 'scientific' approach towards the prediction of
particulars. It is not the astrologer who acts responsibly, exercising
mature clarity of insight and maintaining a religious awareness of cosmic.
law, nor judicial astrology in itself, who Ficino criticises, although he
suspects it is not within the limits of human capacity to develop the
technique required for a comprehensive awareness of all the factors
involved.(1O) One does not have to try to prove the consistency of
Ficino's thought, or assume that we can or should be able to fathom the
-8-

undoubtedly paradoxical twists and turns of his expression of it. But its
misinterpretation is another matter, and in recent times modern scholarship
has shown itself to be sadly unreceptive to the importance of Ficino's
reformation of astrological practice.
One such culprit is Carol Kaske, who in her Introduction to the
translation of Ficino's Liber de vita, mistranslates the very title of the
Dlsputatlo as Disputation against judicial astrology (which would be
astrologla iudiciaria).(1l) Together with other Ficinian scholars such as
Eugenio Garin, P.O. Kristeller and D.P. Walker, she has certainly pointed
to the need for a re-appraisal and consideration of Ficino's astrological
thought in his own terms, (12) but remains curiously unable to enter into
the implications of those terms. Garin admits that "with regard to
astrology [the work of Marsllio Ficino] has never been adequately looked at
in all its fluctuations and variations"(13), and on the whole scholars have
paid insufficient attention to an area which is indispensable for an allembracing understanding of Ficino's philosophical position. It is very
difficult to broach such an area from a perspective of detached historical
analysis (what Ficino was to call notltia)(14) and a continual danger that
personal prejudices or willy-filly rejection of 'occult' practices will
result in an unwillingness to credit Ficino with an understanding of the
subject which is more comprehensive than theirs. We find Carol Kaske
searching for "plausible patterris"(15) in Ficino's attitude which will help
to clarify what she sees as his "self-contradiction". She assumes that
Ficino shows "two outright denials of astrology" in the Dlsputatio and in a
letter to Poliziano of 1494, where Ficino wrote to his friend in praise of
Pico's massive condemnation of astrology, rejoicing that the "superstitious
vanity" of the astrologers had been quashed. (16). She supposes that he
"turned back to specific predictive astrology" (demonstrated in numerous
letters, the Conslglio contra Ia pestilenza(17) and the Liber de vita Book
3) in the Apology to the Cardinals against Savonarola, written a year
before his death in 1498,(18), and suggests simplistically, and not a
little naively, that Ficino's "faith in Savonarola motivated his rejection
of astrology", and that as he withdrew his support he "resumed his more
habitual attitude to astrology" and that finally after Pico and Poliziano
were dead they could not dispute his "relapse into superstition".

-9-

It must be pointed out at the outset that we cannot, arid should not,
attempt to interpret Flcln&s various astrological writings in the same
way. So much depends on the personal, social and political context arid his
intended readership. His relationships with both Pico and Poliziano were
complex and uneasy, arid the involvement of the trio with Savonarola in the
1490s is by no means straightforward or indeed without ominous
implications. Ficino's letter to Poliziano can hardly be regarded as a
clear-cut statement of astrological belief unconnected to the circumstances
in which it was written - in fact it may well have been conceived as a
hidden warning to his friend who died mysteriously soon afterwards.(l9) It
is, I feel, misguided to attempt to define a linear strand of develogment
and/or regression In the chameleon-lie, ever changing hues of Ficino's
chosen vehicles of expression and angles of vision.

For Ficino, Intuitive vision must be a complement to rational thoughtprocesses if any marrythg of mind and soul is to be achieved. One cannot
approach Ficinian astrology, or hope to enter the flux of his imaginative
understanding, with the detachment of purely logical analysis. Carol
Kaske's investigation seems to be geared to the idea that the motions of
the heavens arid their unseen operation on the sublunar world (if any)
function as a purely natural-scientific process, and that any results of
that process must be measurable by rationalistic norms. 1ny subjective or
occult effects are to be reduced to mere "superstition". She sadly
misrepresents Ficino's innovative, personal attitude by an insistence on
restricting 'astrology' into a small pigeon-hole of determinism, even
denying altogether its possible validity in the world of scholarship: in
her Introduction to a philologically thorough translation of Ficino's Liber
de vita, she laments that, in an ideal world, "to do justice to a work so
encyclopaedic as De vita would ideally require the services of a committee
embracing historians of science, of the medical profession, of philosophy,
and of religion"(20) - that she evidently would not feel the need to
consult practisirig astrologers is a sad reflection of academic attitudes.
Her evident difficulty In incorporating the neo-platonic model of
sympathetic cosmic resonance into a broader concept of astrological
experience, leads her to attempt restrictive categorisations which purport
to delimit Ficino's far-reaching syncretism Into "a preference for more-orless over either/or thinking".(21).
-10 -

Carol Kaske talks of Ficino's "ominous horoscope", "peculiar adaptations
of astrology" and "wholesale rejections of astrology"; she even says "a
person with a bad horoscope could hardly be casual and lukewarm towards
astrology; he would have to either reinterpret it to give him some hope or
else deny It outright".(22). Ficino is continually at pains to point out
that crude good/bad distinctions play no part in subtle psychological
tempering,(23) and one simply cannot allow Carol Kaske's assumption that
Ficino's "very bad horoscope" accounts partly for his "rejection of
astrology" in the Disputatio(24) - for such a statement totally denies the
very freedom of will and voluntary 'negotiation with fate' preserved by
Ficino's 'divinatory' attitude. Far from leading him to "reject
astrology", Ficino's struggle for sel'-knowledge, to use profitably the
tensions symbolised In his horoscope, encouraged him to explore the
meaningfulness of symbols and to throw out the deadwood of a deterministic
system. The tests of Saturn are hard, and the recognition that his gifts,
offered through the Inner power of contemplation, might lead to inspired
creative activity was a profound discovery indeed. Certainly for the man
who does not exercise his free-will to know his innermost self and align
with a higher will, planetary influences may be perceived as harmful; but
the difficult and often painful process of such tempering may yield inner
strengths which have no other means of development. To call Ficino's
concern with his own horoscope an "obsession"(25) sadly makes a mockery of
his deep intuitive perception of the benefits of intensely-focussed
perseverance as a path towards Inner transformation. It seems unimportant
to me if Ficino "vacillated" as to whether Saturn "caused" or "prophesied",
in any exact technical sense, his own philosophical career (26) - he
understood a personal horoscope as potentially revealing innate resources
for life and development, and for a greater understanding of personal
purpose. To compare this process to an I.Q. test(27) at best misses the
point, and at worst degrades the nobility, and sublimity, of the endeavour.

I have Illustrated at some length Carol Kaske's critical attitude
because It reflects the very cut-and-dried literalism which Ficino himself
saw as such an enemy to the creative possibilities which emerge when the
imagination is truly valued, when qualitative correspondences and
affinities, non-linear kinds of connection are applied. The psychological
unity Ficino strives for is not a simple uniformity - clarity of insight is
-11 -

not able to reduce the complexities of the sublunar world to convenient,
simple propositions. Rather, a unified faculty of intuitive perception
reveals the corresponding unity behind the complexity of experience, the
polytheistic universe, where elements may be tempered and attuned but riot
reduced in scope to suit the needs of an explanatory system.
Following Plotinus, Ficino intuitively grasped that semiological
astrology, regarding heavenly configurations as signs rather than causes,
provided a more philosophically coherent foundation for hi practice of
natural magic, where synchionistic observations and correlations were
connected with an occultus Influxus from the planets and stars. Carol
Kaske's definitive statement that Plotinus "was not very interested in
either astrology or magic"(28) hardly does justice to the subtle,
discriminating appraisal to which he subjects both arts in Enneads IV. She
appears to consider semiotic astrology as a somewhat poor cousin of the
causal variety, whereas if we learn anything from Ficino's attitude, it
surely must be quite the opposite; that it Is precisely a deterministic
astrology which leaves much to be desired in terms of preserving human
dignity, and that the neo-platonIc/hermetic imaginative, symbolic and
essentially magical attitude holds the key to unlocking the door of fate.
To read that "Ficino occasionally retreats to it when defending Saturn"(29)
or that "the semiological survived such condemnations (of predictive
astrology) in Plotinus' thought"(30) surely belittles the very attitude
Ficino strove to advocate. What Carol Kaske sees as "generalising" from a
single or scanty data(31) Ficino (as indeed Jung) would have advocated as
the free-ranging elaboration of the imagination. The limits of
determinism, for the Renaissance humarli5t, can play no useful part in man's
striving to know himself, arid know God.
Considering all this, Is there In fact an "astrological problem" which
"comes to a head in De vita" and which was "festering" earlier in Ficino's
life?(32) D.P. Walker, In an attempt to Impose a more "coherent line of
develoment"(33) on Ficirio's "varied, inconsistent and usually evasively
expressed" views even wishes to re-date the Dlsputatlo (with no reliable
evidence) to coincide with the letter to Poliziano. D.P. Walker admits at
the outset of his paper "I am remarkably ill qualified to speak on
astrology. I know nothing of the details of astrological procedures of any
-12 -

period"(34) and demonstrates his lack of understanding by a bewildered
incomprehension at how Ficino, Pico and Poliziano could possibly have
laughed at the "vanity of the astrologers"(35): "If only I could find
astrology funny, I would read it eagerly, and this would be a much better
paper."(36) Such an inability to discriminate between the 'petty ogres'
(nefarios glgantulos)(37) whose arrogance and folly, in true Democritan

spirit, so amused Ficino and the discriminating wisdom of the
philosopher/astrologers for whom astrology as a symbolic system became a
tool for self-knowledge, is unfortunately a hallmark of recent attempts to
clarify Ficino's position. The issue at stake is surely not whether or not
Ficino 'believed' in astrology at different times of his life - he clearly
takes Its phenomena as self-evident. It Is rather to appraise his
intellectual and intuitive capacities within a specific philosophical!
religious framework, from which position he was able to enter into the play
of forces implicit in an animated cosmos, arid thus use astrological
symbolism as a vehicle for his musical psychological therapy.

Abbreviations and Information for References
Letters - The Letters of Marsilio FIcino, 4 volumes, translated by the
School of Economic Science.
Op.om. - Marsilli Ficini, Opera oirila, 2 volumes (continuous pagination)
Supp.Flc. - Suppleentum Ficinianum, 2 volumes, ed. P.O. Kristeller
References are re-numbered for each Part of a chapter. AU publication
details of articles arid books are to be found In the Bibliography. Line
references to Ficino's Llber de vita are taken from MarsIlIo Flcino, Three
Books on Life edited by C. Kaske and J. Clark. Plato's works are generally
given by name only, translations from the Collected Dialogues. For the
Hermetic P1ander and Ascie plus I have used the translation by Walter
Scott; for lamblichus' De yster11s translations by both Alexander Wilder
and Thomas Taylor; for Plotinus' Enneads, by both Stephen MacKenna and A.H.
Armstrong. All translations of original Latin in the body of the thesis
are by me unless a modern edition Is stated In the references.

REFENES to Introduction

1.

FIcino, Prooeiilum to the Theologla Platonica, Op.o. p.78:
.. et quicunque Philosophiae studium impie nimium a
sancta religione seiungunt, agnoscant aliquando se non
aliter aberrare

2.

As specified by Boethius, De lnstitutlone muslca 1.2: "The first
-13 -

(music] is cosmic, whereas the second is human; the third is that
which rests in certain instrtnnents." (trans. C.M. Bower)
3. G. Cornelius, 'The Moment of Astrology' part IV p.87
4.

L. Gauricus De inventorlbus et laudibus astronoilae 1507. See The
Cambridge History of Renaissance PhIlosophy p.651

5.

D.P.Walker, 'Marsilio Ficino and Astrology' pp.341-2

6.

Carol Kaske, 'Ficino's shifting attitude towards astrology in the
vita coelitus comriaranda, the letter to Poliziano, and the Apoloq ia to
the Gardinals' p.372 ref. 2

7.

L.Thorndike, 'Ficino the Philosophaster' in History of Magic and
Experimental Science vo]...IV, p.572

8.

J. Hankins, Plato In the ItalIaniRenaissance p.282

9.

Carol Kaske, 'Ficino's Shifting Attitude' pp.372, 376

10. See G. Zanier, La Medicina astrologica e la sua teorla p.45
11.

carol Kaske and John Clark, eds. Ficino, Three Books on Life p.31

12.

ibid. p.6

13. E. Garth, Astrology in the Renaissance pp.61-2
14. See chapter three, part one
15. Kaske, 'Ficino's shifting attitude' p.372
16. Ficino, letter to Poliziano, Op.om. p.958
17.

Consigllo contra la Pestllenza in Supp.Pic.I p.14

18. Kaske, 'Ficino's shifting attitude' pp.371-3
19. See chapter three part one, ref .39
20. Kaske and Clark, Three Books on Life p.6
21. ibid. pp.44,62
22.

ibid. p.19

23. See for example, Liber de vita 2.XVI.215; 3.XI.254
24. Kaske and Clark, Three Books on Life p.19
25.

ibid. p.22

26.

ibId. p.58

27.

ibid.
-14 -

28. ibid. p.64
29. ibid. p.58
30. ibid. p.88
31. ibid. pp.39,44
32. ibid. p.55
33. D.P. Walker, 'Marsilio Ficino and Astrology' p.342
34. ibId. p.341
35. See Supp.Fic.II p.274:
Nec quotles una facet lamur uberlor nobis occasio
sequesque ridendi quam de vanitate astrologorum,
praesertlm si tertius venlat Politianus, Intervenit
vero semper ainnium superstitionum mirus exsibilator.
36. D.P. Walker, 'Marsillo Ficino and Astrology' p.342
37. Letters vol.3 p.76, Op.ow. p.781

-15 -

PTER EVE: HUSICA MU&DANA
PrLsca Theoj pg i p - Flcirio's Ancient Authorities

PART cE: PLAW
Li. Prolociue
"let us rather say that the cause and purpose of god's
invention and gift to us of sight was that we should see
the revolutions of intelligence in the heavens and use
their untroubled course to guide the troubled revolutions
in our own understanding, which are akin to them and so, by
learning what they are and how to calculate them accurately
according to their nature, correct the disorder of our own
revolutions by the standard of invariability of those of
god ... all audible musical sound is given us for the sake
of harmony, which has motions akin to the orbits in our
soul, and which, as anyone who makes intelligent use of the
arts knows, is not to be used, as is commonly thought, to
give irrational pleasure, but as a heaven-sent ally in
reducing to order and harmony any disharmony in the
revolutions within us."(l)

This passage from Plato's T1naeus encapsulates concisely the very theme
of this thesis, and is perhaps the earliest explicit testimony we have to
the connection between symbolic astrology, and the practical use of musicmaking as a therapy. Plato understood that the arts of astrology and
music, at their highest potential, are both means by which human beings can
achieve inner equilibrium of soul and self-knowledge. For they can be seen
as a reflection and echo - a "heaven-sent ally" - of the perfect and
immutably decreed pattern of motion and harmony established in the cosmos
by the divine creator, and deeply imprinted within the human soul. In this
chapter I shall be exploring the common sources and roots of such a
hypothesis as revealed in the 'ancient theology' of Ficino's most revered
authorities in the Pythagorean-Hermetic tradition, who not only provided
his own practice of 'natural magic' with sound philosophical precedents,
but were also his constant, living sources of inspiration. In the
teachings and writings of Pythagoras, Plato, Hermes 'ftismegistus and
Orpheus (continued in the neo-platonic schools of Plotinus, Porphyry,
-16 -

lamblichus and Proclus) Ficino found kindred spirits, whose religious
philosophy he could interpret as being entirely in sympathy with Christian
teaching. Ficino's conviction that a thread of truth could be discerned,
to a greater or lesser extent, at all periods of history, woven through
religion and philosophy - particularly via the Platonic tradition - led him
to dedicate his life to the reconciliation of this 'religious' philosophy
with christian revelation. He produced, to this end, his main
philosophical and theological works, the Theologia Platonlca(2) and De
Christiana religlone.(3) In the words of Hankins:

"For Ficino, Platonism, Instead of being the nemesis of
christendom, is part of God's providential design for the
human race, a phllosophia perennls, springing Intertwined
with christianity from the same sqil of religious
experience; each of them lends support to the other in
their growth towards perfection and truth."(4)

Ficino saw the scholastic Aristoteliariism of the previous centuries as
having failed to achieve the goals of moral and religious training due to
an over-Insistence on dogmatic, formulaic methods of teaching at the
expense of inner reflection. He maintained that true knowledge must first
and foremost be an Intuition of the divine which is by its very nature
prophetic, and which draws everything back to the subjective, qualitative
experience of the individual. In this way, it could not be argued that
Plato's religious experience was qualitatively different from or inferior
to that of Moses or other Hebrew prophets. Ficino recogised the need to
fertilise the traditional, orthodox religious values of his time with the
water of the soul - a conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter (signifying formal
tradition and inspired revelation) such as was actually witnessed in the
heavens in 1484, the year that his complete translation of Plato appeared.
Ficino would also understand Saturn with Jupiter to represent the Platonic
unity of wisdom and worldly power, and would have seen such an Ideal
embodied in his patron and close friend Lorenzo de' Medici.(5)
The syncretic tendency was of course 'well represented in the Christian
apologetic tradition initiated by Philo, the Alexandrian Church Fathers
Clement and Origen and handed down to the Middle Ages via Lactantius and
St. Augustine to St. Thomas Aquinas,(6) and in such Christian Platonists as
Dionysius Areopagitus(7) and John Scotus Eriugena.(8) The interpenetration
-17 -

of Aristotelian and Platonic ideas in the Medieval period and the influence
of the scholastics on Ficino's philosophy has been discussed by P.O.
Kristeller.(9) It is my intention to consider the chief representatives of
the perennial wisdom called 'ancient theologians': those great pagan
visionaries of the Western esoteric tradition whose religious philosophy
most directly fertilised Fictho's particular practice of therapeutic
astrology and music-making. Zoroaster, Hermes Trismegistus, Orpheus,
Aglaophemus, Pythagoras and Plato(1O) - Ficino was deeply attracted by
these quasi-'thvine' representatives of a tradition, which far from being
based exclusively on scholastic verbal definitions of intelligible
doctrines, incorporated metaphorical and visionary symbolism together with
all kinds of theurgic practices involving natural magic, astrology and
music. Above all, it preserved inviolate a secret that was only accessible
to those who were worthy of comprehending it, and to this end these
initiates "held the assumption that deep truths must be veiled in fable and
allegory".(ll) Ficino was firmly convinced "that the best pagan minds had
been far above polytheistic superstitions, and had adhered to an esoteric
philosophico-religious wisdom which they concealed from the uninitiated to
avoid persecution and vulgarisation of thought."(12)

The quantity of Greek and Latin texts of which Ficino had first-hand
knowledge is formidable, but it is the 'divine Plato' who is most
frequently summoned as the advocate of 'right thinking' and as such
Ficino's ultimate authority. For the first time in Western history, his
complete dialogues, along with the Corpus Hermeticum (believed by
Renaissance scholars to stem from the hand of Hermes Trismegistus himself),
were translated and commented on - by Ficino at the very beginning of his
career. In his Preface to the Commentaries on Plato, dedicated to Lorenzo
de'tledici(13) Ficino tells us how Lorenzo's grandfather Cosimo entrusted
him with the task, establishing him as the leader of the Academy at Careggi.
which was to become the focal intellectual and artistic centre of the
Florentine Renaissance. For Ficino, Plato was no less than a prophet of
eternal wisdom:
Almighty God, at an appointed time, sent down the
divine spirit of Plato from on high to shed the light of
holy religion upon all peoples, through his life, genius
and marvellous teaching."(14)

-18 -

Although Ficino claims that the style of his master could never be
reproduced, being "more like that of a divine oracle than any hurnin
eloquence, now resounding on high, now flowing with the sweetness of
nectar, ever encompassing the secrets of heaven"(15) nevertheless in many
of his own writings (particularly his correspondence) we may glimpse the
qualities he admires so much - the veiling of truth with humour and jest,
the "sweetening" of profound thought with "some sweet and useful
matter",(16)) the very use of language itself to rhetorically captivate and
seduce the minds of worldly men into contemplating more enduring spiritual
realities:
indeed Plato's style appears to be more poetical than
philosophical; now his words thunder and reverberate like
those of a seer, now they flow gently, and all the while
they obey no human power but one thaI is prophetic and
divine; he does not play the part of a teacher so much as a
priest or prophet, now enrapturing some whilst expiating
others, and seizing them with divine frenzy in the same
way."(17)

Hankins has observed(18) that in his literary style Ficino was not
content to reproduce the "rhetorical fervour and elegant style" of his
contemporary humanists, but cultivated his own rich, pithy and "mystagogic"
language, full of irony, puns and allegorical excursions. Following his
master Plato, Ficino knew how to use appropriate language as a bait or
'divine lure', to entice the reader to exercise his imaginative faculty and
develop an ability to find the hidden meaning in myth and symbol - always
encouraging the light of the intellect to be turned inwards towards the
.imago Dei in the human soul.

Through the miracle of Divine Providence which has "restored to the
light" Platonic wisdom, Ficino sees Philosophy, the daughter of Minerva,
extending encouragement to Lorenzo to enter the Platonic Academy. On one
level this is an invitation to join the elite at Careggi, where the gods
themselves inspire and instruct: Apollo sings in the garden, Mercury
declaims at the entrance, Jupiter pronounces justice, and, most
importantly, "within the innermost sanctuary, philosophers will come to
know their Saturn contemplating the secrets of the heavens (my
italics).(19) Already we have an indication of the elevated and noble
function of the symbolic imagery of astrology in Ficino's quest for self-19 -

knowledge, as also of the central role of musical performance, for s we.
shall see in chapter four, Ficino's contemplation of "the secrets ot the
heavens" involved specially composed musical settings of Orphic hns
addressed to planetary deities. Certainly the task of knowing his own
Saturn by such a means was to prove life-long, and was to carry profoun3
consequences f or astrology - namely, the re-interpretation of the
traditional 'malefic' view of the planet. On another level, Ficino'
invitation can be understood as a universal and timeless exhortation to
mankind to join an esoteric 'Platonic Academy' and embark on the ditt:icult
but infinitely rewarding journey to true happiness through philosophical
speculation and religious contemplation.
Ficino's fervent conviction that true feligion would find in the
Platonic teachings its surest defence against profanity initiated a reviv]
of ancient wisdom and pagan spirituality which places him at the forefront
of a new era - most especially through the philanthropic incorporation of
Hermetic and neo-platonic 'licit' magic into his every-day practice as a
healer of soul and body. It must not be forgotten that Ficino was both a
priest and a physician, and that his wide range of activities included
interaction and communication with the ordinary Florentine citizen, whether
in Church or at their bedside. Ultimately, it was the

application of his

religious philosophy to compassionate therapeutic ends, via sermons and
public lectures, herbal remedies and astrological music, which superseded
any mere theorising, and which singled him out amongst his contemporarits
in the Academy, such as his particular friends the philologist and poet
Angelo Poliziano and the brilliant but wayward young Giovanni Pico. For
Ficino, the practice of sympathetic magic was a means by which gnosis could
be attained, in the same way that the alchemist's art was directed towaLds

the union of heaven and earth. Both the magician and the alchemist were
striving for psychological unity through the strengthening of
consciousness, or knowledge of the 'divine' essence of man and matter. l3uL
this will be considered further in chapter four.

I shall now look at several of the key texts which set in perspect.ive
Ficino's practice as a Renaissance niagus - those which reveal the
particular cosmological framework on which his 'natural magic' depends.

-20 -

1.2. The Timaeus arid P yt:hagorean harmonia

Pythagoras, the father of the concept of musica mundana, the harmony of
the spheres, is a figure shrouded in legend, and we know little of the life
of the man himself. However, to the Renaissance Platonist he was the most
revered representative of the highest spiritual and intellectual
attainxnent.(20) It is probable that he travelled in Egypt and Baby:lon,
perhaps becoming initiated into the spiritual wisdom of the Egyptians, aid
almost certainly becoming a spokesman for the long-established Eastern
religious tradition. Ernest McClain(21) has emphasised the 'totally
unhistorical' basis of many traditional stories of Pythagorean discoveries,
suggesting that their origin may be traced to ancient Babylon. He sIIow3
that Sumer arid Babylon were mathematically highly advanced, incorporatiiiq
music, mathematics and religion in a system of knowledge which was
bequeathed to the Western world via the teachings of Pythagoras and
Plato. (22)

It is generally held that it was Pythagoras who discovered that musical
intervals may be reduced to numerical ratios,(23) thus providing a
mathematical basis for audible harmony. The perfect intervals of the
octave, fifth and fourth all contain as their numerical basis the numbers
one to four, and so the tetraktys became equated with the notion of
harnionia, the 'fitting of things together' or adjustment of parts in a
complex whole.(24) In the words of Guthrie,
"The discovery of Pythagoras, that the basic intervals of
Greek music could be represented by the ratios 1:2, 3:2 and
4:3, made it appear that kosmos - order and beauty - was
imposed on the chaotic range of sound by means of the first
four integers, 1,2,3 and 4."(25)

In his Commentary on Cicero's Dream of Scipio which became the chief
authority on neo-platonism in the Middle Ages, Macrobius deals extensively
with number in creation.(26) Here we learn that odd numbers are associated
with the male principle, and even numbers with the female. The two are
united in the substance of the world soul of the Timaeus. The number one,
the monad or creative principle, is bisexual and both odd and even in
nature. Understood, in a musical metaphor, as the generating 'fundamental'
of the scale of creation, the unfolding of the consonant octave in the
-21 -

ratio of 1:2 can be seen as the emergence of the female principle out of
the original unity - astrologically, this can be further illustrated by the
symbols of the Sun and Moon. Macrobius affirms(27) that the Pythagoreans
"revere [the tetraktysl among their secrets as pertaining to the perfection
of the soul" and for lamblichus its secrets are connected with the oracle
at Delphi, the seat of the highest and most sacred visdom.(28) Connected
with the tetraktys we find its sum, the sacred Decad or number ten, a
symbol of perfection and completion. Not only does it contain the numbers
which constitute the ratios of 'perfect' musical intervals but also
encc*npasses all four dimensions of experience, being the sum of the
geometrical progressions of point (one), line (two), triangle (three) and
pyramid (four).(29)

The Pythagorean concept of the harmonious structure of a universe
founded on numerical ratio was transmitted via the creation myth of Plato's
Tiaeus.(3O) In Psychology and Western Religion Jung shows that pre-

Christian parallels to the three-fold symbolism of the Trinity are to be
found in Babylonian and Egyptian traditions, and that such ideas were
assimilated into Christianity through Philo and Plutarch.(31) He refers to
Porphyry's statement(32) that the symbol of a cross within a circle
signified the world-soul for the Egyptians, and considers the psychological
implications of the triad and quaternity as symbols of completion. In this
section I can but suniiarise his conclusions, which provide an
interpretation of the TiMaeus as an allegory of fundamental psychological
experience.
According to Macrobius, two is the first number, as with its separation
from the undivided One multiplication may begin: "As soon as the number two
appears, a unit is produced out of the original unity, and this unit is
none other than that same unity split Into two and turned into a
'number".(33) From this duality of the 'one' and the 'other' a tension
arises, as the one holds on to the other and the other pushes away from the
one. Here we find the essential duality represented by archetypal
oppositions such as light and dark, good and evil, male and female. It is
a condition of unresolvable antagonism which must eventually give rise to a
third unifying principle: "every tension of opposites culminates in a
release, out of which comes the 'third'. In the third, the tension is
-22 -

resolved and the lost unity is restored. "(34) Whereas the emergence of two
from one is prerequisite for the act of 'knowing' or differentiation of
consciousness from an unconscious, primordial chaos, three appears as a
synonym for the process of development in time and is expressed by the
perfect symmetry of the equilateral triangle.(35) Three is perfect as it
is the beginning, middle and end; (36) in religious experience the absolute
Deity unfolded into three aspects.
In the Tlaaeus we read:
"god, when he began to put together the body of the universe,
made it of fire and earth. But it is not possible to combine
two things properly without a third to act as a bond to hold
them together. And the best bond 4s one that effects the
closest unity between itself and the terms it is combining
.',(37)
The mean holding the two opposites together will be a geometrical
proportion "such that, as the first is to it, so is It to the last" as in
the progression 2:1 = 4:2 = 8:4 = 2. This, continues Plato, would suffice
if the world were a plane surface. But solids require two means to connect
them: "So god placed water and air between fire and earth, and made them so
far as possible proportional to each other.. and in this way he bound the
world into a visible and tangible whole."(38) Thus, the unit of the triad
is produced from the union of one pair of opposites only, a two-dimensional
construct whose reality is not physical, but remains on the plane of
abstract thought. To encompass physical reality in its fourfold aspect,
two pairs of opposites need to unite. Here, suggests Jung, is the dilemma
of the 'three' and the 'four' found reflected psychic experience:
"Plato begins by representing the union of opposites twodimensionally, as an intellectual problem to be solved by
thinking, but then came to see that its solution does not
add up to reality. In the former case we have to do with a
self-subsistent triad, and in the latter with a quaternity.
This was the dilemma which perplexed the alchemists for
more than a thousand years ... and is also found In
psychology as the opposition between the functions of
consciousness, three of which are fairly well
differentiated, while the fourth, undifferentiated,
'inferior' function is undomesticated, unadapted,
uncontrolled, and primitive."(39)

-23 -

Jung draws our attention to the opening words of the dialogue, where
Socrates notices that a guest is missing: "One, two, three - but where, my
dear Timaeus, is the fourth of my guests of yesterday ..?",(40) suggesting
that, read symbolically, the implication is that either air or water is
missing from the equation of reality. If it is air, then there is no
connecting link with fire; if water, then no link with earth - and we must
agree with Jung's conclusion that "Plato certainly did not lack spirit; the
missing element he so much desired was the concrete realisation of
ideas."(41) The dichotomy between the perfection of the Ideal world and
the imperfection of earthly reality was not easily breached by Plato, who
struggled and failed to put his political theories into action. His vision
of the world was as a 'blessed god' - whole, perfect and uncorrupted;(42)
without the fluid, fertilising bonding of water, air has no means of

Integration with the realm of mother earth, which then can only be regarded
as anathema to spiritual aspiration, hostile and full of painful
limitation:
"The step from three to four brought him sharply up against
something unexpected and alien to his thought, something
heavy, inert, and limited, which no me on [not being) and
no 'privatio boni' can conjure away or diminish."(43)

The Piatonic/thristian legacy of a triadic, 'masculine' spirituality has
of course been continually underpinned by the complementary 'shadow' of
pagan religions. Ficino's re-discovery and promotion of Hermes
Trismegistus and neo-platonic magic heralded a breakthrough of the
'feminine' imaginative aspect of religious experience which promised a
potential healing of the elemental split - indeed this Is the hallmark of
the Renaissance. As a C2iristian priest, his embracing of Lady Minerva can
be seen as a symbolic marriage of spirit and soul in the aichemical alembic
of Philosophy, where viii and desire are one.

1.3. The World-soul

In the Phaedrus Plato presents us with a succinct description of the
nature of soul as an all-pervading cosmic life-force:
"Soul taken as a whole is in charge of all that is animate,
and traverses the entire universe, appearing at different
-24 -

times in different forms. When it is perfect and winged it
moves on high and governs all creation, but the soul that
has shed its wings falls until It encounters solid matter.
There it settles and puts on an earthly body, which appears
to be self-moving because of the power of soul that is in
it, and this combination of soul and body Is given the name
of a living being and is termed mortal."(44)

En the T1aeus Plato tells us that the Demiurge fashioned this soul of
the living god of the world, Its governing principle, from a mixture of the
'indivisible existence' and the 'divisible existence', and the 'same' and
the 'different', thus producing a third kind of independent compound.(45)
He then mixed them Into a single unity, "forcing the Different, which was
by nature allergic to mixture, into unkon with the Same, and mixing both
with Existence." The world-soul is thus three in one, "a revelation or
unfolding of the God-image."(46) Jung points out that Plato makes a subtle
difference between the two oppositions of Indivisible/divisible and
same/different, for there is no suggestion that the divisible has to be
united forcibly in the same manner as the different. Rather, we are
presented with a quaternlo composed of two oppositions, whose middle term
coincides:

iSa.tne-

traivib\t

I

-

Jung suggests that the triad of the Indivisible and the divisible with
their mean corresponds to the condition of abstract thought, which needs
the addition of the second mixture, the same and different, to become
'reality'. This added dimension necessarily involves the incorporation of
that most recalcitrant element, the different:
"The 'Other' is therefore the 'fourth' element, whose
nature it is to be the adversary and to resist harmony.
But the fourth, as the text says, is intimately connected
with Plato's desire for 'being'. One thinks, not
unnaturally, of the impatience the philosopher must have
felt when reality proved so intractable to his ideas."(47)
The common mean between all four opposites, or elements, could also be
seen as the fifth part - the unifying substance of soul which unites the
-25 -

four elements of the body of the world. We could also see the two mixtures
as representing the means of air and water needed to unite the outer
extremes of fire and earth, or in psychological terms the 'masculine' arid
'feminine' aspects of the soul, the latter being most deeply buried
therefore more inaccessible to male consciousness. Whatever archetypal
process 15 being represented in this myth, it is important to realise t.hQt:
Plato would not have been aware of the 'fourth' as a 'problem':
"However extraordinary his genius may have been, it by no
means follows that his thoughts were all conscious ones.
The problem of the fourth, for instance, which is an
absolutely essential ingredient of totality, can hardly
have reached his consciousness in complete form. If it
had, he would have been repelled by the violence with which
the elements were to be forced into a harmonious system.
Nor would he have been so illogical as to insist on the
threefoidness of his world-soul. Again, I would not
venture to assert that the opening words of the Tiinaeus are
a ocnscious reference to the underlying problem of the
recalcitrant fourth. Everything suggests that the same
unconscious spiritus rector was at work which twice
impelled the master to try to write a tetralogy, the fourth
part remaining unfinished on both occasions. This factor
also ensured that Plato would remain a bachelor to the end
of his life, as if affirming the masculinity of his triadic
God-image."(48)
In relation to the Timaeus, it remains to consider the harmonious
structure of the world-soul in terms of niusica rnundana and humana. The
Demiurge divides up the soul-stuff according to the ratios of the three
consonant intervals and then fills it out to complete a musical scale.(49)
It is then cut into two strips which are bent around each other, forming
the circles of the Same and the Different, which contain the spheres of the
fixed stars and the orbiting planets. This strip of the Different is
itself divided into narrower strips which form the basis of the movements
of the individual planets, and are arranged according to the seven numbers
which constitute the two geometrical progressions of 1,2,4,8 and 1,3,9,27.
The corporeal world, that is, the physical bodies of the spheres, is
created within the world-soul:
"and the soul was woven right through from the centre to the
outermost heaven, which it enveloped from the outside and,
revolving on itself, provided a divine source of unending and
rational life for all time. The body of the heaven is
visible, but the soul invisible and endowed with reason and
-26 -

harmony, being the best creation of the best of intelligible
and eternal things."(50)
The planets and the fixed stars move in contrary motion; the planets
move according to the strip of the Different which moves against that of
the Same. Here also we learn that the physical world is a unique copy of
the eternal:
" F The Demiurge) made in that which we call time an eternal
moving image of the eternity which remains for ever at
one • " (51)
Time and movement, in the realm of change, lead to decay, death and
rebirth; the planets, or 'instruments oi time', are, according to Plato,
created in order to define and preserve our b-clti realm and it is
from their movements that man on earth understands 'time'. The Demiurge
constructs the zodiacal sphere of the fixed stars like "a kind of universal
cosmic embroidery"(52) around the heavens, and gives them the two motions
of individual rotation and forward movement within the band as a whole.
Beyond this realm, 'time' is of quite another order; eternal and limnutable.

The Demiurge divides the soul-stuff into "as many souls as there are
stars" and allotts each soul to a star. (53) Plato says that each soul
would be sown in its "appropriate instrument of time", that is, planet, and
that it would return to its native star if it lived a good life:
"And mounting them on their stars, as if on chariots, he
showed them the nature of the universe and told them the
laws of their destiny. To ensure fair treatment for each
at his hands, the first incarnation would be one and the
same for all and each would be sown in its appropriate
instrument of time and be born as the most god-fearing of
living things."(54)

However, the soul which did not refrain from wrong-doing
"would have no respite from change and suffering until he
allowed the motion of the Same and uniform in himself to
subdue all that multitude of riotous and irrational
feelings which have clung to it since its association with
fire, water, air and earth •.. To avoid being responsible
for their subsequent vickednesses he sowed some of them in
the earth, some in the moon and some in all the other
instruments of time •.."(55)
-27 -

and the rest, he left to newly-created gods who fashioned mortal bodies,
and into them, the orbits of the innortal soul. The violent conflict which
ensued when the stream of incorruptibility plunged into the earthly body
caused the motions of the whole being to become "irregular, fortuitous and
irrational". This is the perpetual state of man, caught in a conflict
between the pull of his irrational, mortal part and the awareness of his
essential divine nature. The implication is that the element of the 'same'
retained by each incarnating soul is a particular quality of the fixed star
under which it is born, that is, of the zodiac. It is also allotted a
quality of the 'different', that is from a particular planet, and it is not
difficult to see here the origins of a speculative astrology where the
planetary configurations at the moment of birth mirror the inherent
characteristics of an individual.

In this myth Plato is describing symbolically the very beginning of
Time, when the seeds of all future generations are sown. It would seem
that here we have an esoteric explanation of the fundamental astrological
tenet of the twelve psychological and physical types, and the suggestion
that there is a higher law which determines the time of birth of each
individual so that he may embody the appropriate characteristics for his
unique destiny. In natal horoscopy, not only is each person born under a
particular constellation, but he has a personal 'ruling planet' determined
by his time of birth.(56) According to Plato, this is understood to be the
particular 'instrument of time' to which he is allotted before birth, and
often referred to as his 'guardian spirit'.(57)
In chapter two I shall be exploring in more detail the implications of
the two 'orders' of time, temporal (the realm of change) and eternal
(unchanging) in the context of neo-platonic magic. The framework set out
by Plato in the Tlaaeus provides a powerful image and reference point for
the paradoxical experiences of man as microcosm, who has a foot in both
worlds.

-28 -

1.4 Musica undana
If number is responsible f or perfect harmony, then number must assume a
mystical significance, since audible music founded on the particular
intervallic ratios underlying the cosmic soul will inevitably cause a
sympathetic reaction in the human soul, which Is fashioned from the same
substance. This is vividly expressed by Cornford:
"The living creature (soul and body) is the individual unit
or microcosm; the world, macrocosm, is likewise a living
creature with a body and soul. Individuals reproduce the
whole in miniature; they are not mere fractions, but
analogous parts of the whole which includes them"(58)
That the Pythagoreans equated this hrmon1a with audible music is
attested by Plato in the Republic, where he criticises those who "prefer to
use their ears instead of their minds" to judge intervals:
"for [the Pythagoreansi do j ust what the astronomers do;
they look for numerical relationships in audible concords,
and never get as far as formulating problems and examining
which numerical relations are concordant, which not, and
why. "(59)
As we would expect, for Plato the autonomous theoretical speculation of
the mind was of a superior order to the observations gained from the
'unreliable' senses of vision or hearing, which was not the case for the
Pythagoreans, who evidently in their practical philosophy did not share his
difficulty In attributing value to the sensory realm.(60) Music-making (as
indeed all forms of art) was ideally to be in service to philosophical
insight, a means of reducing the chaos of the human condition by
participating In, not just imitating, the divine pattern - a view shared by
Iris Murdoch:
"The proper activity of the human artist is in simple ways to
discern and emphasize and extend the harmonious rhythms of
divine creation: to produce good design rather than rival
objects ... The decent artist patiently sorts order out of
disorder."(61)
These 'harmonious rhythms', for the musician, are the harmonies of the
spheres themselves. The origins of such a concept are obscure; although
the idea of planetary motion producing harmony must originate In pre-29 -

Pythagorean times, it is from Aristotle, in his lost book on the
Pythagoreans(62) that we learn of their notion that the distances between
planets formed harmonic ratios, and that those furthest from the earth
moved the most rapidly.(63) In On the Heavens(64) Aristotle refutes the
idea that the planets' revolutions give forth real musical harmony,
although he concedes that the idea is "ingeniously and brilliantly
formulated". He states the size and speed of the moving bodies as the
Pythagoreans' evidence that sound Is produced, and says:
"Taking this as their hypothesis, and also that the speeds
of the stars, judged by their distances, are in the ratios
of the musical consonances, they affirm that the sound of
the stars as they revolve is concordant."
Aristotle's criticism is purely empirical, based on natural scientific
observation of moving objects In a medium which Is Itself in motion - he
was not concerned with the need for a metaphorical interpretation. In the
Timaeus, Plato does not imply a system of audible cosmic harmony in the

world soul - it is in the 'Myth of Er'(65) where he suggests the origin of
harrnonia as pitches sounded by sirens positioned on the rims (representing
the planetary orbits) on the spindle of Necessity:
"And on the top of each circle stands a siren, which is
carried round with it and utters a note of constant pitch,
and the eight notes together make up a single scale."(66)
In The Pythagorean Plato(67) Ernest McClain suggests a detailed musical
allegory underlying the myth as a whole, the ratios of the musical
tetraktys being represented by specific periods of time based on the number
ten and seven. He ingeniously presents the idea of a tempered tuning
system In relation to the three Fates, for since they are seated "at equal
distance from one another", this would suggest positions of equallytempered major thirds which are not possible in the Pythagorean system,
hence the adjustment required of Lachesls.(68) The psychological
implications of 'tempering' a scale according to a particular tuning system
In order to preserve certain 'perfect' intervals or avoid discordant ones
are evident if we imagine that the pattern established in the heavens is
that which Is deeply embedded in the human soul. lkCla1n suggests(69) that
Plato understood the necessity for such temperament and how it would be
reflected in society. In the Republlc(70) Plato uses a musical analogy to
-30 -

describe the perfect working order of the ideal state, where selfdiscipline provides the same function as temperance in the maintaining of
balance between all elements:
"Unlike courage and wisdom, which made our state brave and
wise by being present in a particular part of it, selfdiscipline stretches across the whole scale. It produces a
harmony between its strongest and weakest and middle
elements. .
We saw earlier (see pages 21-2) that the process of creation involves
the step from 'one' to 'two', thus initiating a tension of opposing forces
of expansion and contraction. In the Philehus Socrates suggests that the
very foundation of music is to be found in the inherent harmony of these
opposites:
"doesn't [the opposites'l proper integration in height and
depth and speed and slowness, which are indeterminates
create limit, and form the entire foundation of the whole
art of music."(71)
In Jung's hypothesis of the quaternity of elements, held together in a
tensile equilibrium and forming the archetypal pattern of the soul, we can
find a powerful musical analogy. The two 'conscious' and two 'unconscious'
functions can be seen to correspond to the audible overtones and Inaudible
undertones generated from a single pitch, fox division produces the
overtones of the harmonic series by expansion analogously to the creation
of the manifest world out of the One first principle.(72) Iris Murdoch
points out that it Is the Demlurge alone who has direct perception of both
limits, the 'overtones' of creation and the 'undertones' of unconscious,
unmanifest potential, "who can see both ends of the scale of being, the
great uncreated Particulars and the little created ones."(73) The
hypothesis of undertones and their implications has been explored fully by
Joscelyn Godwin who suggests that their postulation is a necessary step
"towards understanding how the musical system can be an intelligible symbol
of the world of Ideas."(74) This is because they 'balance' the audible
reality of overtones by representing their "unmanifested counterpart" in
the realm of the Ideas, or what Jung would term the collective
unconscious.(75) Godwin concludes that
"The twin rows of harmonics represent the universal forces
of contraction (overtones) and expansion (undertones),
-31 -

which for many theosophers are at the very foundation of
Being, and both necessary for Creation to emerge from
Chaos."(76)
He suggests that it is possible that the science of harmonics which was
considered by Plato as the highest form of knowledge(77) is that of
esoteric study of the overtone and undertone series, hinted at by
Iamblichus(78) and expressed in the diagram of the larnbda.(76) The
implications of this extremely complex subject cannot be explored within
the limits of this thesis, but it bears direct relevance to theories of
sympathetic cosmic resonance and musica humana, or the attuning of the
human soul and body to the harmonies inherent in creation, via muslca
Instrumentalis.(80) It would certainly carry implications for 'right
action' and moral responsibility stemming from recognition of the
'undertones' as well as the 'overtones' of psychic existence:
"But our actions also have an exterior result whose
influence spreads out and eventually affects, however
slightly, the entire universe. The latter is part of the
karma (=action) that we create, often disbelieved by the
unphilosophical because, like the undertones, it its
imperceptible or delayed by a long lapse of time, but none
the less a metaphysical necessity. It is symbolically most
apt that we can grasp the overtones with our senses, as we
enclose our body's parts, but not the undertones, since
they belong to the macrocosm outside us."(81)

In Jungian terms, the least differentiated function of the quaternity
can never become wholly conscious, and will be experienced as the most
problematic and threatening aspect of the 'external' world. Depth
psychology recognises that elements belonging to what is now understood as
the 'unconscious' are inevitably projected onto matter, or the cosmos, in
an attempt to reflect back and thus gain some insight into the deeper,
'hidden' workings of the soul.(82) We can see this in operation in the
Pythagorean tradition of planetary scales and intervals, where distances
between the planets correspond to the ratios between notes in a musical
scale.(83) Joscelyn Godwin observes(80) that this theory is fundamentally
a projection into the heavens of a scale system based on the nine-stringed
Greek lyre: "It is an attempt to make the heavens accord with a system of
earthly music, while asserting on the contrary that the earthly system is a

-32 -

result of the heavenly order" which can be represented in the realm of
musica instruenta1is by the monochord.

There is a tradition that Pythagoras himself was able to hear the music
of the spheres - Iamblichus(84) tells us that he understood universal
harmony through intellectual speculation, and then was able to imitate for
his disciples what he perceived through the audible music of voice and
instruments. It is also experienced by Sciplo (in the sixth book of
Cicero's De republica)(85) when, in a dream, his grandfather transports him
to the realm of the fixed stars, whence he looks back at the planetary
spheres and the Earth, and gains a new perspective on the affairs of the
world. Without the restrictions of earth-bound senses, Sciplo can
contemplate the miraculous order of the cosmos and learn of his soul's true
origins. His grandfather testifies that the "great and pleasing sound" he
hears is indeed the music of the spheres:
"That ... is a concord of tones separated by unequal but
nevertheless carefully proportioned intervals, caused by
the rapid motion of the spheres themselves. The high hd
low tones blended together produce different harmonies. Of
course such swift motions could not be accomplished in
silence and, as nature requires, the spheres at one extreme
produce the low tones and at the other extreme the high
tones. Consequently the outermost sphere, the star-bearer,
with its swifter motion gives forth a higher-pitched tone,
whereas the lunar sphere, the lowest, has the deepest tone.
Of course the earth, the ninth and stationary sphere,
always clings to the same position in the middle of the
universe. The other spheres, two of which move at the same
speed, produce seven different tones, this number being, as
might almost say, the key to the universe. Gifted men,
imitating this harmony on stringed instruments and in
singing, have gained for themselves a return to this
region, as have those of exceptional abilities who have
studied divine matters even In earthly life."(87)
Cicero's planetary music would appear to be generated from the motion of
the spheres themselves, not by sirens. It is an audible music which can be
appreciated by the disembodied soul, and in this sense different from the
purely theoretical proportional arrangement as described In the Timaeus.
In Cicero's account earthly music-making has an exalted role indeed,
corresponding to that of philosophical speculation in its potential for reuniting the soul with its divine source. The musical ladder of the octave
Is a powerful analogy for the journey of the soul from Earth to heaven via
-33 -

the steps or tones of the planets, for the eighth step, the octave,
represents the culmination of the journey beyond the sphere of the fixed
stars in the perfection of the Intelligible realm. Cicero compares th
magnitude of sound produced by such a harmony to the sun - for neither may
be directly confronted. The human sense of hearing is too dull to cath
it, as vision is too weak to gaze into the sun's rays; both however may be
recognised through their reflections and echoes by those who are gifted that is already endowed with a particular receptivity - and who develop
particular skills to this end.
The question to be asked, of course, is what it means to be 'gifted'; to
be able to hear the harmonies of heaven and reproduce them on earth. The

whole concept of music therapy, considered from the Platonic standpoint,
becomes central to the psychological integration of the human being. The
notion that soul, connecting the pure Ideas of the divine mind with the
planetary and earthly realms, converts these Ideas into the instrumental
causes which move the sublunary world (to be extensively elaborated by
Plotinus in explanation of 'occult' practices)(88) led Ficino to postulatE
a circuitus spiritualis of energy moving between Mind, Soul and Nature, a
"divine influence emanating from God, penetrating the heavens, descending
through the elements, and coming to an end in lower matter."(89) The
circuit would be completed by the 'plugging in' of the magicianphilosopher, who would know how to use the hidden properties of soul in the
material world and in musical sound for the ultimate aim of re-aligning his
own with God (that is, gaining greater self-knowledge). Man can know of
the interpenetration of the world-soul through its effects in the spiritual
circuit, and 'therapeutic' astrological music can be seen as a way of
working with and on these effects as they are manifest symbolically as
planetary energies in the human psyche - for if a personal natal horoscope
provides an image of the particular concords and discords of the heavens at
the moment of a soul's incarnation, it is not unreasonable to assume that
knowledge of the laws of astrology, musical skill and an active symbolic
imagination could combine in a therapeutic process of considerable
transformative power. Such was the intention of Ficino's Orphic singing.

-34 -

1.5. The Epinomis
An appendix to the Laws, this spurious treatise addresses the question
of the nature of wisdom, and Is directly relevant to the Intrinsic
connection we are making between astrology and music; which is of course
their dependence on number. Whether by Plato or not, the Epinomis contains
a summation of Platonic thought on the fundamental musical and rhythmical
constitution of life itself and man's participation in the eternal cosmic
dance. The kind of wisdom Plato draws our attention to is that which
exceeds all intellectual 'knowledge' and consists of a deep connection to
the fundamental pulsing of nature combined with reverence and awe for the
transcendent principles, or gods, as they are manifest In the bodily
vehicles of the stars and planets. As we shall see in the next chapter, it
Is such a quality of being which Is prerequisite for the effectiveness of
any 'magical' operation intended to achieve psychological harmonisation - a
quality which can be fostered by the right use of the arts whose basis lies
in numerical proportion.
The Athenian begins his investigation into the nature of such wisdom and
the studies required to achieve it by making the clear distinction between
the outer quantitative forms of knowledge-accumulation and the inner
intuition, corm'on to all men if they stop to listen, that there must be
another dimension - the qualitative, 'irrational' element of experience which requires recognition and integration. Such insight, by its very
nature, is ephemeral and easily submerged, proving to be elusive
"as soon as we turn to any of the branches of understanding
which make up the so-called arts, forms of understanding,
or other such fancied sciences. It is as though none of
them all deserved the name of wisdom in the affairs of a
man's life; yet the soul has a confident trust, a prophetic
divination, that she possesses such a native capacity
• . ."(90)(my italics)

Neither is wisdom to be found in the habitual performance of daily
activities or unquestioning acceptance of rules necessary for survival,
such as those concerning meat-consumption, farming, building, hunting and
traditional crafts, nor in the undiscriminating and mechanical relaying of
oracles ("the art of the prophet or his interpreter .. fails us entirely;
he knows only what his oracle says - whether It is true is more than he can
-35 -

tell").(91) Once, the Athenian concedes, the man who fully understood his
relationship to such activities might have been termed wise, but in his
contemporary society such occupations are merely regarded as serviceable or
even denigrated as unworthy of the virtuous man. (92) Similarly, those who
Imitate nature in the arts of music or drawing, show courage in war, skill
in medical diagnoses (based on "fanciful conjecture"), expertise in
seafaring or persuasion in lawcourts do not possess wisdom unless they are
able to refer their particular gift or skill to a higher authority than
that of human opinion and unreliable sense-perception.(93) Most lawyers,
for example "devote themselves to a study of human character based on
memories and empirical fancies, while they are far astray from true
comprehension of genuine rights".(94) Even the man of easy, natural
sagacity, quick intellect, good memory and astute resourcefulness is not
truly wise simply on account of these gualities.(95) In all these types of
applied knowledge or natural 'wit' there Is an essential factor missing,
without which no art or science could transcend human limitations and thus
lead to spiritual growth, and without which no adherence to a belief-system
would ever convince the believer or anyone else of its claims.(96) This is
the knowledge of higher principles which is directly connected to the
science of number, given to mankind by the god Uranus, and freely available
to all through contemplation of the movements of the heavens:
"If a man will but come to the right contemplation of him,
he may call him by the name of Cosmos, Olympus, or Uranus
as he pleases; only let him follow him in his course as he
bespangles himself and wheels his stars through all their
courses in the act of providing us all with seasons and
daily food ... and with the gift of the whole number
series, ... he gives us likewise the rest of understanding
and all other good things. But this is the greatest boon
of all, if a man will accept his gift of number and let his
mind expatiate over the whole heavenly c1rcut."(97)(my
italics)

Number underlies the principles of rational discourse (otherwise there
would be nothing but sensation and memory), all the arts ("all musical
effects manifestly depend upon the numeration of motions and tones"), and
most importantly of all, the natural rhythmic cycles of the universe. (98)
Since the pursuit of wisdom, in the noblest Platonic sense of the
strengthening of the divine part of the soul, depends on rational
discourse, and goodness and happiness depend on wisdom, then it follows
-36 -

that the truly wise man must also be happy and good. The message of the
Epinoinis is that such equilibrium is to be achieved through one discipline
only: the understanding of numerical proportion through the practice of
astronomy. Evil and unhappiness are equated with the disorder and chaos
which manifests when events and activities are "destitute of number" and
degenerate into undisciplined and unrhythmical outbursts of "tuneless
movernent".(99) In this sense, number can be equated with virtue, which
could be defined as the regulation of disorderly impulses within human
nature and the cultivation of nasure and proportion in thought, word and
deed.

We only have to begin, says the Athenian, with the observation of the
rhythmical cycle of night and day (reflecting the numerical equivalent of
one to two) and the Moon's period of waxing and waning. The phenomena of
such repetitive cycles in nature, such as the months combining to form the
year, give living creatures "a general insight into the relations of number
with number" at a most profound level of their experience.(lOO) If
anything upsets the natural rhythms with their infallible provision for
mankind's wellbeing, it is to be attributed to Ignorant human interference
and man's inability to order his life within the immutable scheme of the
elements, and not to the whim of an angry deity.

The essential ingredient of the intuitive wisdom being advocated is that
quality of soul which stems from the direct apprehension that there is a
greater power at work in the ordering of human lives than the personal will
of the individual; namely, piety.(101) The expression of reverence for
such a power needs concrete enactment, while we are in an embodied
condition, through ritual worship Involving prayers and hymns.(102) A
conscious attitude of humility Is required If man truly wishes to purge
away the earth-bound, acquisitive part of his nature, and to discover the
gods' will demands an open, alert attitude of enquiry and attention.
Clinlas and the Athenian demonstrate this in their prayer to the gods
before they embark on discussing them - for in making an intentional
connection with forces not usually accessible to human awareness they are
stimulating their own capacity for Insight into their nature, in order to
represent them as truthfully as possible.(103)

-37 -

There follows a survey of the Platonic dichotomy between solid matter
and invisible soul, with the elemental hierarchy extending like a ladder
between earth and heaven. Each layer contains its own form of living
creature composed from a varying proportion of of elements; from the human
being with his predominance of earth to the fiery daemons who inhabit the
stars.(104) Ficlrio, in his Epitome 1 elaborates the orders of creatures into
a twelve-fold system, making a direct correspondence between stars and men
which suggests the differentiation implicit in the twelve signs of the
zodiac:
"For (Plato] wishes there to be twelve spheres and twelve
souls beyond the one soul of the whole world: then twelve
orders of souls in each sphere. In heaven, these orders
are constellations and stars, on earth, men: in the aether,
air and water they are of course the more lofty
daemons."(105)
The earth-bound nature is disorderly and unintelligent, in comparison
with the uniformity, autonomy and intelligence of the stars, demonstrated
by the immutable laws governing their movements. It is the role of Fate to
watch over "the full accomplishment of all that each and every god has
determined with perfect good counsel."(106) We could say that to be fatebound is to be star-bound(107) - that is, to regard the operation of cosmic
laws in relation to earthly creatures as limiting and restricting rather
than liberating, which can only be achieved through a consenting arid
willingness to participate in what they decree - the implications of which
will be explored more fully in the next two chapters. To free oneself from
an attitude of fatalistic determinism and grasp the true principles at work
requires a 'turning upside down' of habitual thinking(108) - man, says the
Athenian, erroneously believes that human beings are intelligent precisely
because they are of a mutable nature, and considers the heavens to be
devoid of intelligence because they appear immutable - but this is not the
case, for
"that which eternally does the same acts, in a uniform way
and for the same reasons, is for that very reason to be
deemed intelligent ... as (the stars] move through the
figures of the fairest and most glorious of dances they
accomplish their duty to all living creatures."(109)

-38 -

For Plato the presence of soul in the heavenly bodies is proved by the
accuracy of their movements in relation to their "amazing magnitude"; and
if they are divine then they are worthy of worship either as gods in
themselves, or as images fashioned by the gods in their likeness.(l1O)
Their messages are transmitted through the variety of spirits and daemons
which invisibly inhabit the elements of air and aether, and those watery
demi-gods who are sometimes visible to man (Ficino adds "of course, rather
by internal sight than external").(lll) Although such spirits, being
partly of material constitution, are not exempt from suffering, the stellar
and planetary gods are "possessed of an all-embracing wisdom and
knowledge"(112) from whose perspective all earthly trials and misfortunes
are seen as part of a larger, ultimately harmonious, pattern. The
interaction of the daemonic realm with the human may give rise to what we
may term 'occult' phenomena, and this isan area to which no one may
attempt to apply rational explanations nor confine within the bounds of
legislation:
"When it comes to beliefs of individuals or whole societies
originating in the Intercourse of some [of the daemonsl
with us - appearances in dreams of the night, oracular and
prophetic voices ... no legislator of even the slenc3erest
sense will presume to innovate, and so divert his city to a
devoutness with no sure foundations. Nor yet will he
prohibit obedience to the inherited usages about
sacrifices, since in this matter he has no knowledge
whatsoever, as, indeed, 'tis impossible that mankind should
have any."(fl3)

The Sun and Moon command our attention because of their visibility and
evident rulership over life and generation. But we are reminded by the
Athenian that the remaining five planets are equally worthy of respect and
worship as gods who play a necessary part in the ordering of human
affairs; (114) again it is stressed that only the art of astronomy will lead
to a unified mind, for only by contemplating the order of the whole cosmos
as an intricate but perfect expression of the unity or oneness of the
creator can the human soul find such a unity reflected within itself. Such
a glimpse will evoke desire, not merely intellectual curiosity; that is, it
will involve the participation of the irrational soul and stir the erotic
connecting force of love which for Plato was prerequisite for beginning the
spiritual quest:

-39 -

"In the happy man this order (in the heavens] awakens first
wonder, and then the passion to learn all of it that
mortality may, for 'tis thus, as he believes, he will spend
his days best and with most good fortune, and after his
decease reach the proper abodes of virtue."(115)

The Athenian stresses again that the virtue of piety is learnt through
astronomy - the observation and measurement of the heavens must lead to a
heartfelt desire for active worship of the divine principles revealed,
otherwise it remains on the level of theoretical abstraction criticised at
the beginning of the dialogue. The true astronomer, he says, must be a man
of great wisdom who has not just observed the visible settings and risings
of the Sun anciJ400n, but who has trained his capacities to comprehend the
orbits of all seven planets through the application of arithmetic, geometry
and stereometry.(1l6) "Numbers are indeed incorporeal in themselves",
Ficino points out,(117) "since they are none other than a return to unity,
and this is indivisible." In metaphysical terms, the return to 'the one'
is the ultimate aim of the soul, and the Epinornis leaves us with the
injunction that if man pursues his studies focussed on a single end and
purpose, he will come to understand the unity underlying all geometric
constructions, number systems, melodic progressions and schemes of
celestial revolutions:
"As such a man reflects, he will receive the revelation of
a single bond of natural interconnection between all these
problems.... (such a man will have] reduced the manifold
within himself to unity."(118)

Ficino's Epitome chiefly presents an elucidation of the dialogue, with
confirmations from Orpheus, Hermes and other writers and one or two
personal interpolations and excursions; in particular, concerning the
twelve-fold division of the heavens (see page 38 above) and the equating of
the musical ratios underlying the intervals of fifth and fourth to the
distances between earth to Sun and Sun to firmament, according to
Pythagorean tradition.(119) In his introduction Ficino emphasises that a
"perfect disposition of mind", a prerequisite for happiness, consists in
both speculative wisdom and practical religious ritual.(120) The
worshipful attitude towards the divine truths perceived through
intellectual energising is vital, for in order to regulate any potential
hubristic tendencies or intellectual arrogance, acknowledgment of and
-40 -

reverence for the 'irrational' elements in experiential religion - the
experience of faith - is essential.(121) Such a form of knowledge is
innate and natural to the soul and only has to be uncovered and fostered
for a desire for the good to emerge and lead the soul to a more unitied
condition, as it recognises the corresponding unity in incorporeal things.
It is not until his later writings, in particular the Commentary on
Iarnblichus' De mysterlis Aegyptiorum, that Ficino explores more fully the
implications of such a way of knowing through similitude (notio and
aedequatio), which we shall consider in more detail in chapter three.

PART TWO: HERNES

1.6. The Corpus Hermeticurn
Now let us turn to the development of Platonic cosmology in the early
centuries A.D., and in doing so, begin examination of the mode of knowledge
embodied in the Corpus Hermeticwn (which will be continued in more depth in
chapter two), together with the attributes of Hermes as a mythological
figure. It was in the adaptation and elaboration of Platonic concepts that
the neo-platonic and Hermetic authors provided rich soil for the
Renaissance flowering of occult and magical arts, and cultivated the seed,
already sown by their master, of a 'psychological' application of
astrological principles.

In 1463 Cosimo de' Medici instructed the young Ficino to set aside his
intended translations of Plato and work immediately on a Latin version of
part of the Corpus Hermeticuin.(1) This treatise was included in a
manuscript brought to Florence from M3cedonia by a monk who had been
employed by Cosimo in his search for Creek texts. Ficino tells us in his
Preface to the Commentaries on Plotlnus(2) that Cosimo had been lnsi:>lred to
found the Platonic Academy by the teachings of the Platonist Cemisthus
Pletho who came to Florence for the Council of Florence in 1438.(3) P.O.
Kristeller(4) suggests that it was from Pletho that Ficino derived the idea
of the prisca theologia - certainly Pletho's visit to Italy can be seen as
sowing the seed of a revival of interest in classical paganism, opening and
enlivening the debate on the rival virtues of Aristotle and Plato. Both
-41 -

Cosimo and Ficino felt a profound excitement at the disovery of the Corpus
Hermeticum, which they believed to stem from the hand of Hermes
Trismegistus, the Greek name for the Egyptian god Thoth whose sacred books
were believed to be the source of wisdom of the Egyptian priests who
instructed both Pythagoras and Plato.(5) Ficino, on the authority of St.
Augustine,(6) supposed Hermes to be the great-grandson of a contemporary of
Moses who drank from the same fount of wisdom. In the ancient theology he
found a vehicle for philosophical truth in the same way that Christianity
was for religious truth, and both these modes of expression - which
connected intellectually and intuitively with transcendent realities found their common source In Moses.(7)
Various supposedly pre-antique texts, including the Greek Chaldaean
Oracles attributed to Zoroaster by Plethd(8) and first translated into

Latin by Ficirio, and the Hermetic Latin Asclepius (translated by psuedoApuleius) were already In circulation.(9) Renaissance scholars had the
excellent authority of St. Augustine and Lactantius(1O) that Hermes
predated Plato (the fragments and Hymns attributed to Orpheus were not
known until the 15th century via the translations of Proclus).(1l) In the
Asclepius Ficino would have read about the magic rites of 'ancient

Egyptian' religious practices, particularly those involving statueanlmating,(12) and in the Chaldaean Oracles, of the summoning of daemons
and Sun-worship. The men of the Renaissance would have had no reason to
disbelieve the authorities of the Church Fathers regarding the venerable
origins of such texts, and their supposed authors came to be considered as
early representatives of an ancient wisdom which appeared not only to
confirm the truth of Christianity but also to spring from a common source.
Ficino often refers to this genealogy, specifying the members on four
occasions:(13) in the Preface to his translation of the Corpus Hermeticuni
of 1462, he gives the order of these prisci theologi or ancient theologians
as Mercurius Trismegistus, Orpheus, Aglaophemus, Pythagoras, Philolaus,
Plato; in his Philebus Commentary (c.1469) and in Book XVII of the
Theologia Platonica (c.1474) he inserts Zoroaster as the initiator and
omits Philolaus, extending the series into the various neo-platotiic schools
including those of Plotinus and Proclus. Finally in the Preface to
Plotinus (1484) he says:

-42 -

"It was clearly the will of divine providence to recall all
men to herself in a wonderful way through the spirit of
individual leaders: so it once came about that a holy
philosophy was born among the Persians through the
influence of Zoroaster and among the Egyt1ans through
Hermes, a philosophy at one with itself in both places. It
was then nourished among the Thracians through Orpheus and
Aglaophemus, quickly grew up under the guidance of
Pythagoras among the peoples of Greece and Italy, and was
finally brought to fulfilment by the divine Plato at
Athens."(14)

Since Hermes' wisdom was considered to be none other than the source of
Plato's own, it is not surprising that Cosimo urgently requested the
translation of this newly-discovered work, which Ficino completed shortly
before his patron's death.

In fact, to quote Frances Yates, this premise was "a huge historical
error"(15) since it is now considered that both the Hermetic and Orphic
texts emerged out of Greek gnostic and neo-Pythagorean sects of the second
to third century A.D. - to quote D.P. Walker, "a Hellenistic amalgam of
Platonism, Stoicism, Judaism and christianity, set in a gnostic and magical
framework".(16) Frances Yates has discussed the origins and influences of
the Asclepius and other astrological/alchemical 'hermetic' texts, together
with the implications of their magical content for the early Christian
Church and the Medieval philosopher-theologians. She points out that the
age in which they originated, the age of the early gnostic Christians and
the neo-platonists, tended strongly towards a intuitive, mystical and
magical knowledge of reality:
"Since reason seemed to have failed, it sought to cultivate
the t4ous, the intuitive faculty In man. Philosophy was to
be used, not as a dialectical exercise, but as a way of
reaching intuitive knowledge of the divine and of the
meaning of the world . . "(17)

Other scholars have produced convincing evidence that the ideas in the

Herrnetica are indeed of Egyptian origin,(18) and certainly for Ficino their
pedigree was beyond question - Egypt was a golden land where wisdom arose
from unity of Intuition and intellect, where priests were philosophers of
the highest order.(19) However, it is not the historical authenticity
which concerns us, but the content. Of greatest importance for Ficino was
-43 -

the intuitive mysticism of Hermes which offered such a complement and
contrast both to the dogma of the Church and the rigorous rationalism of
idealist philosophy. The fourteen treatises of the Corpus Herrneticum were
translated by Ficino under the general title of Pimander. The tenor of
these profoundly seif-examinatory texts - "a religious philosophy or
philosophical rellgion"(20) - is revelatory, teaching that the individual
can reach personal illumination through the intimate master-disciple
relationship, contemplating the macrocosm of the universe as it is
reflected in the microcosm of his own soul. Here Ficino would indeed have
found confirmation of the esoteric Platonic undercurrents which struck such
a deep chord in his own heart - and confirmation of the efficacy of
'philosophical' magic. He knew that the wisdom of the ancient theologians
was concealed beneath symbols, numbers, images and allegories so that it
should not fall into the hands of those wo would abuse it by
misunderstanding,(21) and it is important to bear this in mind when
considering the apparent contradictions and confusions in Ficino's own
writings on astrology, an art whose true potential as a tool for
psychological insight was (indeed has always been) often ignored, submerged
in a sea of superstitious and ignorant credulity.

1.7. Hermes and iytholoqy
In Greek mythology the primary role of Hermes, the brother of Apollo, is
that of messenger.(22) Swift and cunning, armed with winged shoes and cap
of invisibility, he knows how to deceive and how to avoid being caught,
defined or restrained. He is the god who brings the 'lucky chance', the
unexpected benefit, and who snatches it away. He is the communicator, the
seductive manipulator of lovers' intrigues, of the persuasive businessman.
He is also psychopomp, and the guide of all travellers. It is said in the
Homeric Hyinn(23) that he invented the lyre before giving it to Apollo, and

in the words of Otto "Nothing can give better expression to the gay and at
the same time darkly mysterious, enchanting, and tender elements in Hermes
that the magically sweet tones of lyre or flute."(24) It is important to
recognise these original Hermetic characteristics, as they became
transmuted, refined and subdued in the esoteric, mysterious figure of
Hermes Trismegistus at the end of the pagan era.
-44 -

Ginette Paris likens Hermes' particular kind of intuitive, 'irrational'
intelligence with the Greek metis:
"Synonymous with prudence, reflection and wisdom, metis is
the opposite of deductive knowledge and is contrary to the
linear logic of Apollo ... Rooted in an inner knowledge, an
intuitive perception of contexts, and a sense of intimacy
with all of nature's ways, it belongs to mythic thought,
where logic does not apply. This is Hermes' brand of
intelligence which he gets from the Goddess Metis herself
and shares with the great seductresses Aphrodite, Pandora,
kriadne, the sorceress Medea, the magician Circe, the
strategist Athena ... and many Greek heroes, including
Ulysses. "(25)

The image of Zeus ruling with the wisdom of Metis advising him from his
belly(26) is a powerful one, for In connecting the two modes of 'heady'
intellectualism and 'gut' iritinct a paradoxical mixture arises, which
contains the immediacy of intuitive illumination and practical 'sleight of
hand' in equal measure. It is a kind of savoir-faire which cannot be
reduced to either the blind instinct of Dionysos or the uncompromising
logos of Apollo, the personifications of chaos and reason in their most

extreme forms. Metis transcends both - she sees with an inner vision, not
through processes of thought. She grasps the truth unexpectedly, intuiting
the meaning of signs and symbols, instinctively grasping the 'right moment'
for action, moving obliquely with the ability to connect the significance
of random events which cannot be proved or reduced to a logical coherent
system. Hers is a wisdom which can only be experienced to be understood,
not objectively considered from a distance. 'Wily Odysseus' has metis, as
do Nestor arid Antilochus in the Iliad.(27) This particular kind of
Hermetic wisdom can be seen to contribute to a particular attitude which
can be brought to any activity or belief system, which would not seem
unconnected to the quality of intuitive wisdom advocated in the Epinomis.
Nor is it unrelated to the mode of being required for any act of
divination, augury or oracular prediction where everything depends on the
quality of the individual's participation and Interaction with the
'moment'. As Iris Murdoch puts it:
"The truth which we can grasp is something quiet, small in
extent, arid to be found only in the lived real moment of
direct apprehension out of which the indirectness of
mimetic art arid writing and perhaps language and discursive
thought itself always tends to remove us."(28)(my italics)
-45 -

The writings attributed to the Thrice-great Hermes reveal a mode of
thought which is mythic in that it seeks to reconnect and sythesise both
experience and knowledge to a common source, not to separate and analyse
with the scalpel of pure Apolline rigour. Ficino himself draws attention
to the practical experience, rather than intellectual knowledge, contained
in Hermes' writings - experience which depends directly on an intuitive
wisdom which is innate to the soul since it is "naturally implanted by the
gods".(29) The secret of happiness, says Ficino in an early letter to
Antonio Miniatensi,(30) lies in following the practical lifestyle of
Socrates and Christ, the two supreme representatives of philosophical dnd
religious truth. Hermetic wisdom is all-embracing yet never static as in
the flow of consciousness, showing an acute awareness of the fluctuation of
the human condition yet never losing sight of the one connective principle
underlying the diversity of categorisatior. Ficino was to examine closely
the nature of such wisdom in his Commentary on Iamblichus' De mysteriis, to
be discussed in chapter three.

Astronomically, Mercury is the closest planet to the Sun, and
astrologically he is considered to act in harness with the Sun, being of "a
common nature".(31) The not inconsiderable implications of this are that
true 'solar' consciousness must include the depth and penetrative insight
of Hermetic intuition, and it is hardly surprising that the metaphor of
light to communicate such a faculty of inward 'seeing' was such a powerful
one for those prisci theologi who possessed it. But Hermes does not only
perceive, he communicates his insights through the power of rhetoric. The
Eperor Julian, one of Ficino's neo-platonic sources, calls on Hermes in
his Hymn to King Helios(32) to aid him in his endeavour to express what is
ultimately inexpressible, and to guard him against the ever-present danger
of hubris through mis-representing or restricting the natures of the gods
with inappropriate language. As Ficino emphasises in the Liber de
vita, (33) words carry a power which is to be respected and directed to

beneficial ends - this, too is the domain of Hermes. That he himself
possessed such a gift is confirmed by the eloquence and subtle wit of his
voluminous correspondence, which soars beyond personal sentiment to an
overwhelming concern for communicating universal truth to humanity.
Accessibility of his particular message was of paramount importance,
whether (to cite just four examples) via the weighty, scholarly argument of
-46 -

the Theologia Platonica, terse, uncompromising prose of the Disputatia
contra iudicium astrologorum (to be discussed in chapter three), clear,
practical advice of the Liber de vita or subtle, poetic nuance and inttaphor
of the Liber de Sole. In his Preface to the latter, whose slendur size
belies its significance as Ficino's final triumphant homage to the light of
consciousness, he stresses in true Mercurial fashion that the work is
"allegorical and mystical rather than dogmatic" and that his approach to
the task is not "by rational arguments" but "by certain comparison dedu€'i
from the llght".(34)

1.8. The aichemical Mercurius
"Mercurius is the light-bringing Nous, who knows the secret
of transformation and immortality"(35)

Ficino's disciple Pico della Mirandola wrote to him in 1488 urging hiri
to meet again for philosophical discussion, praising his master's wisdom in
terms which suggest the two men's familiarity with the aichemical
significance of Saturn/Mercurius in their mutual quest:
"Whatever it was which took you away from me, or rather,
took me away from myself, I beg you to come back later, so
that that which once united us should not separate us; and
also may you always believe you can come to discuss occult
matters [faturuin], you who I eagerly desire and thirst for,
solace of my life, delight of my mind, establisher of laws,
master of learning. Farewell and come, so that your
Saturnine nous, that is, fit to discuss occult matters, may
render me able to speak of them also ... (36)

Of crucial importance is the role of Hermes/Mercurius in the aichemical
tradition, whose practices found their theoretical and philosophical basis
in the writings of Hermes Trismegistus. The psychological significance of
the alchemical opus in relation to Ficino will become apparent in chapter
four, and here it is appropriate to outline the esoteric dimension of the
wily god, whose very changeability and multiformity suited perfectly the
ambiguous and paradoxical nature of the occult work of chemical
transmutation. In doing so I shall refer to Jung's exhaustive studies oii
alchemy (Psychology and Alchemy, Alchemical Studies, Hysterium
Coniunctionis).
-47 -

For the alchemist, Mercurius was synonymous with the essential power of
the philosophers' stone itself:
"The ability to 'become all', attributed to the Son of God,
is an attribute not only of the pneunia but of the
alchemical Mercurius, whose boundless powers of
transformation are praised in accordance with the
versatility of the astrological Mercury. He is the materia
lpidis, the transforming substance par excellence, and is
said to penetrate all bodies like a poison."(37)
Mercurius was first understood as the substance of quicksilver, or
Mercurius vulgaris.

The object of aichemical procedure was to extract from

this the Mercurius philosophicus, an arcane essence present in the metal
yet different from it.(38) This could be referred to as the 'soul' of the
metal, and was given a variety of syno-iyms such as the 'divine water',
dragon, fiery lion, night raven and black eagle.(39) It was also
understood as the fire found in the centre of the earth, revelatory light
of nature, and even hell-fire itself.(40) The moral ambivalence of
Mercurlus, who personified appears as devil, trickster, son of Saturn,
psychopomp or divine messenger, is a reflection of his potency as a symbol
of all conceivable opposites. Yet he also symbolises their unity, an
"undividedness impervious to contradictions"(41) arid thus uy embody a
powerful healing force in the alchenuical work, which was undoubtedly aimed
at psychological unity.

Mercurius also represents the mirror-image of Christ, in that they are
the archetypes of the unconscious and consciousness. As the Hermetic
filius microcosnii he unites above and below by ascending to heaven and
returning to earth as the messenger of divine secrets, in a contrary
movement to that of Christ.

This continual circular movement is commonly

represented by the uroboros, or serpent biting its own tail.(42) As
psychopomp, Mercurius leads to the riches of the realm of Pluto, a
territory which must be explored by any heroic consciousness questing for
the grail, or philosophical lapis, if he wishes to achieve psychic
unity: (43)
"Hesitantly, as in a dream, the introspective brooding of
the centures gradually put together the figure of Mercurius
arid created a symbol which, according to all the
psychological rules, stands in a complementary relation to
christ ... its object is to throw a bridge across the abyss
-48 -

separating the two psychological worlds by presenting a
subtle compensatory counterpoint to the Christ image."(44)
From the christian perspective, Mercurius would seem to stand for
everything that is dark and obscure if not downright evil, for dogrtic
christianity (not, arguably, the authentic christ-figure) affirms the
supremacy of light and spiritual purification over the turbulent powers of
the nature. In the process of following such a religion, or any idealist
philosophy, consciousness is clarified and refined through a
differentiation of mind from matter, but only at the expense of rejecting
and denigrating the gods of the earth, who will then take their revenge.
Jung explains this is psychological terms:
"clarification of consciousness necessarily entails an
obscuration of those dimmer elements of the psyche which
are less capable of becoming conscious, so that sooner or
later a split occurs in the psychic system. Since it is
not recognised as such it is projected, and appears in the
form of a metaphysical split between the powers of light
and the powers of darkness."(45)
The alchemists understood Mercurius as a symbol to heal this split for
in his paradoxical nature he represents the conflict of opposites within
the individual psyche.(46) In his duality he embodies both rational soul
and inspirational pneuma, uniting the knowledge of the head and the heart,
or intellectual philosophy with religious revelation.(47) Jung points out
that when psychic transformation is consciously undergone the experience is
one of numinous intensity, and then Mercurius arises in his guise of the
Holy Ghost, or the archetype of wisdom, Sapientia.(48) His hermaphroditic
nature can be expressed as One either through the unity of the three
elements of the masculine trinity, or through the quaternity of the lapis,
which with the added fourth element incorporates the chthonic feminine
aspect of existence.(49) As the principle of wholeness underlying both
three and four-fold aspects of existence he is "the Logos become world", or
the anima mundi suffused throughout creation.(50)

The active, conscious, masculine element of Mercurius is Sol, often
represented by the personifications of King, Father, or Son, whilst the
feminine, unconscious, passive aspect is Luna, personified as Queen,
Mother, Daughter, Church or Virgin.(51) As the Moon has no light of its
-49 -

own but reflects that of the Sun, so the territory of Luna may only be
known through the penetrating light of consciousness, which lies in
potential within the unconscious "like a child inside the mother".(52) The
birth of consciousness from the dark womb of chaos gave rise to powerful
archetypal myths of the divine child, and the re-connection of the 'heroic'
masculine with the feminine element from which he was born arid from which
he struggles to differentiate is a task facing all men in their journey
towards individuation, or psychic completeness. In Gnosticism Saturn is
recognised as the child of chaos,(53) Saturn who is Mercurius senex, the
'old King' who must die to be transformed into Mercurius, the new birth of
consciousness. This was indeed the new meaning that Ficino found in Saturn
through struggling with his melancholy temperament, a task which was given
symbolic significance by the prominence of the planet in his natal
horoscope, situated on the Ascendant in Aquarius.(54) The symbol of
Saturn, as an aichemical/astrological 'projection', gave Ficino the key to
self-knowledge as he continually found meaning in the cycles and supposed
influences of the planet in his own life. It is interesting to note that
after a period of profound inner turmoil in his twenties, Ficino was
presented with the task of translating Hermes Trismegistus at the age of
twenty-nine, the completion of the first Saturn cycle or 'Saturn return' in
his life, a time of discrimination and rejection of outworn parental valuesystems and the re-birth of an individual sense of destiny. From this
moment, his vocation to unite spirit and soul took root, and he was to
spend the rest of his life in service to the ideal of the transcendent
unity of philosophy and religion.
But Mercurius demands the integration of matter, in that man is an
embodied creature dependent on the earth: "no more than we can separate the
constituents of character from the astronomical determinants of time are we
able to separate that unruly and evasive Mercurius from the autonomy of
matter."(55) His astrological glyph (
three-fold nature (Sun 0 Moon

) graphically illustrates his

Earth e . It was only at the very end

of his life that Ficino was led to pay his debt to the earth, in the
medical/aichemical Liber de vita. However, for reasons which demand a
fuller psychological investigation, the descent to the underworld was never
fully undertaken - the feminine never redeemed in her earthly guise.
Instead, Ficino embraced Lady Wisdom and Mother church, and his final
-50 -

apotheosis took literary form in panegyrics to the Sun and Light.(56) The
abyss was to be regarded with "clarity and compassion",(57) not entered
into for the sake of its own dark, instinctual wisdom, and Ficino, as
torchbearer of consciousness to Western man, could but embrace his role to
the hilt. Here he necessarily parts company with the journey of depth
psychology: "Never", he wrote to Lorenzo de' Medici, "have I impiously sung
of ... Proserpine, snatched into the underworld" but rather
"I have honoured .. that doctor of souls from Tarsus [St.
Paul] who was carried off into the world above. And I have
not ... depicted the ill-fated seizure of Helen, that is
earthly appearance, but, as is the way of the Platonists, I
have depicted the sublime upward soaring of the heavenly
mind. " (58)
However, the alchemists understood a further truth (and many risked
their lives for it), that only "at the bottom of the abyss comes the voice
of salvation."(59)

1.9. The Pimander

Let us now look at the account of the creation and the nature of man in
the Pimander, to see how it may provide the framework for an elaboration of
a 'psychological' understanding of astrology, and the model for the
alchemical coniunctio of mind and soul. First of all, a summary of the
physical and spiritual constitution of the Platonic cosmos, which will set
the context for the Hermetic myth.
It is believed that the knowledge of the planets arid their order in the
heavens came from Babylon, introduced into Greece before Plato but after
Anaximander (c.600 B.C.), probably around 440 BC.(60) The division of the
ecliptic (the Sun's apparent path through the heavens as viewed from Earth)
into the twelve zodiacal signs or sections of thirty degrees was a
Babylonian invention brought to Greece before 400 B.C.(61) It is possible
that the generally accepted planetary order of Earth, Moon, Mercury, Venus,
Sun, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn was determined by Pythagoras; this is the order
given by Cicero and called 'chaldean' by Macrobius.(62) In Plato and
Aristotle(63), Venus and Mercury are positioned above the Sun, Macrobius'
-51 -

'Egyptian' order.(64) Physically, Platonic cosmology gives us a model of
seven planetary spheres around the Earth, the eighth sphere of the fixed
stars (the zodiac) and the Intelligible sphere of God beyond. From the
complementary spiritual perspective, the cosmos is ordered in hierarchies
of Divine Mind (the pure intelligence of God), the World Soul (the allpervading, active principle which conveys and converts Ideas into causes in
the sublunar realm), Nature (the four elements - corruptible, compounded of
both intelligible forms and matter) and Matter (lifeless, unformed raw
material). Within this basic four-fold hierarchical structure there could
be an almost infinite variety of sub-divisions, yet the overriding vision
was of a manifest creation which, through the agency of soul, returned back
to the One divine source in a constant circular process of emanation,
conversion and reversion.

The vision of the origin and destiny of the soul in the Corpus
Kerzneticum owes much to the Pythagorean influence on the Timaeus - for
Ficino, it was Plato who was inspired by Hermes. In the Hermetic text we
read that in the beginning there was Mind, which gave birth to the Maker,
and this second Mind made out of fire and air seven
Administrators, who encompass with their orbits the world
perceived by sense; and their administration is called
Destiny ... And Man took station in the Maker's sphere [the
highest sphere of heaven], and observed the things made by
his brother [the planets], who was set over the region of
fire; and having observed the Maker's creation in the
region of fire, he willed to make things for his own part
also; and his Father gave permission ... having in himself
all the working of the Administrators; and the
Adninistrators took delight in him, and each of them gave
him a share of their own nature ... And having learnt to
know the being of the Administrators, and received a share
of their nature, he willed to break through the bounding
circle of their orbits; and he looked down through the
structure of the heavens, having broken through the [lunar]
sphere, and showed to downward-tending nature the beautiful
form of God. And Nature, seeing the beauty of the form of
God, smiled with insatiate love of Man, showing the
reflection of that most beautiful form in the water, an its
shadow on the earth. And he, seeing this form, a form like
to his own, in earth and water, loved It, arid and willed to
dwell there. And the deed followed close on the design;
arid he took up his abode in matter devoid of reason. And
Nature, when she had got him with whom she was in love,
wrapped him in her clasp, and they were mingled in one; for
they were in love with one another."(65)[my italics]
-52 -

It is important to stress that we are dealing with a symbolic cosmology,
a 'poetic metaphor' for an intangible but intense human experience of a
transcendent reality, a myth which provides a vivid image of a profound
human dilemma. Jung understands the ascent and descent of the soul to
represent the aichemical ascent to consciousness, or unity, and the descent
to reality: "He who ascends unites the powers of Above and Below arid shows
his full power when he returns again to earth".(66) The mingling of
rational man with the powers of nature, the meeting of fire and earth, male
and female, thinking and feeling, light and dark, cannot be achieved
without a third unifying factor, for as perceived by the Emperor Juliari,
the soul and body pull in opposite directions:
"For (man's] is a two-fold contending nature of soul and
body compounded into one, the former divine, the latter
dark and clouded. Naturally, thefefore, there is a battle
and a feud between them."(67)
Such a feud results in a state of continual tension in which "all things
which come into being are full of perturbations, seeing that the very
process of coming into being involves perturbation."(68) Clearly a mean
must be found to enable man to live creatively within this perpetual battle
between reason and instinct, and the solution, known to the alchemist and
the neoplatonic magician, lay in the soulful realm of the imagination which
was activated in the practice of their chemical experiment, or through
talismanic magic, ritual invocations and hymn-singing and other theurgic
ceremonial. They understood that the imagination provides a 'middle area'
where Images may safely be held and processed, and thus may hold the key to
the resolution of the tension between the opposing forces within the
psyche. We can of course make the connection between this resolution and
the mode of knowledge advocated in the Epiriomis, where underlying the
insistence on the importance of ritual worship is perhaps the notion that
such practices could provide for such an synthesis of head and heart
through the imaginative use of symbol and image.

The Administrators referred to in the Pimander are of course the
planets, who through the active agency of soul, have endowed the soul of
man with particular qualities before he is incarnate on earth:
"It is the swiftness of the movement of the Kosmos that
causes the diversity of the births. For the cosmic life-53 -

breath, working without intermission, conveys into the
bodies a succession of qualities, and therewith makes the
universe one mass of life."(69)
We are introduced to the idea that the planets in some way control the
destiny of the sensible world, but that man has responsibility arid choice.
It is man who desires to create after the fashion of the Maker, and man who
uses his will to leave the divine realm and become embodied and 'mingled'
with Nature on earth. According to Platonic tradition(70) the individual
soul selects his particular life, which will reflect the the purpose of its
incarnation. This is why, continues Hermes, man is twofold, immortal by
reason of his soul arid mortal by reason of his body - "he is exalted above
the structure of the heavens; yet he is born a slave of Destiny".(7l) The
crucial point here is that the eternalpart of man is ultimately immune to
the play of fate, which comes into operation once his soul is embedded in
the gross matter of the body, with all its irrational impulses and natural
appetites. However, because the original divine part of man is his reason,
a strengthening of this faculty will allow a more conscious participation
in and responsible manipulation of the inevitable downward pull of fate.
Hermes says
"All men are subject to destiny, in as much as all are
subject to birth and death ... and all men undergo what
destiny has appointed for them; but rational men (that is,
those who ... are governed by mind), do not undergo it in
the same way as the irrational ... It is impossible for a
man to escape from his destined death, just as it is
impossible for him to escape from his destined birth; but
from wickedness a nun can escape, if he has mind in
him. " C 72)
In other words, there is a choice to be made, a path to be followed
which will lead one closer to the divine part of one's being arid thus
closer to God within the confines of our given mortal span. It is the
"gods who circle in the heavens"(73) who determine the destiny of our
earthly lives, and their rule is paradoxically inexorable yet everchanging. At death, in the Hermetic account, a nun's soul travels back
through the heavenly spheres discarding the evil attributes of each planet
to the appropriate body, thus freeing himself from the contamination
acquired by his orginal fall from the purity of the eighth sphere:

-54 -

"And to the first zone of heaven [i.e. Moon] he gives up
the force which works increase and that which works
decrease; to the second zone [Mercury] the machinations of
evil cunning; to the third zone [Venus], the lust whereby
men are deceived; to the fourth zone [Sun] domineering
arrogance; to the fifth zone (Mars], unholy daring and rash
audacity; to the sixth zone [Jupiter], evil strivings after
wealth; and to the seventh zone [Saturn], the falsehood
which lies in wait to work harm. And thereupon, having
been stripped of all that was wrought upon him by the
structure of the heavens, he ascends to the substance of
the eighth sphere [the fixed stars], being now possessed of
his own proper power; and he sings, together with those who
dwell there, hymning the Father".(74)

This return to a pristine, unsullied state is the aim of gnosis - the a
journey is of course metaphorical and does not imply literal, physical
death as a prerequisite for union withGod. Such an aim is to be strived
for through the contemplative pursuit of pure philosophy. It is through
the contemplation of the heavens themselves, of the movements of the
planets and particularly of the Sun that the mind may be guided to overcome
the 'perturbations' inherent in the state of being. This is a powerful
recommendation indeed for the value of symbolic astrology as an aid towards
greater consciousness: for the mind, nothing is impossible - man is a
'magnum miraculum' who has the potential ability to know the cosmos arid
himself, and to understand the part he must play whilst on earth.(75)
Through the intellectual penetration and control of mind, the soul may be
either exalted above destiny or deliberately subjected to it,(76) for it
facilitates a deliberate self-awareness and self-direction. This
glorification of the power of the mind, the supremacy of a reason
fertilised by innate intuition, is reflected in the importance for the ricoplatonic philosophers of the Sun as the symbolic representation of the
highest rational principle of man.

1.10. The Sun

Philosophy is a 'solar' activity in the sense that it depends on
visionary, inward sight rather than on logical calculation - that is, the
combination of Mercurial intuitive insight with Apollonian clarity of
perception. In this sense it is also 'masculine' as it strives to separate
-55 -

and differentiate from the instinctual wisdom of the earth. Apollo himselt
lacks compassion, (77) being a god capable of the most cruel and coldblooded acts (witness the flaying of ?iarsyas and the murder of the children
of Niobe). He emanates spiritual loftiness and high-minded purity,
together with a piercing accuracy of perception which endows him with
prophetic gifts - his very distance allows him the utmost objectivity to
see things as they are:
"Apollonian desiderates clarity and form, and hence
distance. The first impression this word gives is of
something negative, but implied in it is the most positive
thing of all - the attitude of cognition. Apollo rejects
whatever is too near - entanglement in things, the melting
gaze, and equally, soulful merging, mystical Inebriation
and its ecstatic vision. He desires not soul but spirit
In Apollo there greets us the spirit of clear-eyed
cognition which confronts existende and the world with
unparalleled freedom - the truly Greek spirit which was
destined to produce not only the arts but eventually even
science. "(78)

But Apollonian science without the compassionate depth of lunar wisdom
would be sterile and mechanical, just as a total lack of his clarity of
judgement would lead to superstitious indulgence and unfocussed
assumptions. Apollo represents intellect in some way divorced from soul;
he needs to incorporate the phantasy, the imagination of both the Moon and
Mercury (astrologically, the only two planets whose mutable nature is
inoulded and coloured by the others) to become 'humanised'. But the gods
are not fixed or consistent in their natures, and Apollo does indeed
'balance' his nature in another role - that of the supreme musician.
For Ficino, Apollo was doubly important as the patron of both music and
medicine,(79) and it is through his musical attributes that his nature is
'ensouled' and balanced, inspiring the human musician to achieve skills
which may elevate the spirit and thus strengthen the solar nature. Such a
'humanised' Apollo became metamorphosed into the figure of Orpheus, who for
the Renaissance musician embodied the ideal 'music therapist' with the
transforming power of his performance. The imitation of this ideal was
certainly the conscious purpose of Ficino's music-making, as we shall see
in chapter four. Using Boethius' model, for the Hermetic Renaissance
musician the conscious cultivation of these very Apollonian ideals of
-56 -

supreme control, unsullied beauty, moderation and proportion, expressed,
paradoxically, through a 'Dionysian' condition of divine intoxication or
'frenzy' in the performance of musica instrumentalis, might lead to an
intimation of the echoes of the harmonies of the spheres themselves, the
musica inundana of the cosmos, and thus might powerfully affect man's own
inner equilibrium, niusica hurnana.

In the the pure light of the Sun Platonic philosophers aim to see things

as they are, not clouded and obscured in the shadowy twilight of lunar
approximation and varying opinion(80) - which belong to the domain of
Mother Nature who has enfolded man in her clasp. The Moon reflects the
light of the Sun, softening and diluting its harsh glare, but in its own
essential nature was considered to be moist and damp, governing the
generating power of nature, corruption of matter and the fluctuation and
changeability of earthly affairs.(81) The alchemists understood that lunar
consciousness demanded integration, and their supreme symbol for psychic
unity was the coniunctio or mystical marriage of Sun and Moon. We have
already seen that the hermaphroditic Hermes represents such a union - he
encompasses the realms of night and day, bringing form arid clarity to the
inscrutable mystery of the night, and gently poeticising the uncompromising
literalness of the day. He is "the one who studies the unseen world in the
light of things seen".(82) Without the penetrating and transforming
compassion of his vision there would be a danger of total submersion in the
irrational forces of the underwor:ld - he leads souls to the realm of Pluto,
but also guides them out again. He must, for 'solar' consciousness truly
is a prerequisite for civilisation, the upward thrust of enlightenment
whose energy is generated by the insistent repelling of 'the powers of
darkness'. It is hardly surprising that those valuing the wisdom of the.
night should have been forced 'underground' and branded as deviant or
heretical, for since Plato the scales have been too heavily weighted
against them.
The Sun as a physical symbol for God provided Ficino with one of the
richest 'poetic metaphors' of the Christian Platonic tradition. In the
hierarchy of levels of being the Sun mediates between all the layers of the
material arid spiritual cosmos as a unifying, all-pervasive symbolic entity:

-57 -

"In the same manner that the Sun generates both eyes and
colours, giving the eyes the power by which they may see,
arid colours the potency by which they are seen, and joining
both of them together with a uniting light, so God is
thought to be with respect to all meanings and intelligible
things. For expectancy itself creates all meaning and
intelligibility, and provides in turn a virtue in action at;
once natural and appropriate to both. Moreover the Sun
daily pours out a universal light through which it excites
to mutual action the virtues of both the intelligible and
intellectual realms, and joins them together through
action. Clearly Plato calls this light truth in respect to
intelligible things, and knowledge with respect to the mind
of man. He thinks moreover that the good itself, that s
God, surpasses all these things, just as the Sun is
superior to light, eyes and colours. But where Plato said
that the Sun prevails over the whole visible realm,
doubtlessly he surmised that the incorporeal Sun, that is
the divine intellect, prevails over the corporeal Sun."(83)

In particular, the letter Orphica comparatio Soils ad Deum(84) and his
small astrological/theological treatises De Sole and De Lurnine written at
the end of his life testify to his own Hermetic ability to synthesise
astrological, neo-platonic and Christian snbolism into a unified whole.
Similarly, light emanating from the Sun as a metaphor for spiritua:1
enlightenment, at its highest potential, and as the source of nourishment
required for the inner journey, is a fundamental concept in the tradition
of prisca theologia. To Niccolo degli Albizzi Ficino wrote:
"Pythagoras told his disciples that they should look at
themselves in a mirror, not by the light of a lamp, but by
the light of the sun. What is the light of a lamp, if it
is not a mind as yet too little instructed by knowledge?
What is the light of the suii, if not the mind totally under
its instruction?"(85)

In the Hermetic and Chaldaean revelatory texts Ficino discovered what he
believed to be the source of such heliocentric philosophical speculation,
for example in the Chaldaean Oracles of Pletho he would have read:
"You must hasten towards the light and rays of the Father,
Whence your soul was sent out, clothed in abundant
intellect."(86)

and in the Ascleplus:
"By the light of mind the human soul is illumined, as the
world is illumined by the sun, - nay, in yet fuller
-58 -

measure. For all things on which the sun shines are
deprived of his light from time to time by the
interposition of the earth, when night comes on; but when
mind has once been interfused with the soul of man, there
results from the intimate blending of mind with soul a
thing that is one and indivisible, so that such men's
thought is never obstructed by the darkness of error."(87)

The "intimate blending of mind with soul" was the unio mentalis to which
the alchemists aspired, and to which Ficino dedicated his life. In his
Preface to the Corpus Heret1cum Ficino, in a rhapsodic eulogy to
Mercurius, stresses that for this interfusion to take place, there must be
a conscious, firm Intention and desire of the soul for penetration by the
divine mind:
""And so there is a real need fordivine light, so that we
may contemplate the Sun itself by the light of the Sun.
Indeed the light of the divine mind is never poured into
the soul unless the soul, like the Moon to the Sun, is
wholly turned towards the mind of God. The soul is not
turned to the mind unless the mind (does likewise 1.
Indeed the mind was no sooner made than the deception of
the senses, and it generated the mists of the imagination.
For this reason Mercurius simply laid aside the senses and
the dullness of fantasy, withdrawing into the portals of
the mind: soon Pimander, that is, the divine mind, flowed
in, whence he contemplated the nature of all things, both
existing in God and emanating from God. Then those things
were revealed by divine command which he explained to the
rest of men."(88)
This concept of the similitude between the subjective condition of the
human soul and the object of Its knowledge, or adaequatio is further
explained by Ficino in the Theologia Platonica:
"As long as the intellect is only potentially prepared to
know, it is not yet united with the object potentially to
be known; but when It is actually knowing, it is united
with it ... since the form of that object is inherent in
the mind .. Thus the knowing mind and the thing known
becomes one, since the form of that thing, as such, molds
the mInd."(89)
We shall refer to this correspondence later where Ficino restates the
notion more emphatically - at the beginning of his Commentary on
Iamblichus.(90) Suffice it to say here that underlying this conception of
knowledge is the notion of syinpathela within the hierarchy of the ordered
-59 -

Platonic universe.( g l) For the neo-platonists the interdependence and
interpenetration of all elements within the whole was made possible by the
active principle of the Interweaving vitalising force or soul within the
cosmos. In the words of Hermes Thismegistus, echoing those of Plato:
"And this whole body, in which all bodies are contained, is
filled with soul; soul is filled with mind; and mind is
filled with God. Soul fills the whole body within, and
encompasses it without, giving life to the universe;
without, it gives life to this great and perfect living
creature, and within, to all the living creatures. In
heaven above, soul persists in sameness; on earth below, it
changes as things come into being.'t(92)

In the Asciepius Hermes follows Plato in emphasising that the goal of
all philosophy is to attain to knowledge of God, that all sciences, whether
speculative astronomy or natural science, are ultimately directed towards
the adoration of God's skill and wisdom. He continues:
"And to know the science of music is nothing else than
this, - to know how all things are ordered, and how God's
design has assigned to each its place; for the ordered
system in which each and all by the supreme Artist's skill
are wrought together into a single whole yields a divinely
musical harmony, sweet and true beyond all melodious
sounds."(93)
We have now arrived at a position to consider the implications of such a
universal sympathy for the practice of theurgic ritual and semiological
astrology, which Ficino synthesised into his unique form of 'natural
magic'. It is in the works of Plotinus, Iamblichus and Proclus especially,
as well as the Asciepius, that Ficino found philosophical justification for
his occult experiments which provoked considerable suspicion from the
Christian authorities. Plotinus in particular arrived in Ficino's life,
along with Pico della Mirandola, at the highly significant time of his
second Saturn return, and he approached the task of translating and
commenting with as much dedication as he had done with Plato thirty years
earlier. In fact, Ficino tells us, Pico arrived the very day the Platonic
opus was being edited for publication, as If Cosimo de' Medici was
continuing to fulfil his role as spiritual patron from heaven. For Ficino,
this was all evidence of a divine plan.(94) Plotinus represented the next
vital step - for in the Enneads Ficino found authority for his 'natural
magic' with the possibility of conscious participation in the life of the
-60 -

cosmos, and justification for a semiologica]. astrology which preserved
human free will.

PART THREE: PLOTI!4US

1.11. The cosmic ballet
The works of Plotinus were rediscovered by Ficino after a long period of
obscurity, although Paul Henry has pointed out(l) that his thought left

traces throughout the Middle Ages, influencing St Augustine, Dionysius and
St Thomas Aquinas. Unlike Ficino, Plotinus (c.204-270 A.D.), we learn from
his biographer and pupil Porphyry, was no1 especially interested in the
practical application of his philosophy, being by temperament a
contemplative and a mystic theoretician:
"He had a complete knowledge of geometry, arithmetic,
mechanics, optics, and music, but was not disposed to apply
himself to detailed research in those subjects."(2)

He was interested in the principles of sciences such as Astronomy, but
only as a constituent element in the overall scheme of cosmic harmony and
sympathy which he elaborated in astonishingly complex detail in the nine
Enneads. Porphyry does however particularly mention that his master

studied horoscopy in detail, and "when he had detected the unreliability of
(the astrologers'] alleged results he did not hesitate to attack many of
the statements made in their vritings."(3) Plotinus evidently achieved the
heights of mystical union with God, had prophetic insight into the workings
of human nature, and was considered to have "expounded the principles of
Pythagorean and Platonic philosophy more clearly than anyone before
him."(4) He was illuminating a tradition which, owing to its subtlety and
esotericism, was constantly in danger of obscurity and mis-representation,
and which therefore needed a succession of sympathetic interpreters to keep
Its insights alive.

Flctho certainly agreed with Porphyry; in the Preface to his own
translation and commentary he states his belief that Plotinus was the first
to 'unveil' the divine knowledge of the ancient theologians.(5) Ficino,
-61 -

having discovered Plotinus towards the end of his life, found in his
writings a way of synthesising his own experience and knowledge - bringing
philosophical speculation into harness with mystical contemplation and both
with active participation in 'the life of the All'. He justifies the
extent of his own lengthy commentaries on account of Plotinus' literary
style, for behind an "incredible terseness" of words Is to be found a
penetrative depth of perception, abundance and richness of thought as in a
multi-faceted jewel. Porphyry describes it thus:
"He puts things shortly and abounds more in Ideas than in
words, he generally expresses himself in a rapt
inspiration, and states what he himself really feels about
the matter and not what has been handed down by
tradition."(6)

Ficino was most excited by the infusion of deep religious mysticism
into philosophical speculation (the fruitful union of the lunar and solar
forms of contemplation) demonstrated by the ancient theologians, regarding
the rediscovery of their work as leading to an 'ennobling' of religion
through the clarifying intellectual influence of philosophy. He accuses
the followers of Aristotle of mis-representing and secularising the
essentially 'religious' insight of their master, and concludes that, rather
than attempting to simply preach to them, such philosophers who "make away
with religion" would only be convinced by a display of divine miracles (to
redress the balance) or the emergence of a "philosophical religion":
"Now, divine providence Is pleased in our age to strengthen
religion as a whole with the authority and reason of
philosophy, until at the appointed time she strengthens the
truest form of religion, as she has sometimes done before,
with the manifestation of miracles among all nations.
Therefore guided by divine providence we have expounded the
divine Plato and the great Plotlnus."(7)

As a conclusion to this survey of Ficino's three major authorities, It
remains to consider Plotinus' own position regarding astrological
influence, for he was undoubtedly Ficino's greatest discovery in justifying
the experiences of synchronistic connection or 'meaningful coincidence'
between events which so greatly enriched his ever1ay life and deepened his
perception of reality.

-62 -

For Plotinus, the divine being consists of three hypostases, the One,
the Divine Mind or Intellectual Principle (nous) and the All-soul, or lifeprinciple. The One, the supreme God of Plato, is the highest 'unknowable',
the ultimate resting point of the whole of creation:
"The One is the One and nothing else, and even to assert
that it 'is' or that it is 'One' is false, since it is
beyond being or essence. No 'name' can apply to it; it
eludes all definition, all knowledge; it can neither be
perceived nor thought. It is not in movement, nor is it at
rest. It is infinite, without limits, and since it has no
parts, it is without structure and without form."(8)

The One transcends the Ideas or Forms in the divine mind, and shines its
light on them to endow them with beauty. The soul, contemplating the Forms
of the intellectual principle, then generates the lower realm of the
'possible'. Plotinus identifies the three deities Ouranos (Caelus),
Chronos (Saturn) and Zeus (Jupiter) with the the three hypostases, linking
Zeus with his grandfather Ouranos in aspiring to his 'active power' rather
than to his father thronos' purely contemplative nature.(9) We find this
snbolism again in the traditional astrological attribution of the virtues
of active and contemplative lives to Jupiter and Saturn, whose antithesis
reverberated strongly for Ficino, reflected in an opposition aspect in his
natal horoscope.
The All-soul for Plotinus includes all individual souls, and when
particular ised in a human being can itself fall into a hierarchy of
Intellective (true knowing), Reasoning (from discursive reasoning to
ignorant opinion) and Unreasoning (from sensible imagination to animal
instinct). Present in the Reasoning principle are the will, the
intellectual imagination arid intellectual memory, which present sensations
to the higher function for judgement. As the All of the universe
culminates in the One, so all man's faculties culminate in the supreme
intuitional Intellectual principle, and the aim of his life should be to
labour to identify with this. Soul is the central reference point for
Plotinus - it is 'amphibian' and connective in function, partaking of arid
travelling between the two worlds of divinity and matter. It is also selfconsciousness, that Is, the perception of the divinity In one's own soul,
through which seif-realisation occurs. This is entirely through the
efforts of the Individual soul - there is no divine 'grace' or active
-63 -

participation by a transcendent godhead. Prayer, if it is effective at
all, works through a "tension of the soul"(lO) as part of the process of
striving - it is not a personaiiy directed appeal. According to
Porphyry(ll) Plotinus' last words were "Try to bring back the god in us to
the divine in the All"; it is the perfect alignment of the soul with the
Intellectual Principle which enables a two-way interaction, the soul at
last fully acknowledging its own divinity:
"like sight affected by the thing seen, the soul admits the
imprint, graven upon it and working within it, of the
vision it has come to."(12)
Plotinus' experiential mystical impulse pervades his writing. The
combination of rational argument and deep, fervent personal desire for
mystic union appealed to Ficino's own temperament and urge for selfunderstanding;(13) indeed the central Plotinian tenet that one knows God
through knowing oneself, that return to the 'father' or 'source' is a
matter of intense, concentrated effort to free the 'authentic' man from the
encumbrances of the attachments it has accrued in its 'fall' from the first
principle, can be seen to underlie Ficino's 'unorthodox' astrology. For if
a personal horoscope is understood as a symbolic representation of such an
imprint - that is, of the individual's essential nature - then its
contemplation could be a powerful tool in the striving to strip away all
false accretions and obstacles to self-knowledge, and this Is of course
exactly what Ficino does advocate in De vita coelitus comparanda, the third
part of the Liber de vita which, It has been suggested, he intended as a
Commentary on Plotinus' Ennead IV.3.1l.(14) We can see that the potential
afforded by astrology In the Plotinian sense of signification, not
causation, is a far cry indeed from the deterministic variety held in such
suspicion both by the Church, and by Ficino and his intimate circle.
The Plotinian cosmos then Is filled with soul, from the One to the
outermost reaches of matter, in a complex interdependent web of ennat1on.
All members of the system, from planets to herbs and minerals, are both
'ensouled' and connected by soul, and thus become sources of cosmic energy
in their various degrees and qualities. In this vast chain of being, all
components are inextricably connected and reciprocally affect each other in
their movements and actions, every such action following a higher law of
-64 -

ultimate divine justice. In Ennead 11.3 Plotinus addressed the question of
whether the stars are causes, generally condemning the commonly-held,
simplistic astrological belief that planets can in any way cause human
conditions or that they have any kind of will, or that their inherent
qualities might change according to their varying positions under the
Zodiac or in relation to other planets. They cannot, he stresses, be good
or evil in themselves, nor can they desire to effect changes on earth:
"Like the birds of augury, the living beings of the
heavens, having no lot or part with us, may serve
incidentally to foreshow the future, but they have
absolutely no main function in our regard."(15)
The stars and planets are in service to the Universe as limbs to a body,
in sympathy with the whole being. As stich, and this was to underlie
Ficino's attitude to astrology, they could signify general events, which
might happen elsewhere in the universal animal, by certain traces or
repercussions which might be interpreted by the perceptive astrologer via
the act of divination, when self-aligned with cosmic law. However they
could never be the direct cause of particulars. Plotinus, like the
venerable exponents of the tradition before him, stresses that only through
the mediation of a symbol can one grasp the meaningful significance and
depth of experiences which are essentially foreign to linear, abstract
conceptual isat ion:
"We may think of the stars as letters perpetually being
inscribed on the heavens or inscribed once and for all and
yet moving as they pursue the other tasks allotted to them:
upon these main tasks will follow the quality of
signifying, just as the one principle underlying any living
unit enables us to reason from member to member, so that
for example we may judge of character and even of perils
and safeguards by indications in the eyes of some other
part of the body ... all teems with symbol: the vise man Is
the man who in any one thing can read another."(16)(my
italics)
All forms of divination, augury or prediction would, for Plotinus, have
their basis in this co-ordination of all creation and inter-dependence of
all its parts: "each thing works with every other thing reciprocally yet
independently in a complex yet determined scheme". (17) When the individual
has freed his mind from the shackles of lower nature and can enter in part
communion with its divine counterpart, then he may see in the comprehensive
-65 -

meaning of the term, the hermetic meaning, for he has a clear channel
through to the organising principles of the cosmos. The stars symbolic
power extends down to the lowest realms of sense, but any immediate
efficacy only extends to what they can clearly be seen to do. In the
Plotinian hierarchy of creation, the chain of causation through subsequent
signification continually extends and moves from the higher (ultimately,
the One) to the lower, becoming less pri5tine and, one might say, diffused
and diluted, as it reaches out through the multiplicity of effects in this
world. There is never any question that the heavenly bodies do produce
effects on the natural world (such as weather and tides), and by extension
it is accepted that they can directly influence the lower part of human
nature, that is, man's bodily condition, temperament and instinctual
behaviour and appetites - indeed medical astrologers work on this premise.
Human temperament as such does not determine human actions, it provides the

raw material with which to perform them, and as such may legitimately be
ordered by a natural law depending on the positions of heavenly bodies.
All natural actions and events would then be in active correlation with the
animated universe, and comprise the realm of what might be termed 'fate'.
However, Plotinus stresses that it the task of man to become liberated from
this material, fate-bound existence by the deliberate raising of his
consciousness in order to "profit by the significance of the sidereal
system" not be "sunken in it and dragged along".(18) That is, to use the
stars symbolically as a tool in self-awareness. Some men achieve a measure
of harmonious equilibrium amidst the continual upheaval and evolution of
life in this way - but most do not.
Plotinus postulates, like Hermes, the predestination of the birth of
individual souls, which are "determined by the cosmic clrcuit"(l9) and
whose nature is immutable, decided in part by stellar correlations and
external material circumstances, for the pure qualities of the planets will
necessarily become modified and corrupted when they enter the body. If
these deteriorations are extreme, then there may be no possibility of
regaining 'alignment', just as "a lyre may be so ill strung as to be
incapable of the melodic exactitude necessary to musical effect".(20)

Soul, as the ordering principle of the whole cosmic circuit (which is
linked by the pervading Spirit), knows the results of all action and
-66 -

experience, and it is Soul which determines the moments and conditions of
birth:
"For whensoever similar factors meet and act in relation to
each other, similar consequences must inevitably ensue: the
Soul adopting or fore-planning the given conditions
accomplishes the due outcome and links all into a total.
All, then, is antecedent and resulthnt."(21)

The momentary alignments of the moving cosmos allow what Plotinus terms
"strokes of fortune" like the finding of a treasure-trove. They also allow
for what Jung was to call 'synchronicity', or meaningful coincidence of
apparently random events connected by a principle which is a-causal.(22)
Both Plotinus and Jung suggest that at such moments, something beyond the
natural law of cause and effect has entered into the action; a passing
alignment of forces within the cosmic order whose repercussions, like
ripples in water, extend to the furthest reaches of the complex web. At
these moments, ripe for announcing events, the wise astrologer or
clairvoyant is able to 'plug in' and predict purely natural occurrences
which do not depend on the responsibility of individual intervention. On
the other hand, human events and conditions such as robbery, marriage, fame
or power Plotinus considers to be essentially determined by many material,
wilful and natural factors, and although they may conceivably be announced
by heavenly configurations, they could never by predicted as particulars.
Since the stars do not have wills, in no sense do they signify
purposefully, In order to indicate future events - it is rather that by the
inevitable pattern and working-out of events along the chain some things
will necessarily indicate others:
"all is unity sprung of unity and therefore one thing is
known by way of another, a cause in the light of the
caused, the sequent as rising from its precedent, the
compound from the constituents which must make themselves
known in the linked total."(23)

It is not surprising that Plotinus mistrusted horoscopy, where it is all
too easy for the astrologer to fall into the trap of a restricting
concretisation of life's possibilities through assertions and predictions

which deny the fluid, unpredictable but personally meaningful potential of
a symbolic attitude to enhance and deepen, not exclude, self-exploration.
Plotinus' powerful image of the animated universe as a great ballet
-67 -

comprised of a rich variety of different movements, everything in sympathy,
like affecting like, unlike repelling unlike, earthly events happening in
5ypathy with the changing combinations and patterns in the heavens, and
man's soul reflecting in microcosm the continual motion, suggests infinite
possibilities for glimpsing powers at work throughout the whole network:
The heavenly circuit has nothing causal in it, but goes
according to the rational principle of its living organism;
there must therefore be a harmony of action and experience
and an order which arranged things together, adapting them
and bringing them into due relation with each other, so
that according to every figure of the heavenly circuit
there is a different disposition of the things which it
governs, as if they were performing a single ballet in a
rich variety of dance-movements."(24)

The apprehension and channelling of such powers by man for beneficial
purposes forms the basis of 'natural magic' - theurgic practices involving
ritual, music, talismanic images and astrology were, for the neo-platonists
and Ficino, for the purpose of ennobling the soul by bringing it into
harmony with the 'All'. In the next chapter 1 shall continue with an
exploration of this concept of 'magic' and, moving from the macrocosm to
the microcosm, consider the ways in which musica humna may be harmonised
and tempered to become a mediating ground, uniting 'what Is above' with
'what is below' in the aichemical marriage of nature and divinity.
I will end this chapter, as I began, with confirmation this time from
Plotinus of the inextricable association of astrology, psychology and
music; of the harmonious interplay of forces in the heavens being reflected
in man's soul. In this sense, for those who are able to 'see' with the
inner vision of the true follower of Hermes, astrology Is music:
"We may know (the overall single purpose of the cosmic
system] also by the concordance of the souls with the
ordered scheme of the Cosmos; they are not dependent, but,
by their descent, they have put themselves in contact, and
they stand hence-forth in harmonious association with the
cosmic circuit - to the extent that their fortunes, their
life-experiences, their choosing and refusing, are
announced by the patterns of the stars - and out of this
concordance rises as it were one musical utterance: the
music, the harmony, by which all is described (the harmony
of the spheres), is the best witness to this truth."(25)

-68 -

REFREVCES to Chapter One
ART ONE: Plato
1.

Plato, Tiaaeus 47c-d

2.

Ficino, Theologia Platonica, Op.om. pp. 78-424. For a modern edition,
see R. Marcel, Théologie Platonicienne de l'iuwrtallté des ames vols.
I & II. For a survey of Ficino's main themes in this great work, see
C. Trinkaus' chapter 'Humanist Themes in l4arsilio Ficino's Philosophy
of Human rnuorthlity' in In our Image and Likeness, Humanity and
Divinity in Italian Humanist Thought vol.2, pp.461-504, and 'Marsilio
Ficino and the Ideal of Human Autonomy'.

3.

Ficino, De Christiana religione, Op.om. pp.1-77. Again, see Trinkaus'
discussion of the main themes in Inour Image and Likeness
vol.2 pp.734-53

4.

On Florentine Platonism in general and Ficino's relationship with
Plato in particular, see 3. Hankins, Plato in the Renaissance pp.267359. This ref. p.285

5.

See Hankins Plato in the Renaissance pp.271,304,357,359; 3. Wadsworth,
'Lorenzo de' Medici and Marsillo Ficino: An Experiment in
Platonic Friendship'

6.

See Frances Yates, Glordano Bruno and the Hermetic Tradition pp.6-12

7.

See D.P. Walker, The Ancient Theology p.5:
"The integration of Platonism and Neoplatonism into
christian theology was enormously helped by the writings
ascribed to Dionysius the Areopagite, based on Proclus
and the Parmenides and compiled some time in the sixth
century A.D. Since these writings were supposed to be
by the Dionysius whom St Paul converted at Athens, they
acquired almost canonic status and retained it well into
the Renaissance period."
See also P.M. Watts, 'Pseudo Dionyslus the Areopagite and three
Renaissance Platonists'. For Ficino's translation and Commentary on
Dionysius, see Op.om. pp.1013-1128: Dionysll Areopagitae, de Mystica
Theologla. Translatlo una cum suis argumentis

8.

John Scotus Eriugena, 9th century philosopher and translator of Greek
mystical texts. His best known work is the theological and
cosmological Perlphyseon. The most recent study of his thought is
D. Moran, The Philosophy of John Scotus Eriugena

9.

P.O. Kristeller The Philosophy of Marsilio Ficino and 'The Scholastic
Background of Marsllio Ficino'

10. See p.42 for Ficino's varying genealogies of ancient theologians
11.

Walker, The Ancient Theology p.2

-69 -

12. See Hankins, Plato in the Italian Renaissance p.282; on the Ancient
Theology, pp.460-4

13.

Marsllil FlcIni Florentinl, conimentarla Platonls, ad Laurentium

Medlcem virum Magnanimum, prooemlum. Op.om. p.1128-30

14. ibid. p.1128:
Deus omnipotens statutis temporibus divini. Platonis
spiritum nimium ab alto dimisit, vita, ingenio,
eloqulogue mirabill, religlonem, facnam apud omnes
gentes illustraturum.
15. ibId. p.1129:
Stylum inquam non tam humano eloqulo, guam divino
oraculo similent, saepe quldem tonantem altius, saepe
vero nectarea suavitate manentem, semper autem arcani
coe lest ia complectentem.
16. ibid.:
Miscet frequenter gravissimo quodaxa consillo utilia
dulcibus, quo modestis sermonis blandi leporibus, animos
natura proniores ad voluptatem, per ipsam voluptatis
escam ad cibum alliciat salutarem.
17. ibid. p.1129:
Fingit et saepe fabulas more poetico, quippe quum ipse
Platonis stylus non tam philosophicus, quam revera
poeticus videatur. Furit enim intendum atque ungatur,
ut yates, et ordinem interea non humanum sentiat, sed
personam agit, quain sacerdotis cuiusdani atgue vatis,
partim quidem furentis, partim vero caeteros expiantis,
et in divinuin furorem similiter rapientis.
18. Haniclns, Plato in the Italian Renaissance p.270
19. ibId. p.1130:
In ipsis denique penetralibus, philosophi Saturnuxn suum
agrioscent, coe lest ium arcanorum contemplatorem.
20. See F. Corriford, 'Mysticism and Science in the Pythagorean Tradition'
pp.138-9
21. Ernest McClain, The Myth of Invariance p.130
22. IbId. p.158; on Babylonian mathematics, see also 0. Neugehauer, The
Exact Sciences in AntiquIty pp.28-53.
23. See W.K.C. Guthrle, A History of Greek Philosophy I p.224; C.J. de
Vogel, Pythagoras and Early Pythagoreanlsm pp.162-6; Macrobius, In
somnum Sclpionis 11.1.8-14
24. See F.M. Cornford, Plato's Cosmology PP.66-72 on 'The division of the
world-soul into harmonic intervals'; PP.69-70 on the tetraktys
25. Guthrie A History of Greek PhilosophY P.224
-70 -

26. Macrobius I.v-vi. See also E. McClain, The Myth of InvarIance p.19
27. Macrobius I.iv.41
28. lamblichus, Vita Pythagoricae 82: "What are the islands of the
blessed? Sun and Moon. What is the oracle at Delphi? The tetraktys.
What is harmony? That in which the sirens subsist ... what is the
wisest thing? Number."
29. See Guthrie A History of Greek Philosophy pp.225,260. Examples of the
decad include Apollo and the nine Muses, God and the nine orders of
angels. See for instance Censorinus De die natali XX (on the 'ten
months' year); Macrobius 1.6.41 (on tetraictys and fourfold nature of
human soul), 1.6.76 (on decad: "et ipse perfectissimus numerus est").
Also McClaIn Myth of Invariance p.6
30. Plato, Tlmaeus 35
31.

C.G. Jung, Psychology and Religion: West and East paras.172-8

32. ibid. paras.179-192
33. ibid. para. 190
34. ibid. para. 180; this also has implications for the consonant third in
music: see chapter four, section 9
35. ibid.
36. See Aristotle, On the Heavens I.i.268a (On the Heavens trans. W.K.C.
Guthrie p.5):
It is just as the Pythagoreans say, the whole world and
all things in it are summed up in the number three; for
end, middle, and beginning give the number of the whole,
and their number is the triad.
37. Tiiiaeus 31b-c
38. ibid. 32a
39. Jung, Pschology and Western Religion para.184
40.

Timaeus 17a

41. Jung, Psychology and Western Religion para.185
42.

TiLaeus 34b

43. Jung, Psychology and Western Religion para.185, also para.251:
Ever since the Timaeus the 'fourth' has signified
'realisation', i.e. entry into an essentially different
condition, that of worldly materiality, which, it is
authoritatively stated, is ruled by the Prince of this
world ... it is the true abode of the devil, whose
hellish hearth-fire burns deep in the interior of the
-71 -

earth, while the shining spirit soars in the aether,
freed from the shackles of gravity.
44. Plato, Phaedrus 246
45. Timaeus 39
46.

Jung, Psychology and Western Religion para.187. See Tlmaeus 37c: the

'father' creates a pattern of himself.
47. Jung, Psychology and Western Religion para.188
48. ibid. para.92
49. Timaeus 35. The Pythagorean scale:

2)1
oc

(L&hQS

3:2

4:3
7ine ()

£Cctle.

T T

TT T s

S
(2,:

50. Timaeus 36

43)

'I

51. ibid. 37
52. ibid.
53. ibid. 41e-42d
54. Ibid. 41e
55. ibid. 42
56. See Ptolemy, Tetrabiblos 111.2.11
57. See Plato, Phaedo 107e,108b,113d; Symposium 202e
58. See Cornford, 'Mysticism and Science' p.142
59. Republic 531a-c
60. The Pythagoreans had no trouble with the four-fold nature of
existence, as symbolised In the sacred tetraktys. This is a highly
complex and little considered area of investigation, but it could be
said that with Plato a 'triadic' consciousness arises as the fourth
element of 'lunar' intuition becomes devalued in the Western surge
towards the supremacy of 'solar' rationality and supreme
consciousness.
61. Iris Murdoch, The Fire and the Sun p.57

-72 -

62. Aristotle, MetaphysIcs 40.7. See W. Burkert, Lore and Science In
Ancient Pythagoreanism pp.350-368
63. Plato disagrees (Timaeus 39a), saying that the fixed stars move most
swiftly, and that the planetary spheres decrease in motion as they are
further removed from the earth.
64. Aristotle, On the Heavens II.ix
65.

Republic X

66. ibid. 617b
67. E. Mcclain, The Pythagorean Plato pp.41-55; see also Joscelyn Godwin,
Music, Mysticism and Magic pp.295-9
68.

Republic 617c-d

69. McClain, The Pythagorean Plato p.55; see also his Myth of Invariance:
McClain points out (p.9) that the twelve zodiacal constellations are
not evenly spaced, and that twelve lunar months do not equal exactly
one solar year. This inequality was also observed in the division of
musical intervals: "In ancient times neither the constellations nor
the intervals of the chromatic scale divided the cycle equally"
(p.1O). There was a necessity for compromise in order that all parts
may work together, music imitating the heavens. Thus both astrology
and music serve Plato as analogies for his well-tempered society. The
'pure' intervals of the ideal cosmic harmony cannot co-exist within
the imperfections of the earthly condition, where individual integrity
must be sacrificed for the good of the whole. In this sense, 'equal'
temperament can be seen as an unnatural, artificial division which has
no model in the harmony of the cosmos. It was Ptolemy who
'normalised' the zodiac in c.150 B.C. with the implicit idea of equal
temperament (Harmonics III). He correlated the 12 signs of the zodiac
with the 13 tones of the Greek Greater Perfect System or Pythagorean
scale. Since each whole tone equals one twelfth of the circumference
of the circle, his zodiacal signs correspond to a whole-tone scale in
equal temperament. McClain adds, "I do not mean to imply that Ptolemy
was advocating equal temperament. I believe he was merely using the
standard Pythagorean scale as a convenient approximation. His
accompanying discussion assigns the standard ratios of tonal intervals
(1:2, 2:3) to appropriate sections of the circumference. It is very
likely that there were older precedents for Ptolemy's procedure, for
the ratio 8.9 is very nearly one sixth of an octave, and it was the
most convenient musical interval to associate with 6 or 12 equal
divisions of a mandala."(p.104) See chapter four, pp.306-9
70. Republic 431
71.

Phllebus 26a

72. Cornford, 'Mysticism and Science' p.l45 remarks that the system of
establishing a fixed underlying pattern of perfect intervals in a
musical scale - imposing order on chaos - "marks out the whole
unlimited field of sound, which ranges indefinitely in opposite
directions (high and low)."
-73 -

73 Iris Murdoch The Fire and the Sun p.55
74. Godwin, Haraonles of Heaven and Earth pp.188-93. This
reference, p.188
75.

On the concept of the collective unconscious, see Jung, The Archetypes

and the Collective Unconscious paras.87-110
76. Godwin, Harmonies of Heaven and Earth p.l89

77.

RepublIc VII 530d-531c

78. See Godvin, Harmonies of Heaven and Earth p.190. The treatise
mentioned is lamblichus, Commentary on Nicomachus' Arithmetic,

discovered by Albert von Thimus; Godwin refers the reader to von
Thimus, Die harmonikale Syabolik des Alterthums 2 vols., Cologne,
1868, 1876, repr. Hildesheim, Oln, 1972, vol.1 p.3
79. See Godwin, Harmonies of Heaven and Earth. Boethius (11.20) gives the
following example of the lambda, under the heading 'progessions from
unity to infinity'(trans. C.M. Bower):
"the beginning of increasing
and decreasing rests in
l3
unity alone"

5

'Ic•

80. On the haraonla of soul and body see Aristotle, Politics 1340b.18;
Plato, Phaedo 86b, Philebus 17d; Cornford, 'Mysticism and Science'
pp.146-SO
81. Godwin, Harmonies of Heaven and Earth p.188
82. See chapter four p.264; Jung, Psychology and Alchemy para.346
83. For example, the distance between Earth and Moon was considered to be
126,000 stades, which corresponded to one tone (one stade equalling
625 ft.). See Pliny, Natural HIstory 11.19-20; Censorinus, De die
natali XXIII; Martianus capella, De Nuptlls Phllologlae et Hercurll
11.169-99; Theon of Sznyrna, Mathematics useful for understanding Plato

111.15. Censorinus and Theon both give the correlation between
planets and intervals as follows: earth to Moon = 1 tone, Moon to
Mercury = tone, Mercury to Venus = tone, Venus to Sun = 1 tones, Sun
to Mars = 1 tone, Mars to Jupiter = tone, Jupiter to Saturn = tone,
Saturn to fixed stars = tone. Thus from the Sun to the earth = a
perfect 5th, from Sun to Moon = a perfect fourth, from the earth to
the fixed stars = an octave. An alternative version (Theon gives
Eratosthenes as an example) the earth remains iimobile. See chapter
four, part one ref.7 for further information.
84. Godwin, Harmonies of Heaven and Earth pp.126-7
85. Iamblichus, Vita Pythagorica ch.15; see Codwin, Music, Mysticism and
Magic pp.26-7

86. Best known through Macrobius' Commentary (360-early 4th c .A. D.) based
on a lost work of Porphyry. This was the most important sourcebook of
Platonism in the Latin West.
-74 -

87. Macrobius VI.2
88. See Plotinus Enneads IV.3.11
89.

Ficino, Theologia Platonica X.7, Op.om. p.234:

Forte vero divinus influxus, ex Deo manans, per coelos
penetrans, descenderis per elementa, in inferiorem
mater jam desinens.
See E. Panofsky, Studies in Iconology p.132
90.

Epinomls 974b-c. The 'prophetic divination' could be equated with

Ficino's notio - see chapter three section 1
91.

Epinomis 975a-c

92. ibid. 974e, 975c
93. ibid. 975d-976b
94. ibid. 97Gb
95. ibid. 976c
96.

ibid. 978b

97. ibid. 977b
98. ibid. 977c-d, 978a
99. ibid. 978b, 978a
100. ibid. 979a
101. See Jung, Mysterium Coniunctionis para.657: "Piety is needed for the
work (of alchemy], and this is nothing but knowledge of oneself."
102. Epinoiis 980a-b

103. ibid.
104. ibid. 981b-982a
105. Ficino, Op.om. pp.1525-30, this ref. p.1528:
Vult enim ultra unam mundi totius animam, duodecim esse
sphaerarum, duodecim animas: deinde in qualibet sphaera
duodecim esse ordines animarum. Hi ordines in coelo
sidera sunt et stelle, in terra homines: in aethere,
aere, aqua, scilicet sublimiori stint daemones.
106. Epinomis 982c
107. I am grateful to Darby Costello for her work on the etymology of
sidus. The Oxford Latin Dictionary gives the following definitions:
i) sidus: "a heavenly body.. the planets ... constellations....
considered as having a direct influence on human affairs... as causing
-75 -

paralysis". ii) sidero: "(of constellations) to affect with sudden
paralysis". iii) sideratio: "the action of causing planets to wither
or affect hun beings with paralysis attributed to the effect of the
constellations". See my chapter two, part one ref.3. For the
associations of cons idero and desidero with a participatory
astrological awareness, and the episode of Olympius' star-magic on
Plotinus, see chapter two p.111
108. Plato, Epinomls 982d
109. Ibid. 982e
110. ibid. 983a-984a
111. Ficino, Op.ora. p.1528:
... visu scilicet Intimo potius, guam externo.

112. Epinomis 985a-b
113. ibid. 985c--d
114. ibid. 986a-c
115. ibid. 986d
116. ibid. 990 a-b
117. Ficino, Op.ozn. p.l529:
Numeri in se quidem incorporei sunt, quando nihil aliud
sunt, guam repetitia unitas, haec autem indivldua est.
118. Epinomis 992b
119. Ficino, Op.om. p.1529:
Pythagorici enim ubi sphaerarum intervalla dimetiuntur,
terrain ad firmamentum comparant: item ad Lunam et
Solem, Solem quogue ad firmamentum. In guibus sane
comparationibus intervallum a terra ad Solem,
comparatum ad intervallum ab eodem ad firmamentum,
efficit quidem inter terram ac Solem sesqulalteram:
Inter hunc vero et firmamentum sesquitertiam: et in
lila quidem proportione diapente consonantia nascitur:
ex hac autem dlatessaron.
120. Ibid. p.1525:
In speculatione quidem sapientia, in cultu vero
religio, in ainbobus tota consistit huinana foelicitas
finisque legum.
121. See Trinkaus on Ficino's De Chrlstiana rellglone in In our Image and
Likeness pp.734-753. He concludes by suggesting that Ficino's
concentration on the nature of the human soul, the "subjective side of
philosophy and of man" revealed a reaching towards a "greater
universality in man's intellectual and religious traditions" which was
to find a similar expression in Lutheranism. Trinkaus' emphasis on
-76 -

Ficino's firm position as an "enlightened christian" despite all his
pagan and magical interests is important to bear in mind. (pp.752-3)

FART TWO: Hermes
1.

Ficino, Op.om. pp.1836-67, Argumentum Marsilli Ficini Florentini, in
llbrum Mercuril Trismeglsti ad Cosrnum Kedicem, Pater Patriae. Ficino
translated the text Pimander (Mercurii Trismegisti liber de potestate
et sapienta Del, cui tltulum Pimander) and transcribed Apuleius'
version of the Asciepius (Marsilli Ficini in Mercuril Trismegisti
Asclepius Lucio Apuleio Madaurensi philosopho platonico interprete

2.

Op.om. p.1537

3.

See C.M.Woodhouse, George Gemlstos Plethon

4.

P.O. Kristeller The Philosophy of Mar.silio Ficino, p.15. Hankins
however (Plato in the Italian Renaissance p.463) maintains that there
is no reason to assume that Ficino's versions of the ancient
theologians derive from Pletho.

5.

On Hermes-Thoth see A-J. Festugière, La Révélation d'Hermês
Trismegiste vol.1 pp.67-88; G. Fowden, The Egyptian Hermes pp.22-31;
G.R.S. Head, Thrice-Greatest Hermes vol.1 pp.47-8l; ed. W. Scott,
Hermetica Introduction.

6.

Op.om. p.1836:
Eo tempore, quo Moses natus est, floruit Atlas
Astrologus Promethei physici frater, ac Maternus avus
maioris Mercurii, cuius nepos fuit Mercurius
Trismegistus. Hoc autem de jib scribit Augustinus.
The reference is to Augustine, De civitate Del XVIII xxxix. See
Yates, Giordano Bruno pp.9-12

7.

See Walker, The Ancient Theology, pp.20-i

8.

The Chaldaean Oracles are a collection of revelatory and visionary
fragments supposedly received from the gods by one Julianus the
chaldean and/or his son Julian the Theurgist in the late second
century A.D. They were first brought to the notice of the neoplatonists by Porphyry and commented on by lamblichus, Proclus and the
11th century Byzantine Psellus. Their content prescribed practical
religious/magical rituals known as theurgy, which will be discussed
more fully in chapter two. H. Lewy (The Chaldaean Oracles and Theurgy
p.368) supposes the oracles' influences to be oriental mystery
religions, Hermetic theosophy and gnosticism rather than Platonic
metaphysics, their Platonic elements deriving from contemporary neoplatonism rather than from Plato himself. They reveal a crossfertilisation of oriental (Babylonian and Syrian) solar and astral
religion and Greek rational speculation, and are primarily concerned
with spiritual enlightenment through revelation from external divine
intervention, not the "training of the inner eye" (p.368), indicating
a "yearning for revelation rather than philosophical complexity"
(p.8). Ficino would have been familiar with the oracles through
Pletho's version, which attributed their origin to Zoroaster and which
-77 -

he translated (Magica, Ad est philosophica dicta magorum ex Zoroastre
in Biblioteca Medicea Laurenziaria XXXVI,35; fragments occur in
Theologia Platonica. See Marsilio Ficino e ii Ritorno di Platone,
Hanoscritti, Stampe e Documenti pp.25-7; Supp.Fic.I pp.x,cxlv). See
Dodds, The Greeks and the Irrational pp.283-9, Theurgy and its
relationship to Neoplatonism'; Hankins, Plato in the Italian
Renaissance p.463; Ruth Maiercik, Introduction to The Chaldean Oracles
pp.1-5; Woodhouse, George Gemisthos Plethon ch.IV 'The Chaldaean
Oracles' pp.48-61. EdItions of the oracles in E. Des Places, Oracles

Chaldaiques; Majercik The Chaldean Oracles; ed. J. Opsopoeus, Oracula
magica Zoroastris cum scholiis Plethonis et Pselil; ed. W. Kroll De
oraculis chaldaicis. Excerpts from Proclus' Commentary are to be
found in Iaxnblichus: The Exhortation to Philosophy, Including the
letters of lamblichus and Proclus' Commentary on the Chaldean Oracles

tr. Thomas Moore Johnson.
9.

See Yates, Giordano Bruno p.3

10. Augustine, De clvltate Del VIII xxiii-xxvi; Lactantius, Institutes
I.vi; see Yates, Giordano Bruno p.7
11. See Walker, 'Orpheus the Theologian and Renaissance Platonists'
12. ed. W. Scott, Asclepius III.23b,24a,37,38a in Hermetical. See my
chapter two, section 15
13.

Op.om. pp.386,871,1836,1945

14. ibid. p.1537 In Plotini epltoznae, seu argumenta, coinxnentaria et
annotationes; prooemium ad Magnanlmum Laurentium Medicem (trans.
School of Economic Science):
Itaque non absque divina providentia volente videlicet
omnes pro singuloruxn ingenio, ad se mirabiliter
revocare, factuni est, ut pia quaedam philosophia quodain
et apud Persas sub Zoroastre, et apud Aegyptios sub
Mercurio nasceretur, utrobique sibimet consona:
nutriretur deinde apud Thraces sub Orpheo atque
Aglaophemo adolesceret quoque mox sub Pythagora apud
Graecos et Italos tandem vero Divo Platonae
consumaretur Athenis.
15. Yates, Glordano Bruno p.19
16. Walker, The Ancient Theology p.17
17.

Yates Glordano Bruno p.20

18. Festugière, La Révélatlon d'Herrnès Trismégiste I p.115 gives as
evidence for Egyptian authorship the references to the astrological
Decans in the Hermetica. These 36 sidereal gods who reside over each
10 degrees of the zodiac are of Egyptian origin, deriving from the
idea that each division of time has its own guardian spirit, and were
assimilated into Hellenistic astrology. See also Fowden, The Egyptian
Hermes pp.31-44, who maintains that the texts' allusions to the
exoteric aspects of the cults practised in the Nile valley point to
their Graeco-Egyptlan origin.
-78 -

19. Ficino, De Christiana religlone in Trinkaus, In our Image and Likeness
pp. 734-5
20. Yates, Glordano Bruno p.22
21. ibid. p.23. Jung has this to say on the necessity for preserving the
secrecy and mystery of 'occult' philosophies and practices:
The thing hidden is always more or less irrelevant, for
in itself it is no more than an image or sign pointing
to a content that cannot be defined more closely. This
content is certainly not a matter for indifference
since it indicates the living presence of a numinous
archetype. The essential thing is the hiding, an
expressive gesture which symbolised something
unconscious and 'not to be named' lying behind it;
something, therefore, that is either not yet conscious
or cannot or will not beocme conscous. It points
to the presence of an unconscious content, which exacts
form consciousness a tribute of -constant regard and
attention. With the application of interest the
continual perception and assimilation of the effects of
the 'secret' become possible. (Mysterium Coniunctionis
para.312)
22. W. Otto The Greek Gods pp.104-24
23. Homeric Hymn to Hermes in trans. T. Sargent, The Homeric Hymns no.4
pp. 30-31
24. Otto The Greek Gods p.124
25. Ginette Paris, Pagan Grace pp.84-6, this ref. p.85
26. See Robert Graves, The Greek Myths 1.9, pp.45-6. Metis is associated
with Mercury inone of the most ancient creation myths (Graves p.27),
where Eurynome, the goddess who laid the Universal Egg from which all
creation hatched, next created the seven planetary powers, attributing
a Titan and a Titaness to each: to Mercury are given Metis and Coeus.
In another myth (Graves p.33), she was born from the union of Air arid
Mother Earth, along with "Terror, Craft, Anger, Strife, Lies, Oaths,
Vengeance, Intemperance, Altercation, Treaty, Oblivion, Fear, Pride,
Battle" - the nature of her siblings certainly suggests an
uncompromising wiliness. This myth is based on Hesiod's Theogony
(338-63), where we learn that Metis was the daughter of Oceanus and
Tethys, grand-daughter of Uranos and Gaia (Heaven and Earth). Her
association with the primal elements of air and earth already
indicates a wisdom which is not purely abstract and intellectual, but
a combination of the clear-sighted rationality of air and the natural
instinct of earth. This 'female' irrational intuition poses a great
threat to the 'reasonable' logic of Uranos, who hates the children
Gaia bears him and hides them away as soon as they are born. These
offspring, through their mother, already have a primitive form of
metis, which we see exhibited in the action of thronos, who, in league
with his mother, cunningly castrates his father. thronos himself,
warned by hs parents that one of his Sons would usurp him, swallows
all the children of his wife Rhea. However with the help of Heaven
-79 -

and Earth Rhea saves her child Zeus and gives Chronos a stone to
swallow instead. Hesiod tells us that Zeus conquers Chrorios "by craft
and power (499), and Robert Graves gives a more detailed account of
Metis' role as the instigator of the plan (p.40). She suggests to
Zeus that he become Chronos' cup-bearer and tells him to mix the
potion which will cause him to vomit up Zeus' siblings - he carries
out the plan with the help of his mother Rhea. Metis becomes the
first wife of Zeus, being seduced by him only after turning into many
shapes to avoid being caught. Hesiod describes her (887) as "wisest
of all, of gods and men". However, when Metis was pregnant, an oracle
of Mother Earth declared that she would produce a girl, but that her
next child would be a son who would overthrow Zeus (Graves p.46). In
order to avoid the same fate as his father and grandfather, Zeus
"thrust her down into his belly", "so that the goddess could counsel
him in both good and evil plans." In due course Athena, the child of
Metis, was born from his head.
27.

e.g. Homer, Iliad 10, XV, XXIII

28. Murdoch, The Fire and the Sun p.60
29.

Op.om. p.1873 (see chapter three p.171):

Ante omnem rationem usum inest naturaliter insita
deorum notio.
30. In Kristeller, Supp.Fic.II p.82. See also Op.om. 619:
Imitate igitur ut coepistis Pythagoram et Socratem et
Platonem.
31. Ptolemy, Tetrabiblos 1.4.5
32. Julian, Oration IV: Hymn to King Hellos 132A. Julian the Apostate, a
disciple of lamblichus, was born 331 A.D. See ed. W.C. Wright, Julian
the Apostate, Works pp.348-51
33. Ficino, Liber de vita 111.21
34. Op.om. p.965:
Verba ad lectorem, librum hunc allegoricum et
anagogicum esse potius guam dogmaticum ... nos ad illam
non tam rationibus in praesentia, guam comprationibus
quibusdam deduct is ex lumine
35.

Jung, Mysterium Coniunctionis para.311, also 117: "Mercurius
demonstrably corresponds to the cosmic Nous of the classical
philosophers"; Psychology and Alchemy 404; Alchemical Studies part IV,

'The Spirit Mercurius'.
36. Ficino, Op.oti. p.889:
Sod quicquid illud fuit, quod te mihi, Id est, me mihi
abstulit, fac quaeso In posterum, ut non selungat nos,
gui nos ohm coniunxit, nec te unguam credas ad me
faturum accessurum, gui te solatium meae vitae, meae
mentis delitias, institutorem morum, disciplinae
magistrum et esurlo semper et sitlo. Vale et veni, ut
-80 -

tuus Saturneus, id est, tuus faturus 'nous' me quo.e
faturum reddat
37.

Psychology and Alchemy para.459

38. Aichemical Studies para.255
39. Ibid. 246
40. Ibid. 257
41. ibid. 295; see also chapter four p.362, A ppendix 1.1. p.368
42. Psychology and Alchemy paras.165,404,447
43. Aichemical Studies para.299
44. ibid. 295
45. ibid. 290
46. ibid. 287
47. ibid. 263
48. ibid. 277
49. ibid. 272
50. ibid. 271, 263
51. Mysteriurn Coniunctionis para.117
52. The Archetypes and the Collective Unconscious para.503
53. Alchemical Studies para275
54. See chapter four, part one ref .167
55.

3ung, Alchemical Studies para.286

56. See Ficino, Liber de Sole ch.IX Op.om. pp.970-i on the 'alchemical'
purification of matter through the heat of the Sun:
The Sun completely fills with light clear and pure
natures everywhere, as If they are now, for a moment,
heavenly; while matter which is opaque and unsuitable
to light, it first warms and kindles, then refines, and
soon Illuminates. And sometimes it elevates to the
heights through heat and light this matter, now light
and acessible.
(Ita Sol perspicuas ubique purasque naturas, quasi jam
coelestes momento prorsus illuminat, opacas vero
materias ineptas luci calefacit prius, et accendit,
atque subtiliat, mox illuminat. Atque tam calorem quam
-81 -

lucem lam leves et pervias, nonnunquam elevat ad
sublimia.)
57. Letters vol.2 pp.68-9, Op.om. p.745: Nunguam ad infima cadit, gui
constitutus In suromo, acute et clementer prospicit infima
58.

ibid. vol. 3 p.15, Op.orn. p.756:

quendam Tarsensem medicum animorum ad superos
raptum ... celebravi. Neque ... infelicem Helenae, id
est, terrenae formae, rapinam, sed ut yen Platonici
solent beatissimum depinxi coelestis mentis ascensum.
59. S. Lilley-Harvey, 'Reflections ... Joseph Campbell' p.94
60. Anaximander understood the fundamental points concerning the structure
of the solar system but made no distinction between the fixed stars
and the planets. Guthrie (op.cit. pp.89-101) says that according to
Eudemus Anaximander was the first to discuss the sizes and distances
of the Sun, Moon and stars; Eudemus attributes the first determination
of their order to Pythagoras.
61. See D. Dicks, Early Greek Astronomy p.17 on the general principles of
the ecliptic. The concept of the ecliptic appears at the end of the
5th century B.C. (p.87), its invention attributed to Oinopides. It
was known by Meton and Euctemon c.430 B.C. Dicks suggests that the
invention of the zodiac is not necessarily Babylonian - the earliest
Babylonian text to mention zodiacal signs is a horoscope of 410 B.C.
Eudoxus listed the 12 zodiacal constellations marking the Sun's annual
path through the heavens (p.156) and the concept of the zodiac was
becoming known by Plato's time (p.115). If the ecliptic was a Greek
discovery, "Hence it may well be that, in the case of the zodiac too,
we ought to think of a parallel development in both Greek and
Babylonian astronomy at about the same time, arid not necessarily of
any direct borrowing of the one from the other."(p.172)
62. Cicero, De republica VI.iv.2; Macrobius XIX.1-2 (Stahl Commentary
p.162):
"Next we must say a few things about the order of the
spheres, a matter in which it is possible to find
Cicero differing with Plato, In that he speaks of the
sphere of the sun as the fourth of seven, occupying the
middle position, whereas Plato says that it is just
above the moon, that is, holding the sixth place from
the top among the seven spheres. Cicero is in
agreement with Archimedes and the Chaldean system;
Plato followed the Egyptians, the authors of all
branches of philosophy, who preferred to have the sun
located between the moon arid Mercury even though they
discovered and made known the reason why others
believed that the sun was above Mercury and Venus."
(See Stahl Commentary p.162, note 1)
63. Plato, Timaeus 38d, Republic 616e; Aristotle Metaphysics
XI.vlii.1073b
64. See Stahl Commentary p.163 note 4: "The orbits of Venus and Mercury
-82 -

are within the earth's orbit and so they appear to swing back and
forth with respect to the sun. They never go very far from the sun's
position in the sky and are seen during the same year as morning and
evening stars." See also A.E. Taylor A Commentary on Plato's Tlmaeus
pp.192-4 where he gives a thorough survey of the differing versions of
planetary order, although he does assume astronomical 'correctness' in
the Ptolemaic order of Moon-Mercury-Venus-Sun. In the symbolic
cosmology of the Platonic system, such a distinction is irrelevant as
intuitive insight does not depend on scientific accuracy. See also
Ficino, Liber de Sole chapter IV Op.om. p.967 Conditiones Planetarum
ad Solem.
65. Poimandres Libellus I, 9-14, Scott Hermetica I pp.119-121
66. Jung Mysterium Coniunctlonis paras.297-314. This ref. pra.304
67. Julian Hymn 142D
68. Poimandres Lib.VI.2a, Scott p.167
69. ibid. IX.7, Scott p.183
70. Plato, Republic X, see also Julian Hymn 131C
71. Poimandres 1.15, Scott p.123
72. Ibid. XII.6-7 ibid. Scott p.227
73. ibid. 111.4 ibid. Scott p.149
74. ibid. I.25-26a, Scott p.129. Jung suggests (Mysterium Coniunctionis
para.308): "The ascent through the planetary spheres meant something
like a shedding of the characterological qualities indicated by the
horoscope, a retrogressive liberation from the character imprinted by
the archons."
75. Asclepius 1.10, Scott p.305
76. Poimandres XII.9, Scott p.229
77. See Otto The Homeric Gods pp.61-80; K.Kerenyi Apollo; Graves Greek
Myths sections 77, 257
78. Otto The Homeric Gods pp.78-9
79. See Ficino, letter to Antonio Canigiani In Letters vol.1 pp.141-4,
Op.om. pp.651-2
80. Plato, Phaedrus 248
81.

See Ptolemy Tetrablblos 1.4

82. Julian Hymn 133D
83. Ficino, Op.om. p.971:
Quemadmodum Sol et oculos generat et colores, oculisque
-83 -

vim praebet qua videant, coloribus qua videantur, et
utrosque in unum lumine conciliante coniungit, ita Deus
ad intellectus omnes resque intelligibiles se habere
putatur. Spes enim return intelligibiles et Intellectus
omnes Ipse procreat, atque virtutem invicem agendi
praebet utrisque propriam semel atque naturalem.
Circumfundit insuper ass idue commune lumen, per quod
virtutes et intelllgibi.lIurn, et intellectuum ad actum
mutuum excltat, copulatque agendo. Quod sane in lumen
rebus quidem intelligendis vet itatem, in mentibus autem
scientiam Plato nuncupat. Putat lnsuper ipsuxn bonum,
scilicet Deum ita saltem haec omnia superare,
proculdubio supra corporeum Solem, incorporeum
auguratus est asolem, Divinum scilicet inteliectum.
84. Ibid. pp.825 ff.
85. Letters vol.1 p.61, Op.om. p.620:

M3ndavit discipulis suis Pythagotas, ut se in speculo,
non ad lucerna, sed ad Soils lumen specularentur. Quid
est autem scintilla luncernae, nisi parurn adhuc
eruditus animus. Quid Soils lumen, nisi mens quaeque
eruditissima?
86. Woodhouse, George Gemistos Plethon p.52
87.

Ascleplus III.18b, Scott p.321

88.

Op.oni. p.1836:

Divino itague opus est lurnine, ut solis luce solem
ipsurn intueamur. Lumen veto dlvinae mentis nunguam
infunditur anlmae, nisi ipsa, ceu luria ad solem, ad Del
mentem penitus convertatur. Non convertitur ad mentem
anima nisi cum ipsa quoque fit mens. Mens veto non
prius fit, guam deceptiones sensuum, et phantaslae
nebulas deposuerit. Hac de causa Mercurius modo
sensus, et phantasiae caligines exult, In aditum mentis
se revocans: mox Pimander, Id est, mens divina, in hunc
influit, urìde ordinem return omniurn, et in Deo
existentium, et ex Deo manantlurn, contemplatur. Demum
quae divino sunt numine revelata, caeteris hominibus
explicat.
89. Kristellet The Philosophy of flarsillo Ficlno p.50, Op.oin. p.239:
Intellectus siquldem quandiu potentia est
intellecturus, nondum curu re potentla intelligenda
coniungitur, sed quando actu intelligens est cum re
actu lam intellecta. Coniungitus autem cum ea
quoniam tel Ililus forma inhaeret menti. Quorum veto
una forma est, ipsa sunt unum: Unuxn ergo fit ex mente
intelligente, ac re intellecta, quando quidem tel huius
forma, ut talis est, format mentem.
90.

Op.om. p.1874; see chapter three, secion 1

-84 -

91. See P. Moff it Watts, 'Pseudo-Dionyslus the Areopagite and three
Renaissance Platonists' p.295:
"Ficino's conception of the universe as a
hierarchically ordered sympatheia underlies his
conception of knowledge as adaequatio - the
correspondence between the knowing mind and the object
of its knowledge."
92.

Poimandres XI.4b, Scott p.209

93.

Asclepius I.14a, Scott p.311

94. See Ficino, Preface to Commentary on Plotinus, Op.om. p.1537:
Divinitus profecto videtur effectum, ut dum Plato,
quasirena sceretur, natus Picus heros sub Saturno
Aquarium possedente: sub quo et ego similiter anno
prius trigesimo natus fueram ac perveniens Florentiam,
quo die Plato noster est editus, antiquum aillud de
Plotino herois Cosmi votum mihi rorsus occultum, sed
sibi caelitus inspiratum, idem et mihi mirabiliter
irispiraverit.

PART THREE: Plotinus
1.

Plotinus; The Enneads, trans. S. MacKenna, intro, by Prof. Paul Henry
S.J. pp.xxxv-xxxvii

2.

Porphyry, Life of Plotinus 14 in Plotinus I trans. A.H. Armstrong,
p.41

3.

ibid. 15, Armstrong, Plotinus I p.45

4.

ibid. 23, 11, 20; Armstrong, Plotinus I pp.71,37,61

5.

Ficino, Op.om. p.1537:
Plotthus tandem his Theologiam velaminibus erudavit:
primusque et solus, ut Porphyrius Proculusque
test..antur, arcana veterum divinitus penetravit.

6.

Porphyry, Life of Plotinus 14, Armstrong, Plotinus I pp.40-i

7.

Op.om. p.1537:

Placet autem divinae providentiae, his seculis ipsum
religionis suae genus auctoritate, ratlonemque
philosophica confirmare: quo ad statuto quod a tempore
verissinxn religionis spectem, ut ohm quandoque fecit,
manifestis per omnes gentes confirment miraculis.
Divina igitur providentiae ducti divinum Platonem, et
Magnum Plotinum interpretati suinus.
8.

The Enneads trans. MacKenna, intro. p.xlv

9.

Plotinus, Enneads V.1.7

10.

Enneads V.1,6,9-il; The Enneads trans. MacKenna, p.lxix
-85 -

11. Porphyry Life of Plotinus 2, Armstrong, Plotinus I p.7
12. Enneads 1.2.4
13. ibid. 1.6.7 and V.8.13: "Our self-knowledge is our beauty, in selfignorance we are ugly".
14. See C. Kaske, Ficino, Three Books on Life p.25
15.

Enneads 11.3.3. (trans. MacKenna)

16. ibid. 11.3.7
17. ibid. 11.3.7

"

18. ibid. 11.3.9
19. ibid. 11.3.10
20. ibid. 11.3.13
21. ibid. 11.3.16
22. See Jung, Synchronlcity, an Acausal Connecting Principle. This
concept will be explored more fully in chapter four, in relation to
astrology and magic: see chapter four part one, ref .139
23.

Enneads IV.3.39

24. ibid. 11.4.33 (trans. Armstrong)
25. ibid. IV.3.12 (trans. MacKenna)

-86 -

A?TRR TWO MIJSICA HUMk!(A

naturaL and SDiritual Magic in the Platonic Tradition

T ctE; Phi1osohtcal Magic
2.1 Introduction
Ficino, in his Commentary on Plotinus' Ennead IV4.30, says:
"Julian and Iamblichus composed oratiQps to the sun. Plato
called the sun the visible off-spring and image of the
supreme God; Socrates, whilst greeting the rising sun, often
fell into an ecstasy. The Pythagoreans sang to the lyre
hymns to the rising sun. Concerning the cult of the sun,
let them look to that; but undoubtedly 'God has placed his
tabernacle in the sun' .(1)

In chapter one we began to investigate the philosophical importance of
the Sun as a symbol of divinity, conceived as both the highest Good, in an
impersonal, transcendent sense, and as the immanent, divinely appointed
intellectual faculty of man - and especially as the seat of intuitive, even
visionary, wisdom. To the outer eye, the Sun is the visible source of
light and warmth necessary for generative life itself. To the inner eye,
it is the intelligible source of spiritual insight, nourishment and growth,
and the divine kernel of each human being. In a remarkably 'aichemical'
passage in his Liber de Sole(2) Ficino sees the function of the Sun as the
purifying and purging fire, refining and dissolving hard, resistant matter
and revealing the divine essence within - the true heroic quest for supreme
consciousness. The spiritualisation of matter (the 'resurrection' of the
body) was the final unifying process of the aichemical opus; for Ficino the
Sun is the dynamic principle behind the ascent from ignorance to selfknowledge, the very means by which matter and spirit may be brought
together in the middle ground of the imagination which exceeds both form
and intelligence. The power of the Sun is activated, and union is
achieved, through the act of love - the desire to re-connect with the
transcendental realm, which is recognised by depth psychology to be
synonymous with certain projected unconscious aspects of one's psyche.(3)
-87 -

It is the function of the aichemical/Hermetic Mercurius to kindle this
desire:
"God first sows knowledge of divine things into angelic and
blessed minds, and then love. Indeed the mind kindles a
love for us believers here which purifies and converts,
before it bestows the intelligence of divine things. Thus
the Sun illuminates clear and pure natures everywhere, as if
they are suddenly become heavenly bodies; indeed first it
warms opaque, unsuitable matter, then kindles it, refines it
and soon illuminates it. And sometimes it elevates to the
heights through heat as well as light this matter which is
now light and accessible. Hence Apollo pierces the great
Python with the stings of his rays, he purges it, dissolves
it and raises it up... Mercurius, as the armsbearer of the
Sun, is said to excite sleeping people with a certain wand
...',(4)
Ficino understood the role of the magus to be that of Mercurius, who
with his wand sets in motion the active realisation of the correspondence
between the outer form and inner psychological process, or 'above with
below'. This is the domain of magic and theurgy in its bewildering variety
of practices, which I shall be considering in this chapter, paying
particular attention to the power of music and rhetoric in hymns and
orations. The Pythagorean/Orphic/neo-platonic tradition of musical
invocation to religious ends undoubtedly provided the specific inspiration
for Ficino's own hymn-singing.

What did Ficino's ancient authorities understand by the sacramental
application of techniques and objects, which was not only musical and
verbal, but also involved visual image, natural substances, astrological
symbols and all manner of observable phenomena? I shall begin by
addressing the vast area of theory and practice commonly called 'magic', or
'occult science', with the aim of clarifying some of the underlying
metaphysical assumptions implicit in the Hermetic and neo-platonic
traditions. I shall refer chiefly to Ficino's own often-acknowledged
sources and precedents, namely Plato, Hermes 'Frismegistus, Plotinus,
Porphyry, lamblichus, Julian, Proclus and the Chaldaean Oracles. As a
iristian Ficino was inevitably confronted with problems in attempting to
reconcile syncretically such pagan enthusiasm with traditional Catholicism.
He was able to perceive the connective undercurrents linking the
'underworlds' of the two great philosophical and religious systems, unlike
-88 -

many of his contemporaries in the Catholic Church, for whom the new
enthusiasm for Platonism constituted a threat to traditional spiritual
training and interpretation of dogma.(5)

2.2. ) g ic and mysticism
Firstly, we must attempt to clarify the various ways and means of
practical participation in the unseen or immaterial suprasensory world
which range from 'magical' operations through an infinite variety of
'religious' experiences to the transcendental total unity with the Absolute
of the mystic. In her exhaustive survey of mystical experience, (6) Evelyn
Underhill provides a useful framework for nderstanding the distinction
between magic and mysticism in their most extreme forms, which is
essentially a distinction between the faculty of knowing and the condition
of being. Both kinds of 'supernormal' activity hold the conviction that it
is possible for man to attain to a spiritual reality beyond that of
sensible phenomena; however, whereas "magic at its best extends rather than
escapes the boundaries of the phenomenal world"(7) the true mystic has the
capacity to fully transcend all such limitations:
"Mysticism, in its pure form, is the science of ultimates,
the science of union with the Absolute, and nothing else,
and the mystic is the person who attains to this union, not
the person who talks about it.."(B)
The magician, she suggests, is motivated by a desire for experiential
knowledge of transcendental planes. Through a deliberate extension and

exaltation of his will, using all manner of external ceremonies and
rituals, he intends (whether his aims are fundamentally ethical and
humanitarian or self-seeking) to manipulate 'unseen' forces - the gods and
daemons of the Platonic spiritual hierarchy - to material ends. The mystic
however is propelled primarily by a passionate emotional impulse for unity
with his spiritual source, harnessed to a total dedication of the will.
This manifests as a desire to arid for love and results in total surrender
to a conscious condition of oneness with that which is beyond words, but
which we commonly give the name of One, God or Absolute. Of course in
between the extreme manifestations of commercial fortune-teller and
solitary comtemplative we find many stages and varieties of 'occult'
-89 -

activity: the priests or shamans who mediate between the enlightened and
the ignorant and establish schools of spiritual discipline; the mystical
philosophers, who expound and interpret the heartfelt intuitions of the
mystical temperament and themselves have firsthand experiences of
transcendental states of being (such as Plotinus); the philosophermagicians who use ritual and ceremonial trapping in service to selfennoblement and spiritual knowledge (such as lamblichus and his followers);
the practical magi such as healers and astrologers who conduct their arts
with compassion and integrity in respect to higher authority, and the
numerous variety of participators in the ceremonial magic of traditional
cults and religions who, to a greater or lesser extent, experience altered
states of consciousness as a result of focussing and sublimating the will
through ritual activity. The ignorant soothsayer or diviner whose alms are
purely selfish and material could be seen as the least nefarious of a whole
host of irresponsible dabblers who attempt to control powers beyond their
comprehension with intentions ranging from ego-centred curiosity to
downright evil.

Outside this grouping of empirical experimenters fall the
transcendental philosophers, whose allegorical maps and sbolic
cosmologles may kindle latent mystical faculties but who do not necessarily
reveal a direct personal experience of them. One may or may not agree with
Evelyn Underhill that Plato himself, although a poetic philosopher, was not
a mystic.(9) Although he regarded the irrational apprehensions of the
mystical temperament as invaluable, he nevertheless submitted all such
experiences to the scrutiny of Reason; intuitive feeling was never exalted
to the rank of intelligible knowledge. Evelyn Underhill regards Platonism
as "the reaction of the intellectualist upon mystical truth", (10) and such
philosophers in the Platonic tradition as
"our stepping stones to higher things; they interpret to our
dull minds, entangled in the sense world, the ardent vision
of those who speak to us from the dimension of Reality"(ll)

but in their highly developed capacity for intellectual scrutiny they stop
short at their vision of truth, not allowing the 'movement of desire' to
flow naturally from the heights of their knowledge(12); they "know but
cannot be".(13) The most important exception she acknowledges to be
-90 -

Plotinus, who reveals himself as a mystic of the highest order whilst
maintaining the ability to communicate his experience in the most rigorous
and lucid philosophical terms. (].4)

It is of course the communication of the inexpressible which is the
domain of artists, poets and musicians, and which leads mystics to resort
to the imagery and symbols of the sensory world to convey something of the
heightened awareness they experience. As Plotinus stresses, (15) all human
beings have the latent potential for some degree of transcendental
revelation, but they cannot make the leap from everyay consciousness to
apprehension of 'the divine' without a medium which partakes of both
worlds. They must be 'bewitched' (16) by the inner, hidden content of an
art or language whose outer form is easily assimiliated by the senses or
the rational mind yet whose reflection of a more intensely 'real' world is
subliminally perceived by the corresponding 'hidden' or Platonically
speaking intelligible faculty of the human soul. In this view, the artist,
musician or poet who does not have an "intuition of the Real lying at the
root of the visible world"(17) would not move the viewer or listener from
his habitual, sense-bound condition and indeed, as Plato warned(18) could
even inhibit his spiritual development by keeping him bound there.

Similarly, the use of poetic, symbolic and metaphorical language enables
the intellect to make a qualitative leap to an intuitive perception of
heightened reality through the power of suggestion:
"The mystic, as a rule, cannot wholly do without symbol and
image, Inadequate to his vision though they must always be:
for his experience must be expressed if it is to be
communicated, and Its actuality is Inexpressible except in
some side-long way, some hint or parallel which will
stimulate the dormant intuition of the reader, and convey,
as all poetic language does, something beyond its surface
sense •" (19)
It is important to consider this in relation to the significance of
words in magical operations, ranging from the mumbo-Jumbo of the charlatan
who may use exotic language to invoke a particular emotion in his victim,
to the exalted intentions of incantatory prayers and Plato's philosophical
'charms'. But I shall return to this in the context of neo-platonic
theurgy.
-91 -

The Greeks had three words to distinguish the different levels of
participation in the supernatural; gOjtj signified the lowest, base
wizardry and superstitous soothsaying; magla (a word derived from magol, a
Persian tribe with particular religious rites foreign to the Greeks) came
to refer to all forms of exploitation of higher forces to gain advantages
on a lower level by practitioners who, to a greater or lesser extent, had
an understanding of cosmic sympathy; and theourgla or philosophical!
religious magic, where the aim was to elevate the lower towards the higher,
to align one's will with that of the cosmos through the agency of
intermediary spirits, from daemons to angels and the gods themselves. The
magus aimed to gain power and control over the invisible presences in the
world - the theurgist strived for self-knowledge through surrender to them.
At either end of this scale, one could add the perverted and willfully
malevolent exploitation of forces known as black magic and the pious intent
for direct contact with super-cosmic deities or God ?limself demonstrated by
the sacraments of religion, such as the Christian Mass.

The philosopher-magician's ultimate aim with his theurgic practices was
the freeing of the soul from its material bonds, to be achieved through
rigorous self-discipline and focussing of the will. To this end, external
'props' such as repetitive, quasi-hypnotic rhythmical incantations and
repeated sacred words as mantras could strengthen and concentrate the
powers of the imagination, to bring the wayward will into alignment with a
higher realm by opening up a channel of communication between them:
"The uprushes of thought, the abrupt intuitions which reach
us from the subliminal region, are developed, ordered and
controlled by rhythms and symbols which have become
traditional, ... and powers of apprehension which normally
lie below the threshold may thus be liberated and enabled to
report their discoveries."(20)

Thus the magician is endeavouring to raise his own spiritual energy when
he calls upon super-terrestrial gods and spirits, using a wide variety of
artificial means. For the famous 'occultist' A.E. Waite the term
'ceremonial magic' embraced all the means by which this energy was
stimulated, "which in effect was a tremendous forcing house of the latent
faculties of man's spiritual nature."(21) In other words, occult rituals
can be seen as 'containers' for powerful psychological operations. Once a
-92 -

permanent raising of the energy level, or alignment with the cosmic will,
has been achieved, then of course the magus would have no further need for
helpful images, sounds or words as he then approaches the condition of the
mystic. As we shall see when we consider Plotinus in more detail, it is
while he has glimpses of an order of things beyond normal human awareness
that the superior magician may perceive the analogies and correspondences
between all creation and know future outcomes, make oracular predictions or
divinatory pronouncements. The lesser magician would work purely from an
assumption of which he had no direct experience. We can see why Plato set
such high standards for the musicians, artists and rhetoricians whose work
was to be used in educating the young, for their quality of being was
directly reflected in their creation, and only those having reached this
level of perception could fuse knowledge with inspiration, and thus guide
others effectively. He also recognised the necessity for popular religious
cults and rituals involving ceremonial magic amongst the citizens, with
their potential, but again only if operated by the wise, to open and extend
levels of perception according to individual capacity, as we shall be
considering in more detail below.

It cannot be stressed too highly that despite the useful distinction
between magical-philosophical and mystical modes of expression, the
infinite number of gradations in the discrete hierarchies of spiritual
development (each nominally involving a qualitative leap) in no way allow
limited or restrictive categorisations of experience. For it is possible
to achieve both divine knowledge and cosmic awareness combined with a truly
mystical rapture of the heart, and for the most enlightened souls to fully
understand the usefulness and psychological necessity of all manner of
'magical' ritual and symbolic art and to put it into practice. The
effectiveness of such action is dependent on a state of being where
knowledge and love can no longer be differentiated, but fuse in a wisdom of
the heart whose ultimate vocation is a selfless concern for the spiritual
education of humanity. Ficino was indeed one of those rare souls.

It has been claimed by that most humane and perceptive of classical
scholars, A.H. Armstrong, that the Greeks did not understand the 'the
occult' in the same way as we do.(22) There is no indication that closed
esoteric groups existed with special and exclusive knowledge of 'secret
-93 -

things' which they passed on to fellow initiates. The rites of mystery
religions were in service to heightened spiritual awareness, which was in
principle accessible to all who had the capacity to embrace it. In an
'open' community seeking spiritual enlightenment, the self-professed
'magician' would have been a highly suspect character; certainly not
credited with wisdom, and probably condemned as a charlatan by any
respectable philosopher. The manifestation of any 'hidden powers' in the
world in the form of the chance or unpredictable event was attributed to
divine intervention, but there was no group of people who had special
access to the gods' world:
"The gods did indeed give signs and omens and oracles, and
there were religious craftsmen with professional skills in
interpreting them. But the interpretation of the signs was
always considered to be a tricky business, and it was
retognised that the interpreters, even if skilled and
honest, might be wrong."(23)

The Pythagorean 'secret doctrine' was a practical philosophy based on
enlightening spiritual principles of cosmic harmony and transmitted by
Plato as a public tradition. If we are to consider the idea of 'hidden
knowledge' at all, it must be in relation to that which is indeed concealed
from most men, the ability to use the forms of ritual (te1est1k), specific
daily practices (akesis), dreairs and omens to activate Plotinus' 'different
way of seeing' and lead towards the apprehension of higher realities. For
Plato, both the discriminating use of music and the practice of
contemplative astrology were the most powerful tools - far from being
superstitious magic, they could evoke the inscrutable yet vital affects on
the soul necessary for the virtue (aret) of the citizens under cover of
the rational composition of music and traditional ritual observance of
cult.(24) The combination of astronomy as a respectable natural science
with an acknowlegement of the stars as visible, divine minds forges a
powerful bond embracing both exoteric and esoteric disciplines which f or
Plato provided the key to the only true wisdom. As we have seen in chapter
one, this is the central conclusion of the Epiriomls.

-94 -

23. Plato and magic
What conclusions may be reached concerning Plato's attitude to what we
would now call magical practices? It has been suggested by E.R. Dodds that
Plato's personal contact with the Pythagoreans of West Greece in around 390
B.C. sowed the seed of his unique philosophical synthesis of reason and
metaphysics: "Plato in effect cross-fertilised the tradition of Greek
rationalism with magico-religious ideas whose remoter origins belong to the
northern shamanistic culture".(25) Shamans, through rigorous training,
have the ability to dissociate from their bodies and transcend the normal
state of human awareness, becoming adept in divination, dream-prophecy,
'magical' healing and religious teaching. In his capacity as a shaman,
Pythagoras would have been concerned with the purification of man's 'occult
self', the purgation and tempering of the irrational forces of the psyche
through catharsis, using rituals in which music and incantation played an
important part. Such enlightened men, Dodds points out,(26) transcended
all limiting boundaries of scientific, magical or philosophical knowledge
in a personal synthesis directly dependent on their quality of being. The
mythical Orpheus too reveals shamanistic gifts, and amongst the
proliferation of 'Orphic' cults it was a central tenet that absolution
could be obtained through ritual. Dodds proposes that it was contact with
such traditions which made such a "fateful contribution" to Greek religious
experience - that of a puritanical belief in an "occult self of divine
origin" which set the "soul and body at odds",(27) in a world where before
Plato psyche was not associated with Reason, but was more akin to the
Homeric thumos, the irrational self or vital life-principle, the seat of
emotion and appetite and intuitive or instinctual apprehension which
dictated one's actions and inhibited rational decision-making. It was
"perfectly at home" in the body. (28)

With the interpretation of this intuitive life-force as in part divine
and separable from its irrational elements, Plato raised the level of
'religious' experience from that of the unquestioning acceptance of
revelation (whether as an authentic experience or on some religious
authority) to that of a rigorous and discriminating exercise in selfexamination and awareness, involving an intellectual and moral sensitivity

-95 -

to all nuances of experience.(29) As Dodds suggests, in Plato's ideal
state the Guardians could be seen as "rationalised shamans". (30)
For Plato, all intuitive, irrational experiences must be brought under
the scrutiny of the intellect. This is not to devalue their significance
as genuine insight, but is a result of the conviction that knowledge
acquired by rational argument could lead to the resolution of inner
conflict, which was seen as the cause of moral evil.(31) Plato recognised
that the passionate element of the soul, that "contentious and combative
element which frequently causes shipwreck by its headstrong violence"(32)
released an erotic energy which could be harnessed towards this resolution
through rigorous philosophical training, (33) and which, paradoxically,
could Itself provide the impulse to transcend earthly experience. That
Socrates himself took irrational intuition very seriously is evident, for
example, from the attention he paid to his own dreams.(34) For him,
'occult' experiences were rich food for rational speculation, which could
be called on to interpret their significance. One is reminded of Plato's
advocating of an inner act of connection or prayer (a Plotinian 'tension of
the soul' (35)) before any intellectual activity: "we should always appeal
to the gods when we set about speaking or reflecting".(36)

Nevertheless, we have many examples of Socrates' acknowledgement of the
benefits of Irrational activities and practice of legitimate 'magic'. He
implies that he himself received initiation into the Corybantic rites which
involved frenzied ritual dancing.(37) In such ceremonies, rites of
purification and supplication Involving 'possession' were conducted,
presumably led by a priest or priestess whose condition of frenzy inspired
the followers. This homoeopathic cure of 'madness with madness', Dodds
suggests, designed to provide an outlet for "infectious irrational
impulses",(38) has its prototype in the Dionysiac mountain dancing, where
orgiastic dancing and music produce an ecstasls which liberates the soul
from overpowering anxieties. In the Classical Age such rituals were
adopted by the cults of Hecate, Cybele or the Corybarites - Plato refers to
the "sacred rage" of the Corybant(39) and the trance induced by frenzied
dancing. (40)

-96 -

Socrates also recognises the powers of midwives with their ability to
alleviate labour pains with 'drugs and incantations' and even to
intuitively match-make with an eye to healthy offspring(41) and mentions
his own apparent ability to "charm away" the fear of death by saying magic
spells.(42) Such a gift, he suggests, is the hallmark of a true magician
and rarely to be found - indeed Sirnmias fears that after Socrates' death
they will be hard put to find another who "understands these spells". In
Char1des 157a-b, a passage of startling relevance to holistic medical

practice and much reiterated by Ficino himself,(43) Socrates suggests a
certain leaf together with a 'charm' as a remedy for a headache, and
implies that the power of such charms lies in their words:
"... if the head and body are to be well, you must begin by
curing the soul - that is the first and essential thing.
And the cure of the soul ... has to be effected by the use
of certain charms, and these charms are fair words, and by
them temperance is Implanted in the soul ... the great error
of our day in the treatment of human beings (lsJ that men
try to be physicians of health and temperance separately."

The problem lies in the fact that it is Impossible for the average
ignorant citizen to distinguish between the potency of a 'charm' uttered by
a truly enlightened philosopher-magician and that claimed by a wily
charlatan. For this reason Plato was in practice highly suspicious of all
claims of 'paranormal' activity, recogrkising both the destructive potential
of thought-suggestion when undertaken Irresponsibly and with evil intent,
and the difficulties In understanding exactly how such effects might occur
In order to arm oneself against them (which was of course possible, as we
shall see in the case of Plotinus):
"There is another form [of poisoning] which works by art,
magic, incantations, and spells, as they are called, and
breeds In the minds of the projectors the belief that they
possess such powers of doing harm, in those of the victims
the conviction that the authors of their suffering can
verily bewitch them. Now as to all such matters the true
facts are hard to learn, nor, if one could learn them, would
It be an easy task to convince another. Arid it would be
labour lost to try to bring conviction to minds beset with
such suspicions of each other, to tell them, it they should
by perchance see a manikin of wax set up In the doorway, or
at the crossroads, or at the grave of a parent, to think
nothing of such things, as nothing is known of them for
certain."(44)

-97 -

Any unauthorised 'magical' activity was dangerous because it could destabilise the individual, and by extension the society, by clouding his
judgement and inducing false opinion.(45) Plato roundly condemns all
"begging priests arid soothsayers" who believe they have the power to
constrain the gods themselves by means of sacrifices and incantations and
to remit sins by various effortless rituals.(46) Such men who do not
examine their own consciences can have no access to higher knowledge, and
in their hands potentially transforming rites can be at best meaningless
and at worst extremely harmful. That such practices were widespread is
suggested by the reference to a 'bushel of books' attributed to Musaeus and
Orpheus which the soothsayers used as authorities for their dubious
ceremonies. Without the ability to discriminate truth from falsehood - and
Plato recognised that the average human condition is one of constant
struggle, confusion and error in vision - the individual cannot be
protected from the perils of mistaking imitations from the real thing; mere
imitations of nature in an art which prohibits any visionary glimpses of
transcendent reallty,(47) or Imitations of the true 'charms' of discourse
in the extravagant rhetoric of speechmakers(48) are likened to the forms of
witchcraft and enchantment which exploit the Inherent "weakness of our
nature" and beguile through their seeming to be something they are not reflections of divinity. In a profoundly psychologically perceptive
passage in the Laws Plato indicates the precariousness of Inncr
equilibrium, since our soul is by its very nature in a constant state of
change and development and may at any moment be tempted into dissolution
and chaos by subversive elements, whether externally applied In the misuse
of 'magic' or internally generated by warring passions. Such a condition
of psychological chaos, he suggests, is what is meant by hell itself:
"all things that have part in soul change, for the cause of
change lies within themselves, and as they change they move
in accord with the ordinance and law of destiny .. if [their
changes of character] are more and in the direction of grave
wickedness, they fall into the depths and the so-called
underworld, the region known by the name of Hades ..."(49)

So seriously did Plato regard the crimes of those who encouraged such
disorder by their subtle and guileful manipulations (manifest not only in
self-confessed magicians but also in "dictators, demagogues, generals,
contrivers of private Mysteries and ... the so-called Sophist")(50) that
-98 -

their punishment in the ideal state is harsh indeed. Those who "bewitch
the living" with "the supposed sorceries of prayer, sacrifice and
incantations"(51) are to be sentenced to solitary imprisonment (presumably
for life) and no rites of burial. In the end, the only authentic 'magical'
effects Plato recognised and trusted were the psychological transformations
brought about by imitation of the immaterial archetypes of the Good, True
and Beautiful.

24. Daemons

In the Platonic spiritual hierarchy, the energy generated by the life
force or world soul as it permeates and connets the various levels is
carried by spiritual beings "superior to men but inferior to gods". (52)
Unlike the morally neutral world soul, daemoris are potentially autonomous
beings whose actions may appear arbitrary, willful and unpredictable if not
subversive and disruptive to the human psyche which reaches out to them, or

which they invade. The co-operation of the various spiritual entities
mediating between God and man was central to magical operations. For Plato
himself such spirits were essentially well-intentioned; they were created
to watch over human affairs(53) and to act as mediators and messengers
between the two worlds. Each individual was protected and guided in the
after-life bya guardian spirit;(54) Socrates attributed his inner
'prophetic' voice which advised him at all times to his guardian angel or
dairnon.(55)

Our clearest account of the function of spirits occurs in

the Symposium where Diotima describes Eros as a 'mighty daemon'. She
explains:
"Spirits are half-way between god and man ... they are the
envoys and interpreters that ply between heaven and earth,
flying upward with our worship and our prayers, and
descending with the heavenly answers and commandments, and
since they are between the two estates they weld both sides
together and merge them into one great whole. They form the
medium of the prophetic arts, of the priestly rites of
sacrifice, initiation, and incantation, of divination and of
sorcery, for the divine will not mingle directly with the
human, and it is only through the mediation of the spirit
world that man can have any intercourse, whether waking or
sleeping, with the gods. And the man who is versed in such
matters is said to have spiritual powers, as opposed to the
mechanical powers of the man who is expert in the more
-99 -

mundane arts. There are many spirits, and many kinds of
spirits, too, and Love is one of them."(56)
The implications of this passage are that 'occult' practices depend on
such spirits for their effectiveness, and that Plato had no doubt of man's
potential to contact them during ritual or mediumistic activity and bring
something of their higher nature into the material world. What he did
doubt, however, was his capacity to conduct such operations with wisdom and
responsibility.

The later neo-platonists devised an elaborate and complex system of
distinction between levels of moral superiorit among spiritual beings and
the elemental layers they inhabited, which as we shall see came into
conflict with the dualist assumptions of christianity, for whom all daemons
must be intrinsically evil. Plotinus' view differs considerably from
Platonic theology with its incorporation of individual choice and
responsibility into the system of guardian spirits. He maintains that each
soul may choose the level of reality on which it lives out a particularly
earthly life, with its guardian spirit existing on the level immediately
above. He links the allocation of guardian spirits with astrological
determinants of character in a passage, often echoed by Ficino, which in
its perception of microcosm/macrocosm sympathy suggests a viable framework
for the symbolic, 'psychological' astrology practiced by the Florentine
magus. After death, Plotinus suggests, souls return to the planet or star
akin to their nature
"each according to his rational activity here: for one must
think that there is a universe in our soul, not only an
intelligible one but an arrangement like in form to that of
the soul of the world: so as that, too, is distributed
according to its diverse powers into the sphere of the fixed
stars and those of the moving stars, the powers in our soul
also are of like form to these powers, and there is an
activity proceeding from each power, and when the souls are
set free they come there to the star which is in harmony
with the character and power which lived and worked In them:
and each will have a god of this kind as its guardian
spirit, either the star itself or the god set above this
power."(57)

Gods (spirits who inhabit the intelligible realm) and lesser spirits are
for Plotinus products of the anima wundi to provide for and sustain it in
-100-

its complex totality.(58) Spirits are impelled by desire for their
particular attribute, and the individual soul chooses its guardian spirit
"according to the corresponding part of that which is active in them, the
soul".(59) Plotinus' majestic vision soars past the intricate debates of
the theurgists on the classification of disembodied spirits and their
ritual invocation. The true magus, for him, is the wise man who knows how
the force of love draws everything together in cosmic sympathy, and how to
enter into it. I agree with A.H. Armstrong(60) that the episode in
Plotinus' life mentioned by Porphyry(61) when he agreed to witness the
calling up of his guardian spirit by a visiting Egyptian priest does not
merely reveal a superstitious interest in theurgic daemonology, but rather
may be given "a rational interpretation in teris of Plotinus' own
philosophy" which shows that the rank of our tutelary spirit is determined
by our own decision to "live by the higher or lower in us". The fact that
the spirit which appeared was no less than a god suggests either that the
whole story was invented by Plotinus' disciples to prove his exalted
spiritual state, or that the priest had attained an extraordinarily refined
level of being; for "no true god could ever be conjured in Plotinus'
universe". We cannot discount the possibility that Plotinus discerned an
integrity and true spiritual gift in the priest which led him to trust the
result of whatever event took place. We shall return to the role of
daemons in the theurgy of lamblichus later in this chapter, and to Ficino's
attempt to coherently synthesise philosophical, magical and Christian views
in his own attitude towards magic in chapter four.

2.5. Divine frenzy

For Plato, the only authentic condition of being in which it was
possible to make any direct contact with higher intelligences, and thus
successfully conduct any 'magical' operation which aimed to divinise the
soul, was that of furor, manifested in the disturbed and heightened
consciousnesses of the prophet, ritual priest, poet and lover. "Our
greatest blessings come by way of madness" says Socrates,(62) and Evelyn
Jnderhill calls such 'madness' a mystical "enabriation of reality",
suggesting that It involves "an intenser degree of vitality ... a more
acute degree of perception, a more vivid consciousness, than that which is
-101-

enjoyed by other men."(63) Dodds has pointed out that it is a commonly
held belief amongst primitive people that all mental disturbances are
caused by supernatural intervention(64) and that "the dividing line between
common insanity and prophetic madness is hard to draw".(65) For the soul
firmly embedded in a material condition, it would seem evident that nothing
less than a severe j olt away from a rational sanity, a turning upside down
of value systems designed to preserve such a condition would be required to
free the soul to glimpse other levels of reality. Whether this is
interpreted as contact with God himself or a whole range of lesser deities
and spirits must depend on the quality and purity of the individual soul,
and the degree of spiritual training undergone in preparation for such an
event.
In the Phaedrus(66) Socrates distinguishes between human and divine acts
of prophecy. Any act of divination or augury which depends purely on human
intelligence for interpretation, such as the observance of birds, is the
work of a "sane prophet" whose comprehension and advice, however acute,
cannot exceed the limits of cosmic sympathies in the natural world. He is
not 'plugged in' to receive the vibrations of higher planes, messages of
the gods themselves, but relies merely on his own human judgement of
external phenomena.(67) The prediction of the future through real
supernatural intrusion, or "heaven-sent madness" however, is called by
Socrates "that greatest of arts" and acknowledged to be an ancient practice
- indeed Dodds suggests(68) that it may be as old as the religion of
Apollo, the patron of all prophetic arts. The Pythia at Delphi evidently
entered into an 'enthusiastic' trance after careful ritual preparation in
which she was possessed by the god in the manner of spirit mediumship.

Although the ultimate aim of such xnediumship was specific knowledge of
future events, the medium herself was merely the instrument of the god and
it was the function of the prophetes to interpret through the application
of wisdom and reason.(69) Plato suggests that any truths which are uttered
"with no conscious thought", whether by prophets, priests or statesmen, are
fit to be considered of divine origin if the results of their speeches are
"repeatedly and outstandingly successful. "(70)

Hierophantic madness is described by Plato as a therapeutic, cathartic
process involving prayer and ritual to heal hereditary afflictions built up
-102-

over generations, originally caused by "some ancient sin".(71) When such
Inherited guilt eventually erupts in the form of severe psychological
disturbance, it may be expiated once and for all in frenzied rites of
purification and supplication. Plato particularly refers to the music of
flutes in such rituals, which calms irrational,

childish fear. Indeed he

likens their effect to that of mothers singing to their babies:
"they ... put a spell on their babies just as the priestess
does on the distracted in the Dionysiac treatment, by this
combination of the movements of dance and song."(72)

Plato's devaluation of the 'irrational' is demonstrated in his rating of
the worthiness of types of life according to the criterion of degrees of
wisdom attained.(73) The prophet and mystery priest appear fifth, below
the level of athlete or physician, since their skills lie in their
'foolishness'(74) or powers of irrational intuition, not their ability to
acquire knowledge through rational argument. Poets and imitative artists
appear even further down the list, presumably since they represent their
glimpses of divinity through a medium accessible to the senses of sight and
hearing. This may harmonise, refine and impose order on the chaos and
confusion exhibited in the utterances of direct oracular possession, but
therefore also may distract from or dilute the impact of the original
inspiration.

Ficino, as we shall see(75) elevates the role of poetic frenzy to the
status of that of the lover, and emphasises the equal potential of both
visible and audible beauty to arouse the longing of the soul to return to
its divine origin. Indeed the inspired musician-poet embodies the gifts of
both prophet and priest, functioning as a seer possessed by a Muse,
composing under the influence of "a kind of instinct or inspiration"
without conscious knowledge of what he is doing(76) or the ability to
discriminate logically:
"When a poet takes his seat on the Muse's tripod, his
iudgement takes leave of him. He is like a fountain which
gives free course to the rush of its waters, and since
representation is of the essence of his art, must often
contradict his own utterances in his presentations of
contrasted characters, without knowing whether the truth is
on the side of this speaker or of that."(77)

-103-

He is "out of his senses" like a Corybantic dancer, says Plato in his
most eloquent description of the Inspired lyric poet.(78) In such a
condition the poet can enhance and transform ordinary reality through
listening to his imagination which is a gift of the Muse:
"a poet Is a light and winged thing, and holy, and never
able to compose until he has become inspired, and is beside
himself, and reason Is no longer in him. So long as he has
this in his possession, no man is able to make poetry or to
chant in prophecy."(79)

Socrates' analogy of the Muse as a loadstone, initiating and
connecting a chain of inspiration from poet to interpreter to audience like
a series of magnets, drawing and fostering particular talents and
affinities (such as Ion's love for Homer) sets the model for the
spiritually therapeutic function of 'live' performance, and explains why
Plato considered 'bad' or ego-centred art, where the creative artist
believes himself to be the generative force, to be so damaging to moral
virtue.
Finally, the "best of all forms of divine possession"(80) - that of the
lover of wisdom, who is aroused to frenzy through the Intimations of
divinity reflected in the visible beauty of this world; in particular,
through the painful experience of falling in love with another human being.
There can be no more vivid portrayal of the struggle of reason over passion
than Plato's highly charged metaphors of the sprouting of the lover's wings
and the charioteer's taming of the unruly horse. The power of erotic
passion, when harnessed, can propel two individuals to self-mastery and the
realisatlon of a mutual love based on the highest principles whose erotic
component, although not necessarily without a physical outlet, is primarily
an expression of the union of their souls. 'Platonic love' in the true
sense of the term does not imply a repression or abnegation of all physical
erotic desire, but a condition in which the lover fully enters into his
passion, knowing to what end his desire must lead and recognising that its
enactment on the physical level is but an experiential Image of spiritual
union. For Plato, the experience of Eros in sexual love (between men) is
an Important first stage in the ascent to "the philosophical life",(81) and
for Ficino it became the principle on which the intense friendships within
the Platonic Academy were founded, arid which philosophically justified his
-104-

own propensity for the detached intimacy of sublimated homosexual
relationships. (82)
The imperfect, or degenerate forms of the four frenzies, as they are
dimly perceived and misunderstood by those souls most firmly locked into a
material universe (like the outermost ripples of a stone thrown into a
pond), manifest as fortune-telling, superstition, 'superficial music' and
what Ficino called "that common and completely insane love"(83) inspired by
the earthly rather than the heavenly Venus. These shadow-forms, it could
be argued, are necessary both as a shield to preserve the pearls from
defamation by the swine, and as potential stepping stones towards an
awareness of their archetype once the 'itching' of the wings has begun.
i

2.6. Pytha gorean music therapy
As we saw in chapter one, the whole idea of a cosmos held within the
tension of order imposed on chaos originated, for the Pythagoreans, in the
mathematical laws of musical intervals which regulated and structured the
world-soul (expounded by Plato in the Timaeus):
"The general principle applied by the Pythagoreans to the
construction of a kosmos is that of the imposition of limit
(peras) on the unlimited (to apeiron) to make the limited
(to peperasmenon) ."(84)

Quantity is imposed on quality, a harmonious cosmos is created within
the confines of the octave or ratio of 1:2. The organising principle
(arch) actively tends towards unity "but it is only when its work is done
that unity is achieved"(85) - the temporal condition can thus be seen as
one of continual striving towards a completion which can only culminate in
the release of the soul from its embodied condition.

We have already noted that for the Pythagoreans, unlike Plato, the
jodgement of the ears was considered as of equal importance to that of the
mind in the evaluation of musical intervals. For accounts of the
importance Pythagoras attached to practical, therapeutic music-making we
must rely to a large extent on the legends and anecdotes gathered together
by lamblichus in his On the Pythagorean Life.(86) lamblichus tells us that
-105-

initiation in
Egypt, followed by twelve years with the Magi in Babylon. However exact
Pythagoras spent twenty-two years studying and receiving

this information may be, it is generally held as we saw in chapter one that
'Pythagorean' discoveries concerning music and mathematics originated in
Babylon, and it is important to bear in mind, particularly in view of the
Renaissance enthusiasm for Hermetic texts, that "the Greeks were indeed as
children to those venerable but by then quite decadent civilisations."(87)

According to lamblichus, the first stage of education in the Pythagorean
school involved the training of the disciples through refinement of the
senses. Music was to take precedence over visual arts,
"through certain melodies and rhythms, from which the
remedies of human manners and passions are obtained,
together with those harmonies of the powers of the soul
which it possessed from the first ... divinely contriving
mixtures of certain diatonic, chromatic and enharmonic
melodies, through which he easily transferred and circularly
led the passions of the soul into a contrary direction
attempering them through appropriate melodies, as through
certain salutary medicines."(88)

Music was used to induce sleep and to purify the intellect, paying
attention to specific times, rituals and astrological symbolism. For
example, at springtime a lyre player would be surrounded by singers whose
behaviour would be 'ordered' by the singing of 'certain paeans' (presumably
to Apollo) in a representational ritual symbolising the Sun surrounded by
the signs of the zodiac.(89) lamblichus tells us that Pythagoras alone had
developed and refined his 'inner ear' to directly intuit the harmonies of
the spheres, which he then determined to reveal to his disciples through
the means available to the outward senses - through dance, recital of epic
poetry and instrumental music - so that they might "comprehend truly the
first and genuine archetypes of things". (90) The overall aim was
purification of the soul and its alignment with the macrocosm, as
manifested by the movements of the heavenly bodies. This was to be
achieved firstly through desire, that is, the inner quickening of the soul
which has been afforded a glimpse of Its immortality (the longing to
'return to the stars'fl(91) and secondly through iiitation of the
inexorable cosmic laws revealed by the movements and harmonic proportions
of the heavens.
-106-

Iamblichus, like Plato, understood this therapeutic tempering of
psychological imbalances and intentional subsititution of various emotional
conditions as 'enchantment':
"Sometimes, also, by musical sounds alone, unaccompanied
with words, they healed the passions of the soul and certain
diseases, enchanting, as they say, in reality. And it is
probable that from hence this name epode, i.e. enchantment,
came to be generally used."(92)
lamblichus likens the whole Pythagorean training method to the Deiphic
oracle; for divine messages cannot be easily accessible to those who do not
apply themselves to serious stndy of the inner, hidden meanings to be found
concealed within the language of riddles and puzzles, and within the
symbolism of ritual practices.(93) Forritual sets up the conditions for a
direct apprehension by the intuitive faculty in a way beyond the power of
verbal communication and rational conceptual thinking. Music is such an
effective 'charm' because it goes straight to the soul, connecting with its
Intrinsic proportions and effecting change and adaptation through its
likeness to and resonance with the object. Thus the change will be natural
and revelatory, beyond any human power to change someone purposively
through a direct argument. In this sense, any moment where an alignment of
the soul has occurred through artistic stimulation, whether in music or
poetry, is an 'enchanted' one.

2.7. Ritual and education
Although for Plato the only truly effective catharsis of irrational
elements was mental withdrawal and concentration(94) he realised that
unlike the p'uilosopher, the common man did not have the self-possession and
strength of resolve to achieve such an aim without the aid of some form of
external ritual. He saw that it would be detrimental to eliminate cult
practice entirely, but that its regulation and authorisation by the wise
was essential for the accommodation of common religious impulses and
traditional honour ing of the gods(95) - as the Athenian pointed out, (96)
the need to worship both visible deities and invisible ones by means of
images was fundamental to all cultures. However Plato understood that the
task of establishing a sanctuary was not to be undertaken lightly and for
-107-

that reason forbade individuals to set up shrines in private houses "under
the delusion that they are winning the privy favour of heaven by offerings
and prayers". At all times the oracle at Delphi was to be the absolute
authority,(97) the cult of Apollo providing a traditional, archaic 'ritual
counterpart to the new "rational form of worship"(98) of the philosophers
which centred around the symbol of the Sun, deified as Helios. In the Laws
we see Plato forced into an extreme position in his despair at the
superstitious materialism of his society. He is attempting to regulate
something essentially unregulatable - the irrational religious impulse - in
reaction to the harmful effects of manipulative and ignorant popular
'religious conjurors'. Astrology, from this point of view, provided for
all levels of society, from the highest mystical speculations on number (as
we saw in the Epinonis) to the rituals of popular cults of the planetary
gods. The most important thing was a fundamental education in the basic
principles of astronomy, so that even if the average citizen remained at
the level of the literal or the superstitious, he would not be guilty of
misrepresentation and at least the seed for potential spiritual growth
would be sown.(99)
In the Laws the role of music as a powerful form of 'natural magic' is
emphasised as being primary in both the education of children and for the
continuing moral health of the citizens. This finds its precedent of
course in the musical regime of the Pythagoreans and the supposed teachings
of Pythagoras himself.

Following the Pythagorean tradition, for Plato the specially-composed
songs for children were "spells for souls", disguised as play, but with the
underlying potential to induce moral virtue and temperance.(lOO) The
'enchantment' of the children was to be effected through the setting of
'noble doctrines'(101) to carefully chosen rhythms and melodies and
performed by experienced singers who themselves had attained a high level
of moral discrimination:
"the sexagenarians of the 'chorus of Dionysus' would need to
be exceptionally sensitive to rhythmic and melodic structure
to ensure their competence to distinguish a good musical
imitation of a soul under the stress of its emotions from a
bad - competence, that is, to distinguish the counterfeit
presentments of a good soul from those of an evil, to reject
the second but produce the first publicly in their hymnody,
-108-

and thus to put a charm on the youthful mind, challenging
one and all to join them in pursuit of virtue by means of
these same imitations."(102)
Again, Plato stresses that it is the condition of being of the performer
which determines the quality of the musical imitation he produces and
thereby will affect most profoundly the impressionable soul. We learn in
the Republic(103) that the subtle qualities of the various harmonic modes
and careful choice of rhythms must always be in service to the words, and
that a strong and noble character will naturally reflect similar qualities
in any artistic output. (104) The true musician is someone who understands
ausica humana - the conditions of the human soul as manifested in moral
virtues and vices - and can Intuitively discern the presence or absence of
'the good' reflected in any activity or image.(105) Plato exalts the
musician's role to no less than that of philosopher whose soul is so
harmonised that it instinctively vibrates in sympathy with the harmony
manifest in the proportions of physical beauty. (106) Because both rhythm
and harmony directly penetrate 'the inmost soul'(107) through
correspondence in kind, the musician as educator may touch the quick of the
listener's pshological equilibrium, and if his own soul is tempered
through training to only receive the 'beautiful and good' then he is in a
position to foster and nurture similar tendencies In the impressionable
souls of children.

2.9. Plotinus
Plotinus, perhaps th a rigorous attempt to refine and reform the diffuse
'magical' strands of the neo-platonism of his day with their implicit
dangers of encroaching superstition and dilution through the proliferation
of cults and rituals (a "spineless syncretism" In the opinion of
Dodds), (108) never mentions theurgy as a legitimate practice. Plotinus'
magic of natural correspondence was based on firm analogies between the
experience of the intelligible realm and Intensified sense-perception of
the material world, which provided a natural image of it:

"They Ithe Forms In Intellect) all flow, in a way, from a
single spring, not like one particular breath or one varmth,
but as if there was one quality Which held and kept Intact
all the qualities In itself, of sweetness along with
-109-

fragrance, and was at once the quality of vine and the
character of all tastes, the sights of colours and all the
avarenesees of touch, and all that hearings hear, all tunes
and every rhytha."(109)

Plot inus was not concerned with the external trappings and oheervances
of religious experience; as A.H. Armstrong points out,(llO) religion for
his was "a solitary Journey of the mind to God" - which is not to say that
he despised or condemned snch practices if fellow-philosophers found them
useful. In the instance of his refusal to accompany Amelius to certain
rituals for the gods in temples with the words "It is for them to come to
me, not me to the*"(1ll) he appears to display an attitude of apparent

indifference towards association with lower deities; or rather, perhaps, he
knew that the presence of a god may be invoked by operss and reverence at
all times, and not necessarily through habitual cult procedures or
manipulation of paraphernalia. Plotinus' contemplation was aimed directly
at union with the CWe beyond all Intelligible realms and their nualna.
Philosophical reflection was In itself a prayerful attitude; a condition of
ceaseless contemplation which permeated all 'lower' activities and enhanced
their significance. His philosophical formulations and images on the one
hand, and the inscrutable content of his stical experience on the other,
were hence two aspects of the same thing. Such practices could, for him,
be the only 'charms' worth cultivating.(112) Plotinus' penetrating mind is
concerned with stripping away all Impediments to an untranmielled, authentic
realisation of the autonomy of man's higher soul, the full assumption of
individual responsibility for affecting, directing and re-aligning external
circ.stances. 'Right action' may then "spring spontaneously from (man's I
higher self's unbroken contemplation."(113)

The images and actions of external ceremonial, in this sense, could only
provide approximations of a true inner experience. They could be seen as a
more or less helpful way of strengthening contemplative powers which sight
be too weak to be harnessed directly towards the vision of the ultimate
Good - for, as Plotinus suggests, "who, if he is able to contemplate what
is truly real will deliberately go after its image?"(114) He does not deny
that images, in reflecting the Intelligible world, may aid recollection,
but stresses that mere sense-perception of such images can In no way lead
to knovledge.(115) It is Important to remember Plotinus' distinction
-110-

between the higher and lower parts of the soul, for he is never in any
doubt that the lower, irrational part, including the body, could be
affected by 'magical' practices, and was particularly vulnerable to what we
might now term telepathic interference. In the episode of Olympius'
attempts to undermine Plotinus by directing 'star magic' at him which
resulted in intestinal pains, (116) Plotlnus apparently was so possessed of
'soul power' that Olympius' actions were deflected back onto him and he
gave up in fear for his own health. (117) According to Porphyry, Plotinus
unquestioningly accepted that his pains were happening as a result of
Olympius' evil thoughts, but such was his ability to act from his higher,
contemplative nature at all times that he was ultimately inmune from, and

by his very quality of being (in other words, involuntarily) resisted and
caused to rebound, such enchantment. (113)

Would Plotinus have maintained that Olyapius' evil wish, evidently some
sort of rite involving astrological. invocation, caused his intestinal
complaint? In Ennead IV. 4.41-2 he describes how the natural powers of the
stars may be set in operation by prayer but do not have autonomous wills to
be petitioned:
"That which he prays for comes about because one part is in
sympathetic connection with another, just as in one tense
string; for if the string is plucked at the lower end, it
has a vibration at the upper ... But if the vibration can
even pass from one lyre to another in so far as a sympathy
exists, then there Is also one single harmony in the All,
even if It is composed of opposites ... nor do Lthe stars]
deliberately choose to attend to prayers, but we must admit
that s influence comes from them both with and without
prayer in so far as they are parts, and parts of one whole
one thing is benefited and harmed by another because it
is naturally so disposed, and by the arts of physicians and
magicians one thing is compelled to give something of Its
power to another .."

If this is effected with harmful intent by the 'magician', it does not
presume any evil property in the part itself:
"if the man who prays is evil, there is no need to be
surprised; for the wicked draw water from the streans aid
that which gives does not know itself to what It gives, but
only gives; ... if someone takes what he ought not from what
lies at the disposal of all, justice pursues him by an
inevitable law."(119)
-111-

From this one could ass that Plotinus, being so in-tune with the apt
and just flowing of such 'inevitable laws' through the subduing and
moulding of his own will, became an unwitting instri.nt for such
retribution to flow back to the perpetrator. In Ennead 111.1, 'C1 Destiny'
Plotinus rejects all neatly cut-ar1-dried theories of causation, held by
Epicureans, Stoics and astrologers, in favour of a free-ranging potential
of h.aan viii to acknowledge its own participation in its destiny. By
likening the role of the vise astrologer to that of the soothsayer or
diviner, in that he Is contemplating the possible significance of a given
set of signs by subjectthg them to a personal interpretation and not
regarding them as definite objective causes, (120) Plotinus sets a
philosophical precedent for all 'magical' rites as experiential, nonquantifiable moments of meaningful and significant connection between the
participator and his chosen set of cosmic 'mirroring' devices, whether they
be observed as stars, birds or entrails. Such operations work, he says in
Ennead IV,

"by sympathy and by the fact that there is a natural concord
of things that are alike and opposition of things that are
different, and by the rich variety of the many powers which
go to make up the life of the one living creature."(121)

In such an inter-connected cosmic system it Is not surprising that an
intentional 'invasion' for manipulative eras by a particular individual
would cause reverberations of equal intensity, for this, for P].otinus,
would simply be in accordance with natural law - a perversion of the
natural state of conditioned tension and reverberation present in creation,
in which we continually and Inevitably participate.
However, the treasures yielded by 'knowing participation' in cosmic forces
are only available to those who are able to make the necessary connections.
Por example, with regard to 'occult' astrology, he says:
"We must rather say that the movement of the stars is for
the preservation of the universe, but that they perform in
addition another service; this is that those who know how to
read this sort of writing can, by looking at them as if they
were letters, read the future from their patterns,
discovering what is signified by the systematic use of
analogy.9122)

-112S.-'

The degree of such ability, according to Plotinus, varies according to
the quality of the human soul, which in its nobler form acts from the
impulse of free-will and excercises total control over bodily passions.
Instead of being at the mercy of external circumstances arid internal
temptations, the "self-directed" man is possessed of himself, and when
moved by "irrational impulses" holds his own and remains free to move In
any direction, maintaining the power to change the outer circumstance or
influence rather than be changed by it.(123) This ability to discriminate
and sift with regard to involvement in life and use of resources was of
course of paramount importance to Ficino in his attempts to regulate and
balance his outer life with his temperamental melancholic tendencies. As I
mentioned earlier, it was the intention of the neo-platonlc magician to use
his practices, whether those of direct contemplation (in the case of
P].otinus) or theurgy (as favoured by Iambllchus arid Proclus) as a means of
self-clarification arid alignment so that his desires and those of the World
Soul become one, achieving a degree of self-possession and direction which
enhances individual freedom of action and liberates from the limiting
shackles of deterministic assumption:
"it is perhaps correct to say that the soul acts
unthinkingly according to destiny, at least for people who
think that destiny is an external cause; but the best
actions come from ourselves; for this is the nature we are
of, when we are alone."(124)
We have already mentioned how Plotinus believed the higher part of the
soul to be immune from the effects of all artificial intervention on the
part of the magician. He explains(125) that this Is because the rational
soul is self-directed, arid may choose whether or not to consciously enter
into the natural enchantment of the world. For all worldly, practical
action Is enchantment for Plotinus - we are constantly moved towards that
which charms us, and often caught by It. Nature herself is full of 'magic
draughts' (126) which bring illusion and misdirect or attract our energies
sideways instead of upwards. Plotinus particularly stresses the danger of
musical incantations, for when they are produced with a specific attitude
and Intent on the part of the magician they exert a wholly natural power
over the irrational part of the soul and so may, by the unscrupulous
manipulator, be misdirected to confuse rather than harmonise:

-113-

"And there is a natural drawing power in spells wrought by
the tune aid the particular intonation and posture of the
magician - for these things attract, as pitiable figures and
voices attract; for it is the irrational soul - not the
power of dioice or the reason - which is charmed by music,
and this k ird of magic causes no surprise: people even 1 ike
being enchanted, even if this is not exactly what they
demand from the ausiclans.9127)
In order to free oneself from such enslavement, Plotinus suggests, we
mt so strengthen the higher part of the soul with philosophy that it will
"dissolve the powers on the other aide."(128) Then an upward shift of
emphasis may take place; all practical activities may be approached from an
inner condition of contemplation. For Plotinus, contemplation is not
confined to a few solitary aysti. It 'is the coon gift of an inner
vision which "all have and few use."(129) As such, it may be brought
constantly to all activities, to 'ennoble' them, for necessary natural
impulses and compassionate actions are not inherently 'noble' (130) but
bec
so by their continual, intentional relation to a higher purposive
design through the medium of the inner eye, which 'sees' with connective,
symbolic insight. The opening of this eye is aided or prompted, in the
Platonic sense, by intimations of the divine pattern perceived by our
senses as Beauty, visible or ardible. It is an operation that must be

continually renewed experientially, to preserve and strengthen the soul,
and can be seen as Ficino's fundamental aim in his emphasis on active
imagination throughout Book three of the Liber de vita, as we shall see in
chapter four.
Plotinus would see that self-examination, understood as selfcontemplation, can alone ennoble every-day life without losing selfpossession. We will find a direct echo of his words "that which [the selfdirected man] contemplates is hinelf"(l31) in Ficino's exhortation to a
young Tmter of the Medici fainily(132) to turn his attention to the
planetary energies mirrored within his soul and "temper within hiaelf" the
heavenly gifts. In the end, engagement in practical activity without
losing a higher self-awareness is a question of attitrde aid participation,
a willingness to renounce habitual, objective thought processes.
Paradoxically, for Plotinus, to be "actively occupied" with the concerns of
so-called everay reality, without having recourse to a contemplative
-114-

perspective, is to be enchanted and deluded by the seithiance of truth.
True 'reality' is only to be found in subjective inner experience:
"The man ... is alone free from enchantment who when his
other parts are trying to draw him says that none of the
things are good which they declare to be so, but only that
which he knows himeelf, not deluded or pursuing, but
possessing it. So he would not be drawn in any
direction."(133)
We can perhaps sue up this brief survey of Plotinus' conception of the
magician's role as follows: the natural process of ebb and flow in the
cosmos is consciously, bit disinterestedly, entered into and dynamically
caught by the magician through his inclination and disposition - what
Giovanni Pico was to call his 'intent of soul' (anfil Intentio)(134) - to
move towards that which he desires, which is to enter the play of forces
for the sake of harmonising his own soul. The natural astrological
benefits which he draws to himself via the 'occult' properties of the stars
and their ef fluxes are thus signs, stoe or by-products, which incline
towards him through a sympathetic resonating. The wilful and deliberate
attempt to harness these forces for the manipulation of events or the
artificial realisation of particular objectives, is illegitimate and
presumptuous and will receive, in the natural balance of cosmic justice,
its deserved retribution.
2.10. Images (sunthaatrL
"Things here are signs; they show therefore to the wiser
teachers how the supreme God is known; the instructed priest
reading the sign may enter the holy place and make real the
vision of the inacessible."(135)
A.H. Armstrong in his article 'Platonic Mirrors'(136) gives a vivid and

succinct analysis of the distinction between 'natural' and 'artificial'
images and Plotinus' own evaluation of their specific derivations and
functions. He quotes a passage from Ennead VI 4-5 where Plotinus clearly
differentiates between the image produced by an artist and that to be found
in the natural world:
"... if one is talking about the likeness made by the
painter, we shall affirm that it is not the original which
made the the likeness but the painter, since even if some
painter makes a self-portrait it is not alikeness of

-115--

himself, for what made the painting was not the body of the
painter or the bodily form which was represented: and it is
not the painter, but this particular disposition of the
colours which should be said to make this particular
likeness. This is not in the strict and proper sense the
makthg of likeness and image as it occurs in pools and
mirrors, or in shadows - here the image has its existence in
the strict and proper sense from the prior original, and
cos to be from it, and it is not possible for what has
ccs to be to exist cut off from it."(137)
In Platonic terms, these tvo forms of imaging can be referred to as
'participation' (methexis) or 'imitation' (ii.sis).(l38) It is the direct
participation of the divine in the natural things of this world which
Plot inus considered of greater twçort than the images constructed by the
intervention of the artist; indeed, such images could be inherently
dangerous. Iris Murdoch draws our attention to Plato's suspicion that art
may be a subversive distraction from the true business of intellectual
speculation, for it demands a personal, subjective response:
"The artist begins indeed to look like a special sort of
sophist; and not the least of his crimes is that he directs
our attention to particulars which he presents as
intuitively knowable, whereas concerning their knowabi 1 ity
philosophy has grave and weighty doubts. Art undoes the
work of philosophy by deliberately fusing knowledge by
acquaintance and knowledge by description."(139)(my italics)
AH. Armstrong points out that for the ancient Greeks, artificial
representation such as that of Greek tragedy could also be "dangerously
powerful"; (140) for in the heightened intensity of artificially induced
emotion, as in the non-naturalistic stylised beauty of sculpture, the aim
is to activate the archetype directly, deliberately creating a clarifying
focus in contrast to the diffuse, ambiguous and often hidden signs freely
available in nature. For Plotthus, the world's interfusion with divinity
is best expressed through the concept of mirror-imaging, rather than
imitative representation. In the words of Armstrong:
"What his preference for the mirror-reflection rather than
the picture enables him to bring forward and stress is,
first, the intimacy and idiacy of the relationship of all
below it to the eternal, and, second, the direct spontaneity
of the eternal's creative self-diffusion."(141)

-116-

Plotinus tells us(142) that it is by means of such close interweaving
that earthly things display traces or signs of their real forme, of
imianent, divine presence. Such a direct, spontaneous imprint of divinity
on the world, facilitated by the action of the Soul, gave rise to Plotinus'
famous image of the temporal world being contained by the eternal as if a
net spread out in the sea. (143) For Plotinus as a contemplative mystic,
divine activity takes the form of emanation and irradiation, a process of
creative contemplation which must precede all deliberate planning of the
artisan:
"the world-order is not the result of following out a train
of logical consequences and purposive thought: it is before
consequential and purposive thinking; for all this comes
later, reasoning and demonstration and the confidence
produced by them.9144)
Such processes of discursive thinking play no part in the processes of
nature, who creates from the font of silent contemplation, as from a dream,
which lies beyond all action. In Ennead 111.8 Nature herself speaks:
"..• my act of contemplation makes what it contemplates, as
the geometers dra y their figures while they contemplate.
But I do not draw, but as I contemplate, the lines which
bound bodies come to be as if they fell from my
contemplation."
In order to understand the processes of magical rites, Plotinus'
continual emphasis on the necessity of abandoning discursive thought in
favour of experiential, intuitive apprehension (hence his preference for
methexis) cannot be too highly stressed, and we need to consider the

implications of such a mode of perception in some detail. Plotinus' master
Plato in his Seventh Letter and in the Phaedrus had already comeented on
the inadequacy of words to represent the true nature of reality. Written
speech, he says(145) is merely a shadow of the "living and animate speech
of a man with knowledge" and moreover
"it shows great folly ... to suppose that one can transmit
or acquire clear and certain knowledge of an art through the
medium of writing, or that written words can do more than
remind the reader of what he already knows on any given
subject ... once a thing is coninitted to writing it
circulates equally among those who do not understand the
subject and those who have no business with it; a writing
-117-

cannot distinguish between suitable and unsuitable readers
...9146)
To quote Iris Ilurdoch, "Plato wrote with nisgivings, because be knew
that truth t live in present consciousness and cannot live anywhere
else."(147) Socrates attributes the tradition of the cultivation of wisdom
by internal resources of memory, rather than by the external form of
writing, to the ancient Egyptians, the culture so revered as the 'golden
age' of religious philosophy by Ficino aid his contemporaries.

Such an eiç*asis would help to explain the 'philosophical incoherence'
(as Brian Copenhaver puts it)(148) of the Hermetic texts, which were
perhaps intended, in the spirit of Egyptian teaching, more as an aideaéioi re to be tasted than doctrines to be learned. Plot inus' own distrust
of artificial 'reminders' s no doubt fostered by the words of the
Egyptian King kmon in the Phaedrus:
"Those who acquire [writing) will cease to exercise their
memory and become forgetful; they will rely on writing to
bring things to their remembrance by external signs instead
of on their own internal resources."(149)

i this passage, Ficino cotanents
"Socrates laughs at the person who studies writing in the
belief that through letters he can reveal indubitable truth
to posterity. In the manner of the Pythagoreans, he affirms
that the contemplation and transmission of truth occurs in
souls rather than in books."(150)

However, paradoxically, if the intelligible world is to be represented
on the sub-lunar level at all, then images rather than words nay provide
the noet effective aeditu, when employed by those who know what they are
doing. Plotinus certainly credited the "wise men of Egypt" with such
skill:
"... either by scientific or innate knowledge, when they
wished to signify something wisely, [they) did not use the
forms of letters which follow the order of words aid
propositions and imitate sounds and the enunciations of
philosophical statements, but by drawing images, and
inscribing in their temples one particular image of each
particular thing, they manifested the non-discursiveness of
the intelligible world, that is, that every image is a kind
-118-

of knowledge and visdom and is a subject of statements, all
together in one, and not discourse or deliberation.9151)
In the Seventh Letter Plato stresses the value of enthusiastic debate
for acquiring knowledge. (152) Given that language in general will always
be a poor substitute for experiential insight, although the vise man may be
able to create verbally the condl U ons for true perception, such
apprehension is mare likely to occur during the thrust of 'live' discourse.
The written word is a solidification of thought, open to misunderstanding
and uncompromisingly, although arbitrarily, fixed in a context. True
penetration into the nature of things, suggests Plato, can only occur
"when all these things, names and definitions, visual and
other sensations, are rubbed together and subjected to tests
in which questions and answers are exchanged in good faith
and vithout malice ... when human capacity is stretched to
its limit, a spark of understanding and intelligence flashes
out and illuminates the subject at issue. "(153)
The creating of the right conditions, the "sustained, persistent
discussion"(154) necessary before insight is gained is, as we shall see in
Ficino's own description of his improvisatory musical compositions, of
direct relevance to all 'spontaneous' artistic outpourings, if they are
worth anything. Plato emphas lees that neither learning nor memory "can
make a man see if his nature is not akin to the object"; but once the
alignment is made (either through natural disposition or purposeful art or
ritual) then there is no danger of forgetfulness, for truth has been
"grasped by the soul". (155)
In Porphyry's Life of Plotlnus we read how his master put this Into
practice. Plotinus' teacher Amonlus left no writings, and for ten years
Plotinus gave lectures and led discussions based on Airinonius' teaching, but
cormItted nothing to writing himeelf(156) - in fact he had made an
agreement with two other pupils not to disclose any of Aimnonius' doctrines.
When he did conit his thought to paper, it was without concern for
spelling or syntax and never revIsed. (157) Porphyry suggests (see chapter
one, page 61) that Plotinus' capacity for sustained, focussed concentration
enabled him to convey as lucidly as possible the nature of his ininediate,
intuitive thought-processes - such a writing method, springing from a
-119-

contemplative over-view, would reproduce as closely as possible in the
reader the sensation of being present at a viva voce exposition.
It is clear from Porphyry's account that in Plotinus' school of utmost
importance s the direct personal relevance of the texts studied and the
encouragement of sustained, penetrating questioning, out of which a 'spark'
of truth might arise which could then be set down in writing. (158)
Ficino's Comnentary on Plato's Seventh £etter(159) reveals his firm
agreement on the dangers of expressing 'divine things' In writing or words
to the coon people, and he stresses that the faculty required for
comprehending them is not that by which 'other things' are understood:
"Nowhere does Plato say that nothing true and certain can be
understood about divine things; but what is understood of
these things can neither be expressed, nor can their
particular truth be understood by the same intelligible
reasoning [ratloj as the rest."(160)
He goes on to explain that the philosopher's mind is prepared for
illminat ion through the strengthening of the divine part of the soul
through 'moral purgation and contemplative resolve' (tui morali purgatione,
tu. resolutione conteiplatival; the act of 'knowing' in this sense is an

approaching and joining with God th an 'opening of contemplation'. Ficino
is also convinced that such things cannot be taught or discovered by the
same systematic reasoning fratioi that may be brought to other areas of
knowledge. The soul must respond or yield to the inner purified essences
of things (purgatissima atque emlnentisslial which are qualities
perceivable by the philosopher after long and dedicated application. Cly
then is his soul prepared for the sudden spark of illumination, the
perception of the Ideas which have been "kindled by the fanning doctrine"
and shine out like the rays of the stars. A mind thus nourished, suggests
Ficino, is unable to represent In words the nature of its revelation, but
rather it "cultivates and instructs minds through listening" that is, in
'live' performance. It is no use, he says, to attempt to convey such
things to those who in their normal condition are incapable of
understanding, through their lack of the essential faculty of inner sight,
but only to those who do have potential to 'see' in this way, for their
"keenness of vision" (acleil will be sharpened and inspired by it. For in
-120-

no way can such refinement ever be cultivated from the soil of a mind
steeped in a habitual yet deadenthg rationality.
There is a radical difference of quality between these two modes of
awareness. Ficir,o's clear distinction between ordinary 'rational' or
con-sense understanding and an anagogic raising of consciousness to
grasp exalted truths inaccessible to man in his comon condition has deep
implications for our interpretative response to his own literary style.
For it is in itself a paradox that he can discourse rationally and

scholastically about something beyond discursive reason; yet perhaps it is
in that very 'rubbing together' of seemingly disparate outer form and inner

content that the 'spark' is lit In the soul of the reader.

2.11. Earthly beauty
In elaborating on the same theme, Plotinus also tells us that the mode
of awareness necessary for contemplation of the essential divinity present
in all things is far from what we normally regard as understanding or even

perception, for rather "it will be like comparing the consciousness of
someone fast asleep to the consciousness of someone awake. "(161) In his
treatise on Beauty, (162) Plotlnus exhorts us to "shut your eyes and change
to and wake another way of seeing, which everyone has but few use."(163)
This is the condition of creative contemplation, the activity of Soul,
known in her furthest reaches by the productive processes of nature which
"holds all the levels of the Neoplatonic universe together
and ensures that the reflections, shadows and dreams which
it produces as our cosmos here belov are true signs and
icons of the Intimate and inmied late presence of the
Good. "(164)
Discursive reasoning, a faculty peculiar to man, is of course necessary
as as stepping stone to a contemplative awareness, but there is always the
danger of it taking over in a way which excludes conjectural or speculative
insight. For the neo-platonists such an awareness could be enhanced
through the power of beauty In earthly things, a beauty which also, as we
have seen, may bewitch and deceive those who do not understand its purpose.
The sense-awareness of beauty manifests in the Platonic tradition as love,
-121-

a desire evoked in response to the supreme beauty of the Idea glimpsed in
an obiect or person, or heard as an echo in auslca lnstruientalls. It is
this desire, or eros, which enables the philosopher to begin his ascent
from the particular to the universal; (165) it frees him to enjoy the
beauties of the earth without desiring their possession, for he is no

longer attached to them for their own sake. A.H. Armetrong stresses(166)
the importance of understardthg the transcendence of the Ideal world as a
horizontal expansion as well as a vertical shift in perspective, the
intelligible cosmos being "our material cosmos with all its beauties

intensified" which is Innediately present when we look with different eyes.
It is the greatest paradox, and perhaps the key to an aichemical unity of
objective and subjective vision, that such perception involves seeing

things both 'as they are' - intensely aria clearly - and yet also knowing
that their apparent truth Is an illusion. For Plotinus, arid for Ficino,
the entire living world is an Icon of the divine.
)ic, for Plotinus, is another way of 'waking' the soul by reflecting
the imperceptible sounds of the ordered cosmos. (167) The musician is seen
as having the facility to be led to higher speculation through his affinity
with harmonious sounds arid rhythn:
"He must be led and taught to make abstraction of the
material element in them and come to the principles from
which their proportions and ordering forces derive and to
the beauty which Is in these principles, arid learn that this
was what excited him, the intelligible harmony and the
beauty in It .."(168)
In this way, the musician may transcend the condition of the lover arid

attain that of the philosopher, although he may not be explicitly conscious
of such a transformation. Moreover, his Intuitive "firm confidence in what
he possesse&'(169) will allow his insights into the divine nature of things
to be comnunicated non-verbally through a musical performance where there
Is no interference from a self-centred acknowledgement of 'divine powers' he arrives on this plateau "without knowing it".(170) Such is the position
of the musical magus, who in the hope of effecting a harmonisation of
'above with below', uses hynms

and invocations to strengthen his prayers.

-122-

PART ¶): Practical Magic

2.12. 'flurqv
In chapter XXII of De vita coelitus coaparanda, the third part of his
Liber de vita, Ficino suggests that the depressive tendencies signified by
the planet Saturn may be alleviated in tvo ways: either a].lopathically, by
the admixture of a good dose of Jupiter, or homoeopathically, by fully
entering into the nature of his melancholy and thereby receiving the
greatest gift of the planet - that of divine contemplation and intelligible
knowledge. In the context of the philosophical life, the latter remedy is
more highly recxmiended, for, says Ficino, "The thaldaeans, Egyptians and
Platonists think that by this method one can avoid the malice of fate."(l)
It is in this light that Ficino's enthusiasm for the neo-platonic
practical magic of the thaldaeans (as relayed by Iathl ichus and Proclus),
the revelatory, 'aichemical' magic of the Egyptians (via Hermes
Trismegistus) and the philosophical magic of the Greeks (in the works of
Plato and Plotinus) must be considered, for his syncretic attempt to
penetrate to the coon roots of a wisdom manifesting through a vast
spectrum of intellectual disciplines and revelatory religious practices was
directed to one end: that of self-mastery and thus the liberation of the
soul from fate-bound necessity. Although Ficino understood that all
religious traditions could be traced back to the same comrion need for unity
and that essentially there was no contradiction in his eracing of the
thristian faith, his advocacy (and even adoption) of magical practices
nonetheless provoked unease amongst some thurch authorities who were
limited by a more othodox perspective. Ficino's Apologia to his Liber de
vita(2) testifies to his struggle in presenting such unorthodox material.
His dileia lay in the conflict between his convictions and the very real
danger of losing his livelihood and reputation - if the new thristian
Platonism was to inspire and take root, it was vital for Fictho that his
authority as a thristian priest was never undermined. Ficino sought "the
reform of thristian theology by returning it to its Platonic sources"
through creating "a new Platonic 'mentality' which challenged implicitly
-123-

the cultural hegemony of the inherited traditions of thristerom"(3) - stxth
work could only be carried out from within the wry institution whose
attitude it sought to change.
Although Plotinus undoubtedly provided Ficino with a sound framework for
his 'natural magic', as we shall explore further in chapter four, the
Florentine nagus was not content to strive for union vith the divine by
internal visionary and contemplative means alone. He found much to be
recourmended in adding the 'charme' of ritual activity involving astrology,
visual image and music to those of philosophical speculation. It was
chiefly the newly-discovered works of Porphyry, lamblichus and Proclus

which revealed to Ficino the lofty potential of theurgic rites, although
like his master Plato he was fully aware of the precarious nature of
daemonic magical activities when practiced by the ignorant. In the
religious rites of the thaldaeans(4) Ficino discovered a practical
dimension to Platonism Which appeared to demonstrate experientially its
essential truths. In the elevation of his music-making and astrology to
the condition of sacramental ritual Ficino took on the role of hierophant,
discovering a form of magic which could lead directly to the contemplative
gift of Saturn through the transforming power of the imagination.

lamblichus, in his De iysterlis Aegyptlorui, drew his personal
exposition of ritual magic in reply to Porphyry's sceptical enquiry, he
tells us, from a synthesis of the three traditions mentioned above
(thaldaean, Egyptian and eek) . (5) This work certainly seeme to have both

aroused Fictho's intellectual curiosity and inspired his practical use of
ritual, drawing from him a lengthy Cosimentary, (6) and it provides us with a
thorough examination and advocacy of the ritual attitude known as theurgy.
He incorporated the experiential revelation of the thaldaean Oracles into
the intellectual discipline of neo-platonism in a way which connected human

philosophical discourse with direct initiation through the power of the
gods. This was magic of a kind which aspired to that which lay beyond the
intellect, vertically connecting man with god, not merely dealing with
horizontal sympathies or artificial hallucinations. (7) The central ritual
of the thaldaeans was anagg, or the ascent of the soul on the rays of the
Gun to mystical union with God. Whereas Plotinus maintained that the
purification of the soul was essentially a contemplative process in which
-124-

the individual could turn to the higher part of the soul - which remained
pure - through internal moral effort, for the thaldaeans the whole soul is
enslaved in matter. In such a condition the soul is subject to the
influence of the stars and prey to the evil aggression of material daemons,
and requires purification through various rituals which eventually lead to
the thrusting of the soul out of the body to be united with the god.
Lewy( 8) suggests that the anagogic condition of ecstatic rapture is none
other than Platonic frenzy - the moment when the soul becomes innortal
through the discarding of all material elements, and in a state of
inebriation is 'possessed' by the god. We may also see similarities with
the aichemical stage of 'whitening' when, in a supreme act of
differentiation from matter, soul and spirit wRIte in the first conlunctfo
or mystical marriage.

lamblichus understood very well that the proper performance of rituals
involved man's participation in a natural order which lay beyond his
conscious grasp, and which enabled him to clarify the part he must play in
this order. In the establishing and consecration of a 'templum' or sacred
space, the conditions are created for alignment with eternal laws, or to
use Boethius' terms, for iuslca huiana to be brought into accord with
•uslca mundana. lamblichus describes sacred rites as "more excellent than
reason"(9) with the potential to purge the irrational elements of the soul
and free the subject from bad fate. Different rituals will be suited to
different types of souls - in fact the specific kind of ritual hardly
matters, for the importance lies in the subjective experience, which will
inevitably be the more powerful when the rite is suited to the soul
performing it.(1O) The objective is to move "from parts to wholes", (11)
from confusion to clarity, freeing from the constraints of material life.
Although the theurgist may use sympathetic magic (his embodied condition is
his starting point therefore the first rites *ust be material ones) such
means are never ends in themselves - the power lies 'beyond' in the gods.
To participate fully means to give oneself to the symbol or occult property
by a turning around and away from logical thinking; for such concentration
frees the dormant intuitive faculty of apprehension from the constraints of
sense-perception and discursive thought, which as we have seen is
continually regarded as a severe prohibitor of alignment with the play of
forces in the cosmos, or real engagement with its forces. Most important
-125-

to Ficino as a 'doctor of the soul' vou].d have been Iainbljcthus' belief in
the power of ritual as a cathartic, purifying activity similar to Greek
tragedy, purging the evil of the soul through its contact with similar
'base' apparitions and auditions:

"The powers of the human passions that are in us, when they
are entirely restrained, become more vehement; but when they
are called forth into energy, gradually and coinensurately,
they rejoice in being moderately gratified, are satisfied;
and from hence, becoming purified, they are rendered
tractable, and are vanquished without violence. On this
account, in cody and tragedy, by surveying the passions of
others, we stop our own passions, cause them to be more
moderate, and are purified from them. In sacred ceremonies,
likewise, by certain spectacles and auditions of things
base, we become liberated from the injury which happens from
the works effected by them. Things of this kind, therefore,
are introduced for the sake of our 5oul, and of the
diminution of the evils which adhere to it thorugh
generation, and of a solution and liberation from its
bonds.912)

2.13. Invocations
Central to theurgic practice was the invocation of gods, who were
loosed' and 'bound' by the magician by means of magic formulae which were
Imparted to him by the gods themselves. It Is continually stressed that
the gods are the active agents; the human participant Is passive and aims
at a purification of his soul which viii allow it to be drawn upwards by
divine action. The conjunction (systasls) of the magician with the god was
achieved through the powerful action on the soul of 'voces ntysticae' - the
names of the gods uttered in the forms of prayer, often outwardly
unintelligible but composed of definite ntmierlcal arrangements and vowel
patterns. For Ialichus, and for Ficino, Invocation achieved no less than
the conforming of human will to divine:
"for an Invocation ... does not draw down the impassive and
pure Gods, to that which is passive and impure; but, on the
contrary, It renders us, who have become passive through
generation, pure and Ininutabie ... (it) renders the viii of
man adapted to the participation of the Cods ... such names
of the Gods are are adapted to sacred concerns, and other
divine symbols, are able, as they are of anagogic or
elevating nature, to connect invocations with the Cods
themselves."(13)
-126-

Why were these magical names so powerful? For the theurgist, the
'secret names' or voces mysticae represented the power of God working in
the universe, the Ideas sown in matter and represented in sound,(14)
andible images of the 'divine lures' embedded in the natural world. Their
knowledge and utterance brought the magician into direct contact with the
archetypal principle personified in the god evoked - Psellus tells us(15)
that such invocations are the 'watchwords' forgotten when the soul left its
divine condition for the embodied; to 'rer' them is to have access to
the musica aundana experienced when the soul descended through the
planetary spheres, and thus to be enabled to begin the reascent:
"Seek out the channel of the soul, from where it descended
in a certain order to serve the body; and seek how you will
raise it up again to its order by combining (ritual) action
with a sacred word."(16)
Tamblichus stresses(17) that only invocations and rites performed by
someone who knows this may reach and join with the "more excellent natures"

through a natural attraction of "similitode and alliance", not through any
violent or manipulative means. He explains that the significance of the
'names' uttered lies In their symbolic value - we cannot apply human
judgements about the degree of meaning in any particular word. To the
gods, they all have a significance which lies beyond the limits of our
imagination; it conforms either to our intellect, itself being divine, or
is simply beyond human powers of description. For this reason we must not
asstn the right to apply logical or natural similitudes to the words which
are transmitted by the gods themselves, and which conform most closely to
their divine natures;(18) bet if it were possible to know the totality of
meaning contained in an invocation, then "the whole divine essence, power
and order" would be revealed. (19) Iamblichus considered that ancient

Egyptian and Assyrian words were more powerful because, since these races
were the first to participate with the gods, their language itself was
inherently "adapted to sacred concerns". (20) He understood that it is
impossible to preserve the essence and idiom of a language in translation,
and that such attempts would result In a degeneration and wealcening of the
original 'divine' force present.(21) Ancient words would also be more
effective due to their Innutability, for in this aspect they correspond to
the changelessness of divine natures and may be more potent reminders of
the eternal 'order'. The preservation of sanctity in a prayer or a holy
-127-

place must depend on its conformity to the invariability of the deity to
which it is dedicated, otherwise no 'divinisation' of the temporal space
(in spoken word or physical locality) can take place. lamblichus laments
the attitnde of his contemporary Greeks, who restlessly indulge in
continual innovation arid change: "they transform everything through an
unstable desire of discovering something new."(22) The venerability arid
sanctity of ancient ritual was thus firmly established, arid one cannot
overestimate the importance, for the Renaissance Platonist, of the
rediscovery of such arcane practices arid their incorporation into a new
synthesis of religious philosophy arid practical magic.
In his Comientary on the Chaldean Oracles Proclus employs musical
imagery to describe the activating of the divine principle of the soul as
it strives towards ultimate union with the Father. He refers to the
'seminal reasons' implanted in the soul as

"the intellectual arid invisible hymns of the ascending soul,
awakening the memory of harmonic reasons, which bear the
inexpressible images in it of the divine powers.923)
Proclus goes a stage further than lamblichus in suggesting that the hymn
surpassing all hymns, that directed towards the Father himself arid no
lesser divinity, must be of a nature that transcends any material or
sensual expression - in fact it can consist of no less than the
'eriergising' of the soul itself. After all initial preparations involving
sensual stimuli of words arid music, the final song of the soul consists in
Its actual transformation:
"The hymn of the Father does not consist of compound
discourses nor the preparation of sacred rites. For being
alone incorruptible he does not receive a corruptible hymn.
Let us not therefore imagine that we may persuade the Master
of true discourses by a strange hurricane of words, nor by
show or parade adorned with artifical rites: for God loves
the simple, unadorned beauty of form. Let us therefore
consecrate this hymn to God as an assimilation to or
becoming like him ..."(24)
f or the thitiates who had not yet attained the inner resources for
such direct internal cortnunion, andible invocations provided valuable
stepping-stones for the ascending soul. The thaldaeans recognised the
traces of divine essences present In ausica instruientalls to be 'baits'
-128-

identical with the lynges, or diating intelligences between the
intelligible and sensible worlds. When evoked, they enter the planetary
spheres whence their message is mediated, (25) and solar light is contracted
into rays which elevate the soul of the initiate to the 'heart' or Sun,
filling it with a fiery ray. Porphyry, On the Philosophy of Oracles,(26)
describes an oracle of Apollo where the god says he will "lift up" the
supplicant who utters the formula he has taught him "from his heart". When
the god is enticed to descend, he then fills the 'recipient' who then
'becomes' the god and utters prophetic words - a shamanic process vividly
described by Porphyry:
"The stream separating from the splendour of Phoebus on
high, and enveloped in the sonorous breath of the pore air,
falls enchanted by songs and by ineffable words about the
head of the blameless recipient.
fills the soft
integument of the tender mhranes, ascending through the
stomach and rising up again, and it produces out of the
mortal pipe (or flute) a lovely song."(27)

It

We are looking at an operation whose essential ingredient is occult
power; the connection of the most physically-experienced emotional force
with the transcendental erotic power of the cosmos. The instinctive
rapture arising from the stomach and through the heart of the ritual singer
is the force of desire which connects with the divine lures or lynges which
have descended into the rolling spheres. The thaldaeans venerated Eros as
the all-pervasive cosmic power who binds all things and brings about the
concord of the universe and of the parts of the human soul. The audible
Ideas or lynges resonate musically with the harmony of the spheres, and
thus the enact ion of the desire becomes a musical reality in which the
human singer (or instrunntalist) has direct access to the gifts of auslca
sundana through the proper use of ausica instruientalis. It is clear from
Porphyry's description that the psychosomatic effects of this process (the
components of muslca humana), are felt as bodily sensations - the
transformation reaches (in the Platonic hierarchy) the lowest material
level. Do we not find here another parallel with the intuitions of the
alchemists, that matter preserves in Its depths a divinity which, when
freed, will transform and 'spiritualise' its very substance and thus
resolve the battle of opposites inherent in a dualistic universe? Theurgic
ritual depends on the receptivity of matter to the permeation of divine
forces; the natural world becomes a meeting-ground for man and god. On the
-129-

spiritual level, the tremendous potential of theurgic ritual - man
transformed into a divine likeness - can be fully realised. In fact the
universe itself becomes a symbol of an occult organism which represents a
higher reality, as we read in the Hermetic Ascleplus: "This [sensible]
Kosmos has been made in the image of that other (eternal I Kosmos, and
reproduces eternity in a copy"(28) and find elaborated by Lewy:(29)
"Consequently the point of crucial interest removes from
cosmology to the occult power of the spiritual in man
this psh1c substance ... receives ... dynamic faculty and
becomes a centre of power which is able, by means of the
pure thought of the divine, to insert itself in the system
of the supramundane powers and to transfer the energies of
their organised structure to itself. Thus the knowledge of
the divine becomes the control of the unity of its powers:
power of thought, power of magic."

2l4. Time
"the things which are seen are temporal, I,it things which are not seen
are eternal".(30)
We shall now turn our attention directly to the underlying theme of this
thesis, which is the exploration of the fundamental distinction between two
orders of what might be termed 'being in time'. This bears specifically on
the nature of the forces in play during the 'magical moment' or within the
synchronous event, when an alignment appears to occur between these two
essentially different 'orders'. In Platonic terme, they are represented by
the eternal Cosmos and its sensible copy. We could also distinguish these
two 'orders' in terms of qualitative evaluation and quantitative
measurement, and we find the most discerning elucidation of the ways in
which the two realms interpenetrate in the third book of the Latin Hermetic
Ascleplus.

Brian Copenhaver rejects the possibility that the Hermetica had much
influence on Ficino's theories of magic. He says that "any attempt to
derive such material from the eclectic and philosophically jejune Hermetica
would have been fruitless"(31) and that their "philosophical content is
banal, eclectic and incoherent". (32) However he does not acknowledge a
more fundamental correspondence between the mode of intuitive perception in
-130-

vhich the texts were conceived and that required of the magus for effective
theurgic operations. I suggest that it would be unwise to Insist that the
practice of magic should be made to rely on any merely theoretical
philosophical coherence, arid that the Insights contained in the revelatory
mysticism of the Hermetic texts rather provide the fundamental attitude and
subjectIve conditions required for successful psychological transformation
such as Ficino advocated - as such, his debt to pseudo-Hermes can hardly be
overestimated. As these authors understood, we simply cannot approach a
real understanding of any magical event when too firmly rooted within the
fixed order of our temporal framework, with its strictly linear, causal
view of time-processes. It is man's very participation in 'Cod's' time
which empowers him to transcend the fateful limitations of matter,
eloquently expressed by Ficino In the Thologia Platonica:
"mankind .. Is so precious a part of the world that it is
the intermediary of temporal arid eternal things according as
it understands the eternal arid organises the temporal; it Is
so close to God that insinuating itself into the secrets of
the divine mind it knows this work of God, namely the order
of the universe."(33)
In distinguishing between the Intelligible and Corporeal realms, we read
in the Asclepius, the chief factor Is the inmeasurabIlity of the
Intelligible in terms of the fixed quantitative methods used for corporeal
events and concrete substances:
"nothing (of the corporeal can mingle with the intelligiblel
which admits of determination by quality, magnitude or
number; for nothing of this kind exists In it. You cannot
measure it as you would measure a body, affixing marks of
length arid breadth arid helght."(34)
The movement of the Cosmos is twofold: eternal by virtue of the
Intelligible realm which infuses into all parts from 'without'; and
temporal by virtue of number and time, determined by the movements of the
celestial bodies which obey fixed laws and relations (Et commotlo aundi
ipsius ex duplici constat effectu).(35) The notion of the immanence of the
eternal order within the temporal poses a paradox - for since the timeless
eternal has entered Into the realm of movement it appears to be itself In
motion.(36) But 'time', in the eternal sense, is not bound by a
chronological order of past, present arid future. When this 'order' of
-131-

things is glimpsed, 'past' or 'future' events may be revealed, woven into a
synoptic pattern which t anscends causality, as if the threads of these
linear events are turned back on themselves and on each other: "into
eternity all movements of time go back, and from eternity all movements of
time take their beginning". (37)

laws of movement are seen as a
reflection or "secondary eternity" - that is, within the changing realm
eternal laws may always be glimpsed. The tensile lirinobility of the divine
principle ("though stable, is yet self-moving' 38) holds steady the mobile
Cosmos according to its own inherent imutable laws: "it is this sort of
eternity that enters into all the parts of which the Kosmos is
cc*nposed".(39) The iimnanence of the eternal in the material world infuses
what appears as an essentially qualitative mode of being into a world of
quantitative processes. The sense-perceptions employed to assess and
measure the temporal world cannot be applied in the same way to the quality
or depth of an experience which reaches beyond the limits of the human
powers of rational scrutiny and measurement.(40)
It is possible to describe the nature of eternal 'time' rather more
faithfully as being circular:
"That movement has had no beginning, and will have no end;
it manifests Itself and disappears by turns in the several
parts of the Koarnos, and that in such fashion that again and
again in the chequered course of time it manifests itself
anew in those same parts in which it disappeared before.
Such Is the nature of circular movement; all points in the
circle are so linked together, that you can find no place at
which the movement can begin; for it is evident that all
points in the line of movement both precede and follow one
another for ever. And it is this manner that time
revolves."(41)

Because of its circular movement, the eternal divine mind is filled with
"all-embracing knowledge" whereas the limited human mind may only stretch
to memory of the past. (42) We are warned that a purely linear view of time
leads to error for it only presents half the picture and distorts the
totality of a particular event: "For where things are discerned at
Intervals of time, there is falsehood; and where things have an origin In
time, there errors arise."(43) Through embracing the Image of circularity
in relation to eternal tIme, the human faculty through which such a concept

-132-

may be glimpsed is itself strengthened, for such is the power of the symbol
vhich facilitates direct connection between macrocosm and microcosm.
In the htman microcosm, the eternal and temporal are reflected in the
different functions of soul and body(44) or in the p6ychological
distinction between the intellective soul (the seat of the deeply intuitive
notlo) and the rational mind. In the same way that the wholeness of the
cosmos can only be comprehended through a total experience of the eternal
as infused in the temporal, the cohesive disposition of the faculties
required for such an act of cognition on the human level would promote an
illumination of the soul by the light of the mind - the aichezaical
conjunction of male and female aspects of the psyche, symbolised by the Sun
arid Moon:
"but when mind has once been interfused with the soul of
man, there results from the intimate blending of mind with
soul a thing that is one and indivisible, so that such men's
thought is never obstructed by the darkness of error • "(45)
Through his intellect (Intellectus/dlanola) rather than merely through
his rational mind or sense, man has the capacity to obtain a more
comprehensive picture of the eternal order through varied degrees and
qualities of perception, according to the intensity of his subjective
vision: "And thus it comes to pass that we men see, as through dark mist,
the things of heaven, so far as this is compatible with the conditions of
the human mind."(46) However this vision is not achieved without an
appropriate attitie and "mental effort" (lntentione aentis). It Is
possible now to see both Plotinus' internal 'tension of the soul' arid
externalised theurgic purifications arid rituals as efforts to transcend the
boundaries of linear time so that the human soul can tune in to that moment
or space where the two orders coincide or intersect, and from which
divinations, oracular pronouncements or prophecies may spring. The
ultimate aim of the soul elevated to the Sun on sunbeams in theurgic
anag&g would entail an experience of such a coincidence, for "the beyond
is no more than the eternal duration of the supreme experience which the
soul undergoes during the initiation".(47) Such an experience of
participation In a conjoining arid interaction of the two orders is an
irrational, subjective one, depending to a large extent on the
corresponding condition of unity in the human soul, and set in motion by a
-133-

longing generated through the tension of religious feeling created by the
ritual. The process cannot be regarded as a systematic interlocking of two
equivalent processes or mechanisms Independent of the one who perceives It
- such moments may be viewed as 'fortuitous' or 'synchronous', but they are
never predictable or logical.
In a cross-fertilisation of the two orders, linear time may appear to
lose its momentum whilst eternity adapts itself momentarily to linear
motion, resulting in an expansion of consciousness at that point where time
appears to 'stand still'. In the human being the discursive mind rests and
the soul's Intuitive mode of perception is allowed to blossom - in such a
synchronous event the intrusion of the eternal into the temporal is grasped
and the implications of the moment are seized in their entirety by man in
his entirety. It is the moment when profound changes may take place In the
human psyche through a liberation from cause-and--event thinking to a
conscious deepening of awareness to embrace a wider spectrum of the
qualitative distinctions and intensities of any given moment.
location and moment of this occurence (its co-ordinates within the
temporal system) Is called 'chance' or 'contingency' by the Hermetic
authors, who recognised that It was "intermingled with all material
thlngs"(48) as a necessary temporal component of the inscrutable workings
of Destiny - a force which in Itself lay beyond 'orders' of time:

"The seven spheres ... have as their Ruler the deIty called
Fortune or Destiny, who changes all things according to the
law of natural growth, working with a fixity which Is
ininutable, and which yet is varIed by everlasting
movement."(49)
The 'contingent' provides a glimpse of what appears to be haphazard but
which paradoxically confirms an inimitable order beyond normal awareness,
which is ustIf led and determined by Necessity. The arrangement of events
in time progression, the domain of Order, is one way in Which the 'higher'
Cosmos weaves the 'lower' like a garment: (50)
"Destiny generates the beginnings of things, Necessity
compels the results to follow. rd in the train of Destiny
and Necessity goes Order, that is, the interweaving of
events, and their arrangement In temporal succession...
-134-

Order ,. maintains the interconnexion of the events which
Destiny and Necessity determine."(51)
Order and contingency (or 'causal' and 'acausal' orderedneas) provide
the warp and weft of the cosmic fabric; in the generation of creatures the
two modes find expression in the ininutability of the laws governing the
characteristics of the particular species and the uniqueness of each
Individual:
"For It is impossible that any single form should come into
being which is exactly like a second, if they originate at
different points of time, and at places differently
situated; but the forms change at every moment in each hour
of the revolution of that celestial circle ...Thus the type
persists unchanged, but generates at successive instants
copies of itself as numerous and different as are the
moments in the revolution of the sphere of heaven, for the
sphere of heaven changes as It revolves, but the type
neither changes nor revolves..."(52)
A horoscope, or representation of this particular moment, can be seen as
a 'frozen' image of the intersection which contains within it the complete
potential of that moment, and which is not limited to one position within
linear time. As a divinatory tool, it will allow qualitative predictions
which may suggest distinct concrete events but can never indicate those
precise times, certain locations or particular forms which will be the
vehicles for conveying the essentially subjective experience required by
any one individual. We shall explore this more fully in chapter three when
discussing Ficino's attitude towards astrological prediction. Suffice it
to say here that a horoscope may be seen to encapsulate the quality of a
moment in time using measurable co-ordinates and therefore may provide a
template for the individual's resources and thus become a powerful tool for
unification within the psyche. Any attempt to reduce astrology to purely
rational 'scientific' theories or statistical analysis may thus undervalue
and mis-represent its holistic potentia].(53)
significance of such a symbolic image, in whatever form it may take

(horoscope, statue, talisman, Inscription, spoken word) extends beyond its
sensible manifestation and thus may lead to the glimpse of the eternal
order. This is confirmed by Ficino himself in a discussion on the power of
words In the Theologia Platonica.(54) In his reading of lamblichus and
-135--

Proclus on the power of invocation Ficino would have found confirmation of
his own insights into the 'occult' properties of the spoken word; that it
is the Meaning of the word which reflects its qualitative dimension and
which remains after the act of speaking:
"Signification is an incorporeal, not a sensible, thing
this signification remains in the intelligence of the
auditor although the syllables have disappeared, as it had
existed in the intelligence of him who spoke before he
spoke. Consequently the signification produced without
intermediary by the soul of him who speaks is incorporeal
If one pays attention to this signification, it is the
thought of God who speaks that one comprehends. "(55)
Ficino likens the relation between meaning and words to that between the
soul and body; or again we might use the, imagery of the eternal and the
temporal being fused in the spoken invocation or prayer uttered with true
intentio anii. The same power, latent within any visual image designed to
symbolise unity or wholeness, as for example in 'animated' statues which
formed an important part of the Egyptian and thaldaean rituals of
teiestlk,(56) might be entered into and released by such an 'intention of
the soul' expressed through prayer or sacrificial ceremonies.

2.15. Statue-magic
As far as Ficino was concerned, Plotinus' reference to statues as
receptacles for soul(57) was based on the 'god-making' passages in the
Asclepius, (58) where we find the art of statue-animating heralded as one of
the greatest achievements of man.(59) These gods, we are told, are
fashioned in human likeness out of material substances (as God fashioned
man in his likeness) with the addition of a "suitable power from the nature
of the world" (vlrtutem de mundi natura convenlentei) whereby they work
good or evil acts. Through rituals involving herbs, stones, and scents
"which have in them something divine" (that Is, their 'occult' property
which corresponds to the attribute of a particular deity) the souls of
spirits are evoked and Implanted in the statues, (60) 'which then become
"living and conscious, filled with the breath of life, and
doing many mighty works; (they] have foreknowledge, and
predict future events by the drawing of lots, and by
prophetic inspiration, and by dreams ... (they] inflict
-136-

diseases and heal them, dispensing sorrow and joy according
to men's deserts."(Gl)
What is this "supernatural force" which facilitates such miraculous
processes? It is perfectly clear from the most cursory examination of the
Asclepius that it would be futile to expect any explanations which rely on
logical, cause-and-effect rationalisations. Nor may we dismiss such
accounts as 'merely' imaginative, fantastic delusions - both reactions
would remain firmly within temporal, causative framework belied by the
texts themselves. However, if we consider it possible that some living,
numinous quality may be grasped through the interfusion of the temporal and
the eternal 'orders', and that to seize this moment will depend solely upon
the quality of the individual's subjective condition (when his own normally
unconscious faculty of overview and insight beyond linear time-structure is
stimulated), then it is possible that in the interfiow and alignment of
cosmic with human soul insights into the nature of things (experienced as
prophecies, dreams, divthations etc.) may appear to originate from the
images themselves. The Hermetic authors held that these 'terrestrial' gods
predicted and administered the particulars of earthly concerns; it is not
difficult to suppose that in the state of 'frenzy' induced by ritual,
latent human potential - seen as 'divine' - to transcend temporality may be
projected onto a suitable image of divinity, whereby it is believed that
the god himself completes the work. The spirits are encouraged to remain
In the statues, we are told, through the continued performance of
sacrifices, hymns, praises and "sounds which imitate heaven's harmony"(62)
- a passage which Ficino was quick to refer to in his own discussion of
statue-magic. (63)

Plotinus' account of statue-magic in Enneads IV.3. illustrates the
principle that, on the basis of his understanding of magic as a product of
sympathy within the All, material objects constructed with the specific
Intent on the part of the magician to invest them with a more powerful
resonance through an intensification of their 'occult' properties, could

Indeed be said to be 'inhabited' by a god - but this would be through no
intention of the god himself, nor through his manipulation by man. Rather,
It would be achieved by the alignment of the divine or 'occult' property
present in the object with the cosmic soul, a sympathetic attraction
-137-

conducted and focussed through the sensitive spiritual touch of the
mediating magician. Their construction by men of such wisdom would reveal
true Insight into "the nature of the All":
"That which is sympathetic to (soul] is what imitates it in
some way, like a mirror able to catch (the reflection of] a
form. Yes, the nature of the All, too, made all things
skilfully in imitation of the [intelligible] realities of
which it had the rational principles, and when each thing in
this way had become a rational principle in matter, shaped
according to that which was before matter, it linked it with
that god In conformity with whom it came into being and to
whom the soul looked and whom it had in Its making. For it
was certainly not possible for the thing made to be without
a share in the god, nor again for the god to come down to
the thing made."(64)
Proclus, in his influential treatise De sacrlficic' et aagia (revealed to
the West, as was the De aysteriis, by Ficino's Latin translation)(65),

gives us a concrete and homely image of the process of purposeful
interaction Into this play of forces with the analogy of candle-flame:
"For instance, if a candlewick which has been heated
beforehand is placed under a lamp, not far from the flame,
you will see it light up even though it has not touched the
flame, for the transmission of the flame takes place
downwards. By analogy, you may consider the heat already
there in the candle to correspond to the Sympathy between
things, and its being brought and placed below the flame to
correspond to the Sacred Art (hieratik techne5) making use
of material things at the right time and in the right
vay."(66) (my italics)

Proclus' description of the practices of the magi, who used their
knowledge of occult sympathies between hierarchies of spirit and matter in
their ritual concoctions and images, was to have profound Influence on
Ficino's own magical treatise, the Liber de vita. Proclus did not doubt

that it was possible to create images, through the subtle art of mixing
various combinations of properties and essences present in matter - images
which contained divine powers within them: "Thus they unified the
multiplicity of powers which when dispersed are weakened, but when combined

lead back up to the Form of the Archetype (h tou paradeigiatos idea)".(67)
If the practices Proclus describes Incinded the construction of statues, he

does not consider such procuration of divine forces as illicit or
dangerous, but rather as a stepping-stone to a higher form of magic at a
-138-

level where physical objects are abandoned in favour of purely intellectual
communion with higher powers.(68) For Plotinus on the other hand, such an
art is explained by the link of everything in the sense-world to the
intelligible through the agency of soul; the creators of images who "wish
that the gods should be present to them"(69) intensify and focus the divine
element through the concentration and intention of that very faculty in
their own soul - via the subjective experiences induced by ritual and
purification - thus enhancing the potential of the material form as a bait
or divine lure for cosmic soul.

Ficino, following both lamblichus and Synesius (whose treatise De
somniis he translated)(70), was well aware of the dangers in the non-

theurgic use of statue-magic involving spiLit-exhortation and conjuration.
Synesius objected to rituals which involved matter as a lure for bewitching
daemons from the lower echelons of the material cosmos which would thus
only result in the trapping of the magus in matter.(71) He acknowledged
that Plotinian cosmic sympathy would involve the participation of cosmic
divinities, but held that "whatsoever of the divine element is outside the
cosmos can in no wise be moved by sorcery."(72) Similarly, laniblichus
condemned the Egyptians' magic as merely constructing baits for evil
spirits,(73) could find no value in artificial images ("these useless
delusions")(74) and denied that anything fashioned "by human art" might be
"genuine and pure"(75) or contain divine power.(76) Ficino's stance was
more ambivalent, although we find him often echoing lamblichus' cautious
advice "it is necessary to know what is the nature of wonder-making art,
but by no means to have faith in it".(77) The general objection was that
such magic (thaumaturgy) was illicit in that it denied the essential Forms
in favour of material images, inviting earth-bound, and therefore evil,
daemons who deceived and deloded the magician; it was particularly harmful
as it prevented any progression or development of the soul which would
ultimately lead to union with God, and which would depend on the invocation
of hypercosmic numlna. For lamblichus and Proclus, all forms of theurgy
using material ob j ects must ultimately lead to a condition of mystical
contemplation. On this account, lamblichus recommends the practices of the
Chaldaeans, who in his view practiced pure theurgy in their understanding
of the higher purposes of sympathetic links between the occult properties
of consecrated matter and divinities.(78)
-139-

We might describe such a process of recognising the divine properties in
matter as one in which the souls of the worshippers are encouraged to
remain attuned, through regular celebration using words and music, to their
deeper resonances - to maintain the 'horizontal' expansion of consciousness
within the ordering of events on a 'vertical' time-scale. The true value
of religious ceremonial must surely be to enhance the awareness of the
eternal in the temporal.

Modern depth psychology would understand these 'magical' procedures to
be methods through which the unconscious is projected onto external objects
in order that it may be more readily consciously recognised and assimilated
by the participant. As Jung has extensively illustrated, the idea of the
trapped 'spirit in matter' or the 'living stone' is an ancient alchemical
one:
"Although the alchemists attached the greatest importance to
(the physical nature of the stone), and the "stone" was the
whole raison d'etre of their art, yet it cannot be regarded
as merely physical since it is stressed that the stone was
alive and possessed a soul and spirit, or even that it was a
man or some creature like a man."(79)

The alchemists were looking for the 'spirit-substance' in the heart of
the stone which would transform base metals into gold and which must first
be freed in order to be recovered - such work reflecting the psychic
transformation of the operator hinEelf:
"This 'spirit-substance' is like quicksilver, which lurks
unseen in the ore and must first be expelled if it is to be
recovered In substantla. The possessor of this penetrating
Mercurius can 'project' it into other substances and
transform them from the imperfect into the perfect state.
The imperfect state is like the sleeping state; substances
lie in it like the 'sleepers chained in Hades' and are
awakened as from death to a new and more beautiful life by
the divine tincture extracted from the inspired stone. It Is
quite clear that we have here a tendency not only to locate
the mystery of psychic transformation in matter, but at the
same time to use it as a theorla for effecting chemical
changes." (80)

As we shall explore further in chapter four, Ficino was not unaware of
the aichemical nature of his 'natural magic' and could not condemn outright
'occult' practices involving images simply because of their dubious
-140-

labelling by orthodox Cristianity. If an act of the imagination involving
talismans, inscriptions or artificial images led to greater psychic
integration and unity, then this was justification enough for their use.
As Ficino wrote to his great friend Poliziano, he held no "definite theory"
(certam ratlonea) about the efficacy of astrological figures in particular

and was prepared to use any remedy "which might appear to anyone to be
life-restoring in any way whatsoever".(81) Regarding statue-magic in
particular, (82) Ficino agrees with Plotinus and Hermes that the ancient
magi were able to capture "a life or something vital from the Anima Mundi
and the souls of the spheres and of the stars" in matter, but that such
nuilna were cosmic, not the higher, celestial variety. He upholds most

strongly the aichemical Hermetic notion that such airy daemons are
continually present in matter as "a nabjral force of divinity" and may be
strengthened in their presence by musical incantations, but is sceptical
about certain reports of astrological prophecy being uttered by fabricated
statues. Human attempts to intervene and manipulate the presence of
daemons are not to be trusted - if the divine may be glimpsed in matter it
may only be through the all-embracing presence of the Anima Mundi and the
participation of the priest, who knows how to reveal such a presence by
entering into the natural ebb and flow:
"the Anima Mundi generates and moves the forms of natural
things through certain seminal reasons implanted in her from
the divine. These reasons he even calls gods, since they are
never cut off from the Ideas of the Supreme Mind. (Plotinus]
thinks, therefore, that through such seminal reasons the
Anima Mundi can easily apply herself to materials since she
has formed them to begin with through these same seminal
reasons, when a Magus or a priest brings to bear at the right
time rightly grouped forms of things ..."(83)
Although professing allegiance to Hermes and particularly to Plotinus,
Ficino's attitude towards artificial images is by no means clear-cut. But,
as we shall see in chapter four, it did ultimately depend on their efficacy
in stimulating the Imagination and on the quality of the individual's
subjective response, not on the restrictive legislations of Church
authorities.

-141-

2.16. DIvination
lamblichus' discussion on the valid forms of divination can be
understood as an attempt to explain the necessity of removing oneself from
the realm of 'human' values and measurements: "For the whole authority of
It pertains to the gods". (84) Any knowledge of the future can only be
obtained from a divine perspective - natural phenomena used in the process
of divination are to be seen as instruments or tools of the gods, and never
as primary causes in themselves. (85) lamblichus stresses that divinations
can only be totally genuine when the divinity possesses the soul
entirely(86) and there is no interference from the human body or material
part of the soul. The shock induced by divine frenzy has the effect of
banishing the participation of the rational mind, for the individual has
exchanged his life for that of the divinity:(87) "The frenzy causes words
to be let fall that are not uttered with the understanding of those who
speak them". lamblichus acutely observes that any attempt to describe the
process in detail will fail, for it is not through rational appreciation
but through imaginative intuition that the eternal order of things is
glimpsed: "hence it is by impression, and not with precise accurateness,
that we speak in relation to it." In the same way, the power of ritual,
choric music to excite affections or heal passions is not to be attributed
to a purely human activity; it is effective precisely because it
corresponds to auslca mundana and thus attracts the harmony of the gods:
"By the agency of such a relationship of the choric songs to
the gods it is that their presence actually becomes manifest
... whatever has a mere Incidental resemblance to them
becomes ininediately participant of them."(88)
The quality of the harmony we experience as mediated or transmitted
through p uslca lnstruientails Is directly dependent, according to
lamblichus, on the rank of the god whose presence is suninoned and not on
the native capacity of the individual to hear it. The implication being
that the greater the correspondence between the humanly performed music and
its divine counterpart, the higher the rank of divinity which will be drawn
down and the more powerful will be the reminder to the soul of its heavenly
origins. The musician is not merely re-aligning the musical resources
within his soul, he is hoping to attract the sublime music which transcends
his imagination and hence his own musical capacity and skill. For
-142-

lamblichus rejects the notion that the soul consists Innately of harmony
and rhythm - it is affected because it heard musica aundana prior to its
condition of embodiment, and may participate in these harmonies again when
it perceives their echoes. Iainblichus uses this musical analogy to provide
an overall explanation for divinatory practices ("Hence we may generally
explain in this way the source of the divine faculty of divination");(89)
for music is one of the most powerful means of inducing awareness of that
etthg-point of temporal and eternal which allows 'memory' of past and
future to merge into the present.
Divination works, says Iamblichus, because the gods bestow an energy
superior in kind and quality to anything in "generated existence" - it is
of a different order, and "it is not right to compare their operations to
those taking place in ordinary ways". (90) He confiru the Hermetic
authors' conception of the two orders of 'time' in attempting to convey how
the divinatory experience transcends all temporal limits of time or place:
"Such a faculty, being inseparable from the constitution of
places and bodies that are subjects of it, or preceded by a
motion limited by number, cannot always prognosticate in the
same manner things occurring in every place. But being
separate and free of places and things that are measured by
the enumerations of times as though superior to those
existing in relation to time, and from those that are held
fast by place, it is present with objects equally wherever
they are, and is always conversant at once with those coming
into existence in time, and likewise includes in one the
truth of all things by virtue of its own separate and
superior essence."(91)(my italics)
The divining power of the gods is fully present everywhere "with those
who are able to receive it", permeating all elements and living beings in
nature and imparting the faculty of foreknowledge "according as everyone is
able to receive of it". lamblichus stresses the folly of assuming that
simply going through the required motions of a prescribed ritual will
automatically produce a divinatory insight; (92) the imagination must be
consciously prepared and awakened to receive "divine illumination". This
can be achieved through the focussing of light on inscriptions, musical
incantations, darkness, potions - in other words sensual stimuli to arrest
the thinking processes and stir the latent imaginative faculty which is
otherwise largely inaccessible, buried and enclosed deep within the
-14 3-

material soul. Above all, light is recoimnended as the primary mode of
preparation for divination; it Is a "sacred irradiation" (which Ficino was
to call an occultus influxus)(93) which emanates from all the celestial
spheres. This mode of divining through the subtle perception of rays and
quality of light is to be distinguished from the method using stars or
planets as signs or symbols, to which lamblichus adds all forms of
divination or augury which rely on merely human ingenuity and
interpretative skill. By such means it is impossible to make accurate
predictions - the diviner is bound by the limits of his own speculations
and may only guess or expect certain outcomes:
"From the divine tokens, according to the relationship of
things to the signs that have been exhibited, the technic in
some way arrives at conclusions, and guesses at the augury,
inferring from it certain probabilities."(94)
The meaning hidden in the signs produced by the gods, whether they are
stars, flights of birds or sacrificial entrails is there for the diviner to
fathom, if he suspends rational judgement. By a process of 'magnetic'
attraction, his very desire to know the true 'message' will be strengthened
by its presence in the symbols themselves:
"[The godsl generate all things by means of images, and
likewise signify them beforehand through instituted
emblematic representations ... by this means, they excite our
faculty of understanding to a greater acuteness. "(95)
It is important to realise, says lamblichus, that the gods may use
anything in the world of nature to carry purposeful signification. But
such reliance on the interpretation of natural phenomena is inherently
dangerous, for any reduction of a symbolic pattern to an anthropocentric
analysis cannot reveal a ultimate truth. In the long run, the pure
theurgic union attained In the anagge can be the only legitimate form of
divination as it involves direct apprehension of the divine powers which
rule the cosmos. (96) Psellus, in his Comnentary on the thaldaean
Oracles(97) went further, to specifically condemn the use of astrology,
birds and entrails In divination, and we read in oracle fragment 107(98) of
the necessity for an uncompromising attitude of humility and discrimination
in order to discover what the gods intend, not what man wishes them to.
Again the message is reiterated - one cannot apply temporal measurement and
expectation to eternal laws:
-144-

"Do not cast into your mind the huge measures of earth, f or
the plant of truth does not exist on earth. Do not measure
the extent of the sun by joining rods together, for he is
borne along by the eternal will of the Father and not for
your sake. Let be the rushing motion of the Moon, she
forever runs her course by the action of Necessity. The
starry procession has not been brought forth for your sake.
The wide-winged flight of birds is never true, nor the
cuttings and entrails of sacrificial victims. All these are
playthings, the props of coimnercial fraud. Flee these
things, if you would open the sacred paradise of piety,
where virtue, wisdom and good order are brought together."
It Is not a case of the divine intellect descending to the level of the

human to procure a divination; rather, it converts our level to its own
through kindling the dormant divine faculty in man and raising his
understanding to an apprehension of what we have termed the eternal
dimension.(99) The process is a spiralling one which must culminate in the
total clarity of unhindered awareness and absolute knowledge of the laws of
the cosmos - but there are many stages at which, through a greater or
lesser enlargement of perspective, glimpses of divine order may be had. It
must depend on the degree to which one is able to perceive the
signification. Even Inanimate objects are bestowed with soul by the gods
In order to allow the apprehension of nature's 'occult' powers and foster
the corresponding force in the human soul. lamblichus' final point is that
the divinatory attitude is a mode of being through which all things are
perceived in this world as potential signs and indicators of the will of
the gods. It involves an opening of the heart to the heart of the world in
an act of renunciation of personal will, (100) for anything less will not
allow an uncontaminated, direct knowledge of the gods' will:
"...everyone who is a genuine lover of the Gods, should give
himself wholly; since by this means Irreprehensible truth
will be obtained in divinations."(101)
for, as expressed in oracle fragment 116,
"the divine Is accessible not to mortals who think
corporeally, but to all those who, naked, hasten upwards
towards the heights."(102)
Such a condition can in no way be defined in terms of human logic or
analysis. lamblichus attempts to describe it as:
-145-

"authoritative, and first in operation, and likewise selfgoverning and transcendent, encompassing all things in
itself, but not itself encompassed by any, or enclosed in
limited conditions by its participants."(103)

2.17. Astroloav
In chapter one we laid out the Platonic and Hermetic symbolic cosmology
which pre-supposes the inextricable participation of the human soul In the
forces of the cosmos - thus providing a framework for an esoteric approach
to astrology. How did the theurgists incorporate this into their
understanding of divination and fate? lamblichus is unequivocal in his
estimation of astrology as a "true mathematical sclence",(104) testified as
divine by the time-honoured art of astronomy,(105) and he realised that Its
abuse was due to the ignorance of those who "wander from the scope of it".
We also find his disciple, the Enperor Julian (who tells us that he was
held in some esteem as an astrologer when still a youth);(106)
distinguishing between those who survey the heavens "like horses or cattle"
and those who, "[drawingi their conclusions from the unseen world",
recognise the heavens as "a great multitude of gods". (107) Because we are
in the realm of time, divine knowledge is easily obliterated through its
contamination and mingling with material elements and motions; but
astrology may provide a way of strengthening it:
"This divine mode is indeed in astrology also, and a certain
clear Indication of truth, though it is but small, is at the
same time preserved in it."(108)
In the thaldaean rites the gods invoked by the magician to empower him
for his operation (the rite of conjunction or sustasls) were particularly
the Lords of Time; those who presided over the hour and day at which the
ceremony was to take place. This would have the effect of purposefully
intensifying the quality of the moment by expanding the awareness of the
magician to embrace the 'eternal' present in the actual temporal event. As
we shall see, Ficino paid great attention in his practical life to the use
of elect tonal astrology in general and planetary hours in particular to
enhance the quality and effectiveness of any enterprise - especially those
concerned with healing, whether of body or soul.(109) lamblichus tells
-146-

us(11O) that the Egyptians believed they could transcend fate simply by
observing a suitable time for their rituals - but what does he mean by the
assertion that the gods dissolve fate and liberate from the mundane order
of cause and event?(111) Again, it is with reference to the two 'orders'
of time that we may understand how astrology may either bind or liberate,
depending on whether the individual 's understanding is limited to the
temporal order alone, or embraces both.
lamblichus explains(112) that the celestial bodies are gods "because the

divine form which is in them predominates, and inserts everywhere
throughout one total essence."(113) The individual will partake of the
powers of the planets "according to its own proper nature, arid not
according to their power"(114) - that is, according to his ability to
transcend definitions arid interpretations based on human (and therefore
distorted) values. It is not the case, says Iamblichus, that planets are
In themselves benefic or malefic; apparently 'evil' affects are due to the
ways In which the varying qualities of material natures receive the
"irradiations" or influxes and the Impure mixture which results:
"Thus, for instance, the efflux of Saturn is constipative,
but that of Mars is motive; but the passive genesiurgic
receptacle In material substances receives the former
according to (its] congelation arid refrigeration, but the
latter according to an Inflamatlon which transcends
mediocrity. "(115)
The Sun Is of course the central generating force of energy within the
universe, and is modified in Its form during its yearly cycle through the
twelve signs of the zodiac. Individuals receive the Sun's powers, as they
are contained in arid combined with those of all the other heavenly bodies,
"according to their peculiar motions";(116) in other words, the power is
uniform and invariable in its nature, and how material beings are affected
by it is dependent on their Individual constitutions arid capacities. The
choice available to man is directly concerned with the degree to which he
identifies himself with material or spiritual reality. lamblichus explains
this in terms of a psychic duality; man has two souls, one from the
Intelligible realm, arid one from the realm of the planetary circuits; that
is, eternal arid temporal. The higher soul, in transcending the motions of
time, cause arid effect, is liberated from such laws called 'fate' by active
-147-

intention and energising - to be achieved through ritual and supplication
to the gods "as they alone rule over necessity through intellectual
persuasion."(U7) The concept of eternal life implies the triumph of the
higher soul as it gives itself over to another order, abandoning the
determinism iinutably set by the Lords of Time. Man can choose to live a
fate-bound life, subject to the temporal workings of these laws which are
the domain of mundane gods and making no effort to change the modality of
his orientation - or he may sense the necessity to turn around and through
moral and intellectual effort strengthen the influence of the
'supermundane' gods in whose domain causal laws have no authority. (118)

In the Hermetica this struggle is explained in terms of the active role
of the planetary daemons in the determining of individual destiny. Such
daemons, assigned to the various planets but ultimately subject to the Sun,
exercise total convmand over the lower soul:
"They are both good and bad in their natures ... To these
daemons is given dominion over all things upon earth ... For
they mould our souls into another shape, and pull them away
to themselves ... For at the time when each one of us is
born and made alive, the daemons who are at that moment on
duty as ministers of birth take charge of us - that is, the
daemons who are subject to some one planet... These daemons
enter into the two irrational parts of the soul ... But
the rational part of the soul remains free from the dominion
of the daemons, and fit to receive God into itself ... such
men are few indeed; and all others are led and driven ... by
the daemons..."(119)

In lamblichus' discussion concerning the possibility of finding the
personal guardian daemon through astrological rules of nativity, he shows
the same scepticism towards the investigation of divine principles using
the limited means of human judgements according to particular rules.(120)
If we try to trace the origin of a daemon from a horoscope, using
habitually conventional rules of measurement and calculation, we are
applying definitions which can never reach as far as the transcendent cause
or essential nature of the daemon. To grasp the nature of any spiritual
entity requires a faculty of a quite different order. 1ny daemon whose
existence and sphere of operation was limited by such astrological geometry
could not possibly liberate the individual from fate, since his origin
would be merely within the scheme and limits of the natal horoscope and
-148-

therefore in the realm of time.(121) To know his "more ancient origins" is
only possible through divine, or theurgic, divination, which may use the
stars, but is not bound by imperfect assumptions concerning them, and knows
that any rules are in service to a higher knowledge than ours:
"For whether these arts (of nativities I are known or are
incomprehensible, yet, at the same time, the efflux of the
stars distributes to us the daemon, whether we know it or
not. But divine divination is able to teach us concerning
the stars, in a way which is most true, and (when we are in
possession of this] we are not entirely in want of the
enumeration of canons, or of the divining art."(122)
It is those astrologers who rely exclusively on the "enumeration of
canons" without any "divining art" whom Ficino was to call the "petty
ogres"(123) in agreement with Julian(124) that there is a huge difference
between astrologers who are satisfied with making "plausible hypotheses"
from their own judgements, and priests of religion who use astrological
symbolism in service to their living rites of purification of the
soul. (125)

2.18. ConclusIon: cognition
To conclude this chapter, I shall attempt to summarise the essential
nature of the cognitive faculty required for an effective magical operation
- this will set the context for a more detailed consideration of Ficino's
attitude towards and practice of hymn-singing as a ritual performance, as a
'seizing of the moment' in which the souls of both performer and auditor
are transformed through alignment with the sympathetic motions of the
cosmos.
lamblichus, Julian and Proclus were all practlslng philosophers whose
'magical' activities enhanced and furthered their speculations. Proclus'
biographer tiarinus tells us that his master acquired his virtues through
the conforming of his life to his philosophy:
"practising the actions by which the soul succeeds in
separating itself, continually, by day or night, making use
of the purificatory practices which woo us from evil, of
lustrations, and of all other processes of purification,
whether Orphic or (ialdean ..."(126)
-149-

Proclus believed that the philosopher should be "the hierophant of the
whole world";(127) he himeelf composed hymns,(128) experienced luminous
visions in thaldaean rites,(129) could produce rain, predict earthquakes
and utter prophetic verses.(130) We can hardly believe, as many writers
imply(131) that theurgic ritual, "a power higher than all human wisdom,
embracing the blessings of divination, the purifying powers of initiation,
and in a word all the operations of divine possession"(132) could by nature
be inferior to the purely speculative life. It must be considered from
within its own terme and not fall prey to modern prejudices. Certainly
Ficino hinelf gives equal importance to the values of intellectual
speculation and active ritual as leading to the complementary virtues of
wisdom and piety, in his confirmation that "complete human happiness and
the aim of law consists in both wisdomin speculation and true religion in
ritual".(133) Indeed, even for purely speculative philosophers like
Plotinus, eventual union with the One could never be achieved without a
full embracing of the ritual or divinatory attitude. Theurgy can provide
the means of transcending rational understanding through direct experience:
as Gregory Shaw puts it,
"rather than falling outside the circumference of Platonism,
theurgy was understood by tamblichus and Proclus to penetrate
to a deeper centre, which extended the boundaries of the
Platonic world. "(134)
Ritual is an attitude, not a theory, involving a giving of one's whole
self to the symbol in the hope of ultimately transcending it; a concrete
enactment of the soul 'turning upside down' and deliberately going against
the natural processes of the temporal realm in order to "transform manifest
chaos into cosmos". (135) Shaw suggests that when such an inversion occurs,
the turbulent passions which ensue (due to the individual's heightened
awareness of the confusion and duality of embodied existence) may be
regulated by Plato's recollection through sensible objects which developed
into full theurgic ritual amongst his successors. He points out that all
elements of the cosmos in which we find ourselves, as we have seen in the
case of astrology, are ambivalent, in that they may be used either as such
aids to harmonisation and balancing of soul (through a participatory act)
or remain as hindrances in the form of distinct, 'knowable' phenomena:
"The entire cosmos and its daimonic powers are both
obstacles to the soul and vehicles of transcendence,
-150-

depending on the souls' relation to them. Theurgy
establishes a proper relation, providing souls the means to
transform their obstacles into icons, whether they were
painted in the fine medium of interior prayer or in the
darker colours of animal sacrifice."(136)

We might say that 'bad Late' is due to being caught, blindly, in the
wheels of destiny - attempting to maintain personal law in the face of
insurmountable opposition from the gods, or cosmic purposes. When
'inverted', the soul falls in line with the measures of the Creator,
however he is hypostatised, and thus in line with its true destiny. In the
words of Hermes,
"Man knows himself, and knows the Kosmos also, provided that
he bears in mind what action is suited to the part he has to
play, and recognises what things he is to use for his own
ends, and to what things he in turn is to do service."(137)

Magical practices cannot be 'understood' - for that very intellectual
act involves a separation from immediate experience. For that reason, the
human intellect cannot make judgements about its effectiveness. As
lamblichus explains:
"For a conception of the mind does not conjoin theurgists
with the gods; since, if this were the case, what would
hinder those who philosophise theoretically, from having a
tbeurglc union with the gods? Now, however, in reality, this
is not the case. For the perfect efficacy of ineffable
works, which are divinely performed in a way surpassing all
intelligence, and the power of inexplicable symbols, which
are known only to the gods, impart theurgic union. Hence, we
do not perform these things through intellectual
perception. "(138)

Proclus emphasises that it is by "simple and impartible intuitions" and
not "discursive reason" that the soul may eventually achieve unity with the
One. By the process of similitude, the object of knowledge must correspond
to the faculty knowing it:
"to the sensible or object of sense-perception the perceptive
cognition, to cognizable objects discursive reason, to
intelligible objects intelligible cognition, and therefore
also to that which is prior to intellect the flower of the
intellect is correspondent."(139)

-151-

Again, it is stressed that what is purely intelligible is on a higher
hypostasis than the multiple or compound material forms which we measure,
and so cannot be grasped by applying "a certain measure of form and
knowledge" - for this would reduce its essential unity to coarser
multiplicity, and would involve attempting to 'know' or grasp it through
an inferior, coarser faculty. It is only the "flower of intellect" which
may, as the most unified intellectual element, lead us to the Paternal
intellect, and the "flower of the soul", the "first of all our powers"
which may transcend all intellectual powers and lead to the "Principle
which is beyond all beings, and is the unifying power of all that is in
us".(140) In this rarified realm the highest refinement of intellectual
apprehension comes rather closer to the beauty and intuition of a vision
than it does to a set of discursive propositions. Amongst the thaldaean
Oracles themselves we find an exhortation to surrender all thoughtprocesses, and in a meditative state connect with the intelligible through
a condition of passive cognition. The oracle conveys its message through a
poetic, visionary use of language which even surpasses the metaphorical, in
encouragement to abandon literal interpretation. This realm is in its
nature unknowable, and can only be contemplated in its absence, in the void
of unknowing, by suspending the need for verification and reassurance. As
such it holds the inscrutable and inaccessible power of unconscious
content:
"For there exists a certain Intelligible which you must
perceive by the flower of mind. For it you should incline
your mind toward it and perceive it as perceiving a specific
thing, you would not perceive it. For it is the power of
strength, visible all around, flashing with intellectual
divisions. Therefore, you must not perceive that
Intelligible violently but with the flame of mind completely
extended which measures all things, except that Intelligible.
You must not perceive it intently, but keeping the pure eye
of your soul turned away, you should extend an empty mind
toward the Intelligible in order to comprehend it, since it
exists out of (your) mind."(141)

Corresponding to the flower of intellect, the Hermetic writers exhort us
to "see with the eyes of the mind" for "thought alone can see that which is
hidden".(142) We are told that it is not through physical observation of
the heavens that God may be known, but through imaginative and intelligible
contemplation of their symbolic significance:
-152-

"If you wish to see Him, think on the Sun, think on the
course of the Moon, think on the order of the stars..."(143)
Then, in accordance with the capacity for inner sight, the turning away
from inunersion in temporality may begin:
"For it is a property of the Good that it becomes known to
him how is able to see it ... the vision of the Good is not a
thing of fire, as are the sun's rays; it does not blaze down
upon us and force us to close our eyes; it shines forth much
or little, according as he who gazes on it is able to receive
the inflow of the incorporeal radiance .. But in this life we
are still too weak to see that sight; we have not the
strength to open our mental eyes, and to behold the beauty of
the Good, that incorruptible beauty which no tongue can
tell."(144)
lamblichus' criticism of Porphyry(145) is that he remains firmly in the
literal realm of discursive thought, from which springs his discomfort and
doubt concerning theurgic practices: "what you assert is rather
philosophical and logical, than conformable to the efficacious art of
priests", he objects, adding:
"You seem to think that knowledge of divine things and of
anything else is the same, and that each step is derived from
oppositions, as is usual with dialectical propositions; but
it is nothing like that at all, for the knowledge of divine
things is entirely different and is separated from all
contradiction. "(146)
There is of course a fine line, to the uninitiated observer, between the
magician who truly 'knows' and the one who genuinely and honestly imagines
himself to be enlightened. It is a hubristic arrogance, says Iamblichus,
to assume that as mere humans we are able to rely on our own judgement in
any sacred concern. The overriding theme of his treatise is to emphasise
the danger of forming assumptions and conclusions about divine matters
merely according to personal opinion. The act of allowing and
acknowledging the validity of the eternal dimension of life - which we
could describe as the quality and content of unconscious experience requires humility and reverence; but when fully entered into there is the
possibility of achieving psychic wholeness and equilibrium - the accord of
ausica hur.ana with iuslca iundana. How Ficino himself attempted to effect

-153-

such a transformation through his use of astrology and music is the subject
for the rest of this thesis.

-154-

REREV(S to chapter Two

PART E: PhUospphical maaic
1.

Ficino, Op.om. p.1745 (trans. D.P. Walker Spiritual and Demonic Magic
p.18):
Orationern ad Solem composuit Julianus et lamblichus.
Solem Plato f ilium et imaginem summi Del Visibilem
appellavit: Solent Socrates orientem salutaris ecstasim
saepe patiebatur: Orienti Soil Pythagorici hymnos lyra
canebant. De cultu quidem Soils liii viderint: Deus
certe in Sole posuit tabernaculuin suum.
Ficino's sources are: Julian, Hymn to King Hellos in Works vol.1, 352;
Plato, Republic VI,508 b-c, SymposIum 220 c-d; Iainbllchus, De vita
Pythagorica c.25,35; Psalm XVIII.6

2.

Op.om. p.971 Coinparatlo Sole ad Deum

3.

I am grateful to Darby Costello and the Latin translation group of the
Company of Astrologers for their work on the etymology of 'desire':
desidero derives from de sldero, or 'from the star'. Its definitions
include 'to long for, greatly wish for, desire, to stand in need of,
to want, to miss, to find lacking'. Similarly, considero, 'with the
star', originally meaning 'to observe the stars' has come to mean 'to
look at closely, inspect, examine'. These words reveal an
inextricable connection between man's inner condition and that of the
cosmos - to 'desire' is to feel the lack of harmony or connection with
one's star, to yearn to return to one's star or to re-establish a
relationship with it. They imply a subjective/objective correlation
which has since been lost in common usage, suggesting that true desire
is that which yearns from the heart for a cosmic consciousness, for
psychological alignment with the laws of the cosmos as reflected in
the stars, and in particular in one's own horoscope pattern. As
Evelyn Underhill postulates, "the deep-seated desire and tendency of
the soul towards its Source" (Mysticism p.85) is the condition of
total dedication of the will known as mystical Love. (See also
desiderata, deslderium). Dictionaries used: Dlctionnaire etymologlque
de la langue Latlne; Chambers Etymological Dictionary, 1947 ed.;
Oxford Latin Dictionary, Lewis and Short Latin Dictionary.

4.

Op.om. p.971:

Quod Deus angelicis beatisque mentibus scientiam
divinorum prius Inserit, mox amorem. Animus vero
nostris hic utrunque credentibus amorem accendit
purgantem atque convertentem, antequam divinorum
intelligentiam la[r]giatur. Ita Sol perspicuas ubigue
prasque naturas, quasi lam coelestes momento prorsus
Illuminat, opacas vero materias ineptas luci calefacit
prius, et accendit, atque subtillat, mox illuminat.
Atque tam calorem quant lucem lam leves et pervias,
nonnunquam elevat ad sublimia. Hinc Apollo radiorum
aculeis Pythoneam molem transfigit, purgat, dissoluit,
attoilit ... Mercurius tanquam Soils Achates caduceo
quodam excitare dicitur dormientes
-155-

5.

See Hankins, Plato in the Italian Renaissance vol.1 pp.347-51. The
opposition to Platonism reached a peak in the 1490s with the polemical
sermons of Savonarola.

6.

Evelyn Underhill, Mysticism

7.

ibid. p.151

8.

ibId. p.72

9.

ibid. pp.262, 305:
"In the 'contemplation' of Plato and of the Platonic
schools generally, however, the emphasis lies at least
as much on intellect as on intuition: with him the head
and not the heart is the meeting-place between man and
the Real."

10. ibid. p.83
11. ibid. p.83
12. ibid. p.50, quoting Thomas Aquinas Summa theologlca iI.ii.q.clxxx; also
p.83
13. ibid. p.83
14. ibid. pp.50,85,333
15. Plotinus Ennead 1.6.2
16. See Ennead IV.4.40 on bewitchment; Underhill, MystIcism p.74
17. Underhill, Mysticism p.74
18. See Murdoch, The Fire and the Sun pp.5-7, 31-2, 40-2, 65-7
19. Underhill, MysticIsm p.79
20. ibid. p.l57
21. See A.E. Waite, Occult Sciences p.l4
22. A.H. armstrong, 'The Hidden and the Open in Hellenic Thought' in
Hellenic and Christian Studies pp.83-4
23. Dodds, The Greeks and the Irrational p.86
24. Ibid. p.184: arete for Socrates was not a set of behaviour patterns but
"a consistent attitude of mind springing from a steady insight into
the true nature and meaning of human life." See Protagoras 319a-320c
25. Ibid. p.209
26. IbId. p.146
27. ibid. p.139
-156-

28. ibid. p.139
29. Ibid. p.209
30. ibid. p.210
31.

SophIst 228a-b, Phaedo 237e-238a

32. Laws 863b

33. Republic 485e
34. Phaedo GOc-61c, Apology 33c
35. See chapter one part three, ref.10
36. Plato, Eighth Letter 353b
37. Euthydemus 277d

38. Dodds The Greeks and the IrratIonal p.76
39. SymposIum 215e
40.

Ion 553e

41.

Theatetus 149c-150a

42. Phaedo 78a

43. See for example, letter on Music to Antonio Canigiani, Letters vol.1
pp.141-4, Op.om. pp.651-2
44. Laws 933a
45. Republic 413b
46. ibid. 364b-e
47. ibid. 602d, see Underhill, Mysticism p.74:
"(The] intuition of the Real lying at the root of the
visible world and sustaining its life, is present In a
modified form in the arts; perhaps it were better to
say, must be present if these arts are to justify
themselves as heightened forms of experience. It is
this which gives to them that peculiar vitality, that
strange power of communicating a poignant emotion, half
torment and half joy, which baffle their more rational
interpreters. (The true business of art isi not to
reproduce the illusions of ordinary men but to catch
and translate for us something of that 'secret plan',
that reality which the artistic consciousness is able,
in a measure, to perceive."
48.

Euthydemus 290a
-157--

49. Laws 904c-e
50. ibid. 908d-e
51. ibid. 909b
52. Ibid. 731d
53. Ibid.
54. ibId. 620d-e, Phaedo 107d-e
55. Phaedrus 242b
56. Syizposium 202e

57. Plotinus, Ennead 111.4.6
58. Ibid. 111.5.6
59. ibid. 111.5.7
60. A.H. Armstrong, 'Was Plotinus a Magician?' pp.73-9
61. Porphyry, Life of Plotinus 10 (Armstrong Plotinus I pp.33-5)
62. Phaedras 244a

63. Underhill, Mysticism p.235
64. Dodds, The Greeks and the Irrational p.64
65. ibid. p.68
66. Phaedrus 244c-d
67. Philebus 67b

68. Dodds, The Greeks and the Irrational p.70
69.

Timaeus 71e, 72a

70. Meno 99c-d

71. Phaedrus 244d-e
72. Laws 790e, 791a

73. Phaedrus 248d
74.

Tlmaeus 71e

75. See chapter four, pp.312-4; Letters vol.1 pp.42-8, Op.om. pp.612-S
76. Apology 22c

-158-

77. Laws 719c
78.

Ion 533d-535a

79. ibid. 534b
80. Phaedrus 249d

81. ibid. 250a-b See also A.W. Price, Love and Friendship in Plato and
Aristotle pp.55-8
82. For examples of Ficino's attitude towards his friends see Kristeller,
The Philosophy of Marsillo Ficino pp.283-8, Op.ora. pp.716, 864,
Letters vol.4 pp.20-21, 24-5, 35-6, 46, 50, 57. He reveals an
emotional intensity in his relationships which is remarkable as much
for its spiritual fervour as for its total lack of sensuality. He
wrote to Piero Compagni, "1 love [members of the Academy] too much and
I embrace them in such a way that I do not let them go away." (Modo
proficiscor ad alios, quia minus amo, ad academicum non proficiscor
qula nimis aino, atgue ita complector ut abire non finam.) (Op.om.
p.864, in Kristeller, The Philosophy of Marsilio Ficino p.283)
83. Letters vol.1. p.47, Op.om. p.615:
Amorem divinum, amor ille mater vulgaris penitusque
insanus, falso imitatur, poesim, levior, ut diximus,
musica, mysterla superstitio, divinationem coniecto.
84. Phaedo 67c
85. Laws 909d-910b

86. ibid. 930e-931a
87. RepublIc 427b-c, Laws 738b-c, 759c

88. Dodds, The Greeks and the IrratIonal p.221
89. Laws 821b-d

90. Guthrie, History of Greek Philosophy I pp.247-8
91. ibid. p.251
92. For trans. see Thomas Taylor, lamblichus' Life of Pythagoras, or
Pythagoric Life; Gillian Clark, On the Pythagorean Life; excerpts in
Joscelyn Godwin, Music, Mysticism and Magic pp.25-30
93. On Pythagoras' travels, see Clark On the Pythagorean Life pp.6-8
(chs.13-19). This quotation, Godwin, Music, Mysticism and Magic p.26
94. Thomas Taylor, Life of Pythagoras ch.15, in Godwin, Music, Mysticism an
Magic p.26
95. Taylor, Life ch.25, Godwin, Music, Mysticism and Magic p.28 and note 8
p.303
-159-

96. Taylor, Life ch.25, Godwin, Music, Mysticism and MagIc p.27
97. See ref.3 above
98. Taylor, Life ch.25, Godwin, Music, Mysticism and Magic p.29
99. Clark, On the Pythagorean Life p.103 (ch.247)
100. Plato, Laws 659e, 670c
101. ibid. 664b
102. ibid. 812b-c
103. Republic 398d-400d

104. ibid. 400d-e
105. ibid. 402c
106. ibid. 402d
107. ibid. 401d
108. Dodds, The Greeks and the Irrational p.286

109.Plotinus, Ennead VI.7.2, (trans. A.H. Armstrong in 'The Divine
Enhancement of Earthly Beauties', Hellenic and Christian Studies p.76)
110. In The Cambridge History of Late Classical and Early Medieval
Philosophy p.204
111. Porphyry, Life of Plotinus ch.10 (Armstrong, Plotinus I p.35)
112. Ennead V.3.17; See The Cambridge History of Late Classical and Early
Medieval Philosophy p.260

113. ibid. p.253
114. Ennead 111.8.4 (trans. Armstrong)
115. The Cambridge History of Late Classical and Early Medieval Philosophy

p.257
116. Porphyry Life ch.10 (Armstrong, Plotinus I p.33)
117. See chapter one part one, ref .107. Armstrong translates astrobolesal
as 'star-stroke'. The connection between the stars and physical
paralysis deserves further investigation - the ability to manipulate
their effects and direct them towards another person is evidently
connected to the idea that they had an innate capacity to paralyse or
render an individual impotent in some way.
118. On Plotinus and Magic, see Armstrong 'Was Plotinus a Magician?' and P.
Merlan, 'Plotinus and Magic'. Merlan attempts to prove Plotinus'
practice as a magician, Armstrong convincingly refutes his
-160-

conclusions. On this incident, Merlan suggests Plotinus was suffering
from "a delusion of persecution" (like Strindberg) and assumes he had
a "schizoid personality" (p.342), attempting to explain the event as a
psycho-somatic reaction interpreted by Plotinus, who would know no
better, in terms of evil star-rays. Armstrong replies: "For an
educated man in mid-l9th century Scandinavia, to attribute real or
imaginary pains to witchcraft might well be taken to indicate some
degree of mental abnormality: but for a man of the 3rd century A.D. to
attribute a perfectly geniune and in no way neurotic attack of illness
to magic indicates nothing of the sort." (p.74)
119. Ennead IV.4.42 (trans. Armstrong)
120. ibid. 111.1.5
121. ibid. IV.4.40 (trans. Armstrong)
122. ibid. 111.1.6

"

"

123. ibid. IV.4.44

"

"

124. ibId. 111.1.10 "
125. ibid. IV.4.43
126. ibid. IV.4.43
127. ibid. IV.4.40 (trans. Armstrong)
128. ibid. P1.4.43
129. ibid. 1.6.8. See ref.164 below
130. ibid. IV.4.43
131. ibid. IV.4.43 (trans. Armstrong)
132. Letters vol.4 p.63, Op.om. p.835:
Si hac ragione prudenter tibi ipse in te coelestia turn
sigma, turn munera temperavis
See chapter three pp.229-30
133. Ennead IV.4.44 (trans. Armstrong)
134. G. Pico, Conclusiones nuinero xxxr secundurn propr lain opinionem de modo

lntelligendi hymnos Orphel secundum Magiam no.2, Ornnia ... opera p.159
135. Ennead VI.9.11 (trans. MacKenna)
136. Armstrong, 'Platonic Mirrors' in Hellenic and Christian Studies
pp.147-81.

137. Ennead VI.4.10, (trans. Armstrong in 'Platonic Mirrors', Hellenic and
Christian Studies p.148)
138. Armstrong, Hellenic and Christian Studies p.148
-161-

139. Murdoch, The Fire and the Sun p.139, on Republic X
140. Artrtrong, Hellenic and Christian Studies p.151
141. ibid. p.155
142. Ennead V.3.31

143. ibid. IV.3.9
144. ibid. V.8.7. (trans. Armstrong)
145. Phaedrus 276

146. ibid. 275c
147. Murdoch, The Fire and the Sun p.147
148. For this reference, see this chapter part two, ref.32 below
149. Phaedrus 275

150. In M. Allen, Marsilio Ficino and the Phaedran Charioteer pp.80-i
151. Ennead V.8.6 (trans. Armstrong)

152. Murdoch, The Fire and the Sun pp.22-32
153. Plato, Seventh Letter 344
154. Murdoch, The Fire and the Sun p.23
155. Seventh Letter 344

156. Porphyry, Life of Plotinus ch.3 (Armstrong, Plotlnus I p.11)
157 ibid. ch.8 (Armstrong, Plotlnus I pp.29-31)
158. ibid. ch.13 (Armstrong, Plotinus I p.38)
159. Ficino, Op.om. pp.1534-5
160. ibid. p.1535:
Non inguit Plato usquani nihil yen certigue de divinis
iritelligi posse: sed neque psse expnimi, quod de his
intelligitur, neque propniani horum venitatem intelligi
eadem ratione guam caetera.
161. Ennead 111.6.6 (trans. Armstrong)
162. Ennead 1.6

163. Ennead 1.6.8 (in Armstrong, Hellenic and Christian Studies p.174)
164. Armstrong, Ilellenlc and Christian Studies p.163

-162-

165. Symposium 210a-212b, Phaedrus 255e-256e

166. Armstrong, 'The Divine Enhancement of Earthly Beauties', Hellenic and
Christian Studies pp.69-70
167.Ennead 1.6.1
168. ibid. 1.3.1 (trans. Armstrong)
169. ibId. 1.3.].

"

170. ibid. 1.3.1

"

E'RT TWO: Practical magic
1.

Ficino, Liber de vita 3.XXII.84:
Noxium veto influxum Saturni effuglunt subeuntque
propitlum, non solum gui ad lovem confugiunt, sed etiaxn
gui ad divtham contemplationem ab ipso Saturno
significatam tota mente se conferunt. Hoc enim pacto
malignitatem fati devitari posse Chaldaei et Aegyptii
atque Platonici putant.

2.

ApologIa quaedam, In qua de medlclna, astrologla, vita mundi: Item de
Magls qul Christurn statiin natum salutaverunt in Carol Kaske and John
Clark eds. MarsIlIo Ficlno, Three Books on Life pp.395-401

3.

Hankins, Plato In the Italian Renaissance pp.6,32

4.

See chapter one part two, ref.8

5.

lamblichus, De mysterlis Aegyptiorum. Edition used: ed. Stephen Ronan,
Iambllchus of Chalcls, On the Mysteries with translations of Thomas

Taylor and Alexander Wilder (refs. to Taylor trans. in brackets).
have used translation by Wilder unless stated otherwise.
This ref. 1.1 (4), Ronan p.23
6.

Ficino, lamblichus de mysterlls Aegyptorum, Chaldaeorum, atque
Assyrlorum, Op.om. pp.1873-1908

7.

De aysterlls 1.19 (61), Ronan p.47

8.

H. Levy, Chaldaean Oracles p.462

9.

De mysterlls 1.11 (37), Ronan p.36

10. ibId. V.15 (20), Ronan p.114
11. ibid. 1.19 (58), Ronan p.46
12. ibId. Ii). (39-40), Ronan p.38
13. ibId. 1.12 (41), Ronan p.39

-163-

14. See Majercik, The Chaldean Oracles fragment 108 p.91:
'For the Paternal Intellect has sown symbols throughout
the cosmos, (the Intellect) which thinks the
intelligibles. And (these intelligibles) are called
inexpressible beauties .
15. ibId. frag.109:
N But the Paternal Intellect does not receive the will of
(the soul) until (the soul) emerges from forgetfulness
and speaks a word, remembering the pure, paternal
token
16. ibid. frag.110
17. De mysterils 111.18 (145), Ronan p.82
18.

Ibid. VII.4 (255), Ronan p.129

19. ibid. VII.4 (256), Ronan p.129
20. ibid. VII.5 (260), Ronan p.130
21. ibid. VII.5 (257-9), Ronan pp.129-30
22. ibid. VII.5 (259), Ronan p.130
23. See Thomas Moore Johnson, trans. 'Excerpts from the Commentary of
Proclus on the Chaldean Oracles' in Iamblichus: The Exhortation to
Philosophy including the letters of lamblichus and Proclus' Commentary
on the Chaldean Oracles ch.I p.123
24. ibId. ch.II p.124
25. Maiercik, The Chaldean Oracles frag.76 p.79
26. In Levy, Chaldaean Oracles p.58
27.

ibid. p.43

28. Ascleplus 111.31, Scott, Hermetica I p.351
29. Levy, Chaldaean Oracles p.440

30. II Corinthians 4.18. Quoted in A. Jaffé The Myth of Meaning p.21
31. BrIan Copenhaver, 'lamblichus, Syneslus and the Chaldaean Oracles In
M3rsilio Ficino's De vita libri tres: Hermetic magic or Neoplatonic
magic?' p.443
32. Copenhaver, 'Scholastic Philosophy and Renaissance Magic In the De vita
of Marsilio Flcino' p.524
33. Ficlno, Theologla Platonica XIV.8, Op.om. p.318 (trans. In Trinkaus, In
our Image and Likeness p.496):
genus humanum .. quod est mundi pars adeo pretlosa Ut

media sit temporalIum rerum et aeternarum, quantum
-164-

aeterna capit, ordthat temporalla; adeo Deo proxin ut
ses divinae mentis arcanis insinuans opus hoc Del,
ordthem scilicet mundi cognoscat.
34. Ascleplus III.34b (Scott, Heretica I p.323)
35. ibid. 111.30 (Scott, Hermetica I p.349)
36. ibid. 111.31 (Scott, Hermetica I p.351)
37. ibid. 111.31 (Scott, Hermetica I p.351)
38. ibid. 32b (Scott, Hermeticalp.355)
39. ibid. 40b (Scott, Hermetica I p.353)
40. ibid. 31 (Scott, Heret1ca I p.353):
"The being, then, of which I speak - whether it is to be
called God, or eternity, or both, and whether God is in
eternity, or eternity in God, or each In the other this being, I say, is imperceptible by sense; it is
infinite, incomprehensible, Immeasurable; it exceeds
our powers, and Is beyond our scrutiny.TM
41. ibid. 40b (Scott, Hermetica I p.355); see also Aristotle, On
Generation and Corruption II.10.337a: "Time ... is a number of the
circular movement"
42. ibid. 32b (Scott, Hermetica I p.357)
43. ibid. 32b (Scott, Hermetica I p.357)
44. Put succinctly by Proclus, Commentary on the Chaldean Oracles trans.
T.M. Johnson ch.IV, p.125:
The body is the root of evil, just as the Intellect is
the root of Virtue ... our body is a part of generation
or the sphere of time and sense, but another part,
namely the soul, is able to act unsubdued by the power
of generation, but cannot conquer the whole of
generation, unless we destroy the being or essence of
it:
45. Ascleplus III.18b (Scott, Hermetica I p.321)

46. ibid. 32b (Scott, Heret1ca I p.357)
47. Levy, Chaldaean Oracles p.420
48. Ascleplus III.40c (Scott, Hermetica I p.365)
49. ibid. III.].9b (Scott, Heret1ca I p.325)
50. Ibid. 34c (Scott, Hermetica I p.3T7)

51. ibid. 39 (Scott, Hermetica I p.363)
-165-

52. ibid. 35 (Scott, Herietica I p.329)
53. This will be discussed further in chapter three, but for a thorough

appraisal of the dilemma posed to astrology as a divthatory art by a
'scientific' overlay of rationalism see G. Cornelius, 'The Moment of
Astrology', particularly parts IV,V and VI.

54. Ficino, Theol.Plat. X.7, Op.om. pp.233-5. See Watts, 'Pseudo-

Dionysius the Areopagite arx three Renaissance Platonists' pp.295-7

55. ibid. pp.296-i
56. See Dodds, The Greeks and the Irrational pp.292-5 on the branch of
theurgy known as telestik

57. Ennead IV.3.11
58. Asclepius III.23b-24a,37 (Scott Heritetica I pp.339-341,359)

59. ibid. 37 (Scott Hermetica I p.359)

'

60. ibid. 37 (Scott, Heretica I p.359)
61. ibid. 24a (Scott, HerLetica I pp.339-40)
62. ibid. 38a (Scott, flermetica I p.361)
63. Ficino, Liber de vita III.XXVI
64.

Ennead IV.3.].1

65.

Op.om. pp.1928-S

66. Proclus Diadochus, De sacrificlo et lagia ed. Ronan 'On the Sacred
Art' pp.146-7. For Fictho's version, see Op.om. p.1928:
Siguis enim canabim, sive papyrum calefaciat, deinde
subigat lucernae proximae etiamsi non tangat, videbit

subito accensam canabim, guarumvis non tetigerit ignem,
accerlsionemque desuper ad infer iora descendere.
Comparemus igitur nabim calefactani, sive papyrum
cognationi cuidam inferiorum ad superiora,
appropinquationem vero elus ad lucerna opportuno usui
rerum pro tempore, loco, materia.

67. ibid. Ronan p.147, Op.om. p.1929:
Quorum quidem divlsio unamquamque debilitavit, mixtio
vero restituit in exemplaris ideam.
68. IbId. Ronan p.149, Op.om. p.1929:
Quaxnobrem ab allis, atque similibus recipientes primum
potentias daemonum, cognoverunt, videlicet eas esse
proximas rebus, actionibusque naturalibus: atque per
haec riaturalia, quibus propinquant praesentiam
convocarunt.
69.

Ennead IV.3.11

-166--

70. Ficlno, Syneslus De somnils, Op.o. pp.1968-78
71. See B. Copenhaver, 'lamblichus, Syneslus ar the thaldaean Oracles'
pp.446-8
72. ibid. p.446, quoting De somnhis 132d 10-13
73. De ysteriis 111.28-30 (167-175), Ronan pp.91-4
74. ibid. 111.29 (172), Ronan p.93
75. ibid. 111.29 (171), Ronan p.93
76. ibid. 111.30 (174), Ronan p.94
77. ibid. 111.30.175, Ronan p.94. See Ficino, Llber de vita 'Apology'
1.55; III.Xv.110; Verba .. ad lectorem 1.21.
78. De yster1ls 111.31 (176), Ronan p.95
79. In Psychology and Alchemy, Aichemical Studies, Mysterlum Conlunctionls.
This ref. Nysterium Conlunctionis para.773
80. Jung, Psychology and Alchemy para.406
81. Op.oi. p.958:

Nequid denique praetermlserim intentatum, quoed ad
vitam utcunque conducturum cuiquam videri possi,
norinulla tainen intersero firmiora, multa quoque passim
congero, quae et si forte minus spero, tamen opto
prodesse.
See also chapter four, section 5
82. In Liber de vita III.XXVI.77:
Vult autem una cum Trismegisto per mater lalla haec non
proprie suscipi numina penitus a mater Ia segregata, sed
mundana tatum, ut ab Initlo dlxi et Synesius approbat mundana, inquan, Id est, vitam quandain vel vitale
aliquid ex anima mundi. et sphaerarum animis atque
steflarum, vel etlain motuni quendain et vitalein quasi
praesentiam ex daemonibus.
83. ibid. III.XXVI.127:
guatenus [anima mundi) naturallum rerum formas per
seminales quasdam rationes sibi divinitus insitas
generat atque movet. Quas quldem ratlones appeflat
etiam deos, quonlam ab ideis supremae mentls nunquam
destituuntur. Itaque per rationes eiusmodl animam
mundi facile se appilcare materlis, quas formavit ab
initlo per easdem, quando Magus vel sacerdoes
opportunis temporibus adhibuerit formas rerum rite
collectas
84. De aysterlls 111.1 (100), Ronan p.64
85. IbId. 111.1 (102), Ronan p.64
-167-

86. ibid. 111.1 (99-102) on divination, 111.2-3 (102-109) on divination
through drean, Ronan pp.64-i
87. ibid. 111.4 (110), Ronan p.68
88. ibid. 111.9 (119), Ronan p.72 (Thomas Taylor trans.)
89. ibid. 111.9 (119), Ronan p.72 CT. Taylor trans.)
90. ibid. 111.10 (123), Ronan p.73 CT. Taylor trans.)
91. ibid. 111.12 (129), Ronan p.75 CT. Taylor trans.)
92. ibid. 111.14 (133), Ronan p.77
93. See chapter four pp.274-5 on the 'occult' light of the Sun and stars.
Also, Ficino's treatise De Lumlne, Op.orn. pp.976-86
94. De mysterlis 111.15 (135), Ronan p.78 T. Taylor trans.)
95. ibid. 111.15 (136), Ronan p.78 (T. Taylor trans.)
96. ibid. 111.27 (164-5), Ronan p.90. See also Levy, Chaldaean Oracles
p .257
97. Psellus Expositio in Oraculo Chaldaica 1128b

98. Majercik, The Chaldean Oracles fragment 107, p.91
99. De mysterils 111.16 (139), Ronan p.79
100.See for example Proclus Commentary II: "But the earth, from which It is
necessary that the heart be raised ..." and Majercik fragment 58 p.71:
"[the solar fire] was established at the site of the heart ..." In
note 1 p.166 Majercik remarks: "In thaldean cosmology, the sun was
situated in the middle of the seven spheres as the 'heart' or 'centre'
of the Universe. See also Levy, Chaldaean Oracles p.124, n.221d,
409-13
101.De aysteriis 111.31 (179), Ronan p.96
102.Majercjk, The Chaldean Oracles frag.116, p.97
103.De iysterlls 111.17 (143), Ronan p.81 (T. Taylor trans.)
104.Ibid. IX.4 (277), Ronan p.137
105.ibid. IX.4 (278), Ronan p.137
106.Julian, Hyirn 13].
107.Ibid. 134B, 148C
108.De ysterils IX.4 (278), Ronan p.137
109.FicIno, Liber de vita 3.XXI.95, XV.90, XII.110,120
-168-

110. De aysterlls VIII.4 (267), Ronari p.133

111.ibid. VIII.7 (270), Ronan p.134
112.ibid. 1.17 (52), Ronan p.43
113.Julian, Hymn 143B
114. De iysterils 1.18 (54), Ronan p.44

115.ibid. 1.18 (55), Ronan p.44
116.ibid. VII.3 (253-4), Ronan p.128
117.ibid. VIII.7 (270), Ronan p.134
118.ibid. VIII.8 (271-2), Rorian pp.134-5
118. Plander Libellus XVI.13 (Scott, Heret'ica I pp.269-70)
120.De .ysterlis IX.2 (273-4), Ronan p.136
121. ibid. IX.2 (273-4), Ronan p.136
122. ibid. IX.3 (276), Ronan p.137
123.Nefarlos glgantulos: Op.om. p.781, see chapter three, section 11
123. Julian, Hymn 148B
125.Ficino Llber de vita 3.XXVI.95
126.Marinus, Life of Proclus ch.18; trans. K.S. Guthrie in The Life of
Procius or Concerning Happiness p.34
127.Ibid. ch.19, Guthrie, The Life p.35
128. ibid. ch.19, Guthrie, The Life p.35
129.ibId. ch .28, Guthrie, The Life p.45
130. Ibid. ch.28, Guthrie, The Life p.45
131.e.g. Dodds The Creeks and the Irrational p.288 declares theurgy to be
the ancient equivalent of spiritualism, which corrupted Platonic
rationalism with Oriental superstitions and which was no better than the
attempts of vulgar magic to control supernatural forces:
"As vulgar magic is commonly the last resort of the
personally desperate, of those whom man and god have
alike failed, so theurgy became the refuge of a
despairing intelligentsia which already felt 'la
fascination de l'abime'"
See also C. Shaw, 'Theurgy: rituals of unification in the Neoplatonism
of lambllchus' pp.2-13 where he gives a detailed critique of modern
scholars' attitude towards theurgy. His essential conclusion is that
"rather than falling outside the circumference of Platonism, theurgy
-169-

was understood by lamblichus and Proclus to penetrate to a deeper
center, which extended the boundaries of the Platonic world." (p.12)
This was certainly Ficino's intuition - for him, 'Platonic' did not
mean restricted within a certain clearly-defined and exclusive set of
beliefs, rather it denoted a reverent, symbolic and holistic attitude
towards life which sought to integrate the needs and functions of both
mind and soul - the interrelation of the ob j ective with the
subjective. "Plato is called divine" he wrote in the Prooemiwn to the
Theologia Platonica (Op.om. p.78) "because he never speaks of morals,
dialectic, mathematics or physics without bringing all of them to the
contemplation and cult of God with a feeling of profound piety." (Quo
factum est, ut ex ipse sine conversia divinus: et doctrina eius apud
omnes gentes Theologia nuncuparetur, cum nihil usquam sive morale,
sive Dialecticum, aut Mathematicum, aut Physicum tractet, gum mox ad
contemplationem cultumque Del suimia cum pietate reducat.)
132.Proclus Theologia Platonica p.63, quoted in Dodds, The Greeks and the
Irrational p.291
133. Op.o. p.l525:

In speculatione quidem sapientia, in cultu vero
religlo, in ambobus tota consistit humana foelicitas
finisque legum.
134.Shaw, 'Theurgy' p.12

135.ibid. p.15
136.ibid. p.18
137.Asclepius 1.10 (Scott, Hermetica I p.305)
138.De iysterlis 11.11 (96), Ronan p.62
139.Proclus Commentary on the Chaldean Oracles ch.IV, trans. T.M. Johnson
p.125

140.ibid. p.127
141.Majercik The Chaldean Oracles fragment 1 p.61
142. Piiander Libellus V.2 (Scott, Heretica I p.159)

143.ibid. V.3 (Scott, Herietica I p.159)
144.Ibid. X.4b-5 (Scott, Heretica I pp.189-90)
145.lamblichus' treatise is a refutation of Porphyry's Letter to Anebo in
which Porphyry severely questions the efficacy of theurgic practices,
on the grounds of their Irreconcilability with the fundamentally
intellectual nature of Greek philosophy. See trans. in Ronan, On the
Mysteries pp.14-21
146.

De mysterlls

1.3 (10) (trans. in Shaw, 'Theurgy' pp.21-2)

-170-

GJAPTE.R RJE: FICINO AND ASWOJOGY

PART cVE; On the Knowled ge of Divine Things

3.1. Notio
"A mind apt in knowledge will discover truth more readily
than one practiced in the highest branches of science."(l)

I shall begin this chapter with a direct connection between the mode of
knowing emphasised by the neo-platonic theurgists and Ficino's own thoughts
on the matter, as expressed in various key passages in his Commentary on
lamblichus' De aysterils.(2) This will provide the context from which a
clearer perspective on his particular attitude towards astrology may
emerge. Ficino's translations of and commentaries on Plotinus, lamblichus,
Porphyry and Proclus have been generally neglected by modern scholars in
favour of his letters, Platonic commentaries and theological works - but it
is in these very texts, written towards the end of his life, that we find
Ficino formulating the basis for the practical, experiential wisdom and
'occu

awareness on which his own natural magic depended, and which was

to find final expression in the controversial but extremely popular Liber
de vita of 1489.
At the beginning of the Commentary, Ficino elaborates on lamblichus'
reply to Porphyry that knowledge of divine things cannot be attained
through rational argument and discourse.(3) In his own attempt to explain
the mode of understanding required, he distinguishes between notio, or a
pre-eminent, intuitive sense innate to the soul, and notitia, or conceptual
mental activity. As this is one of Ficino's most succinct interpretations
of 'qualitative' as opposed to 'quantitative' apprehension it is worthy of
detailed examination. He begins by stating the belief that preceding all
human faculties of reasoning (ratio) the gods implanted in the soul an
experiential faculty of knowing (usus), which he describes as "a certain
touch of divinity (tactus quldam dlvinitatis) rather than the workings of
mental conception (notitla)."(4) This innate, immediate grasping of divine
things through that part of the soul "touched by the gods" will stir, says
-171-

Ficino, a natural appetite for that to which it is akin - the Good - and
foster a capacity for careful consideration (ratloclnatio) and vise
judgement. Notio is perpetually available, within the soul, to be drawn on
and experienced - it is concerned with the perception of the essentiality
of things, and is of quite a different order from the quantifiable
knowledge referred to as notltla. The nature of notlo is "a certain
essential contact",(5) not linear discourse. In other words, it is not
concerned with developing gifts for speculating on and quantifying an
experience, it Is that experience. Ficino's use of earthy, tactile

terminology (tactus, contactus) brings the intellectual and spiritual
impulsion of fire and the theoretical abstraction of air (the two elements
which motivate Greek transcendental philosophy(6)) into harmony with
concrete, sensual experience: notlo embraces the qualities of mind, soul
and the senses in a single act of apprehension. For we must continually
bear in mind that Ficino was no Plotinus - his intellectual activities were
balanced by daily practical ministering to the physical and spiritual needs
of his community. His ideal of unity involved the natural congruity of an
action with its internal impulse, which itself arose from a deep sense of
connection with higher principles.

In our struggle to attain unity of being, we can only make a "particular
and effective contact" (contlgultatern tarn proprium et efflcacem) with such
principles (the gods) through a corresponding unity of our own soul, and
this must of its very nature transcend the particular distinctions implied
by the use of different words for 'mind' and 'soul', and by the eventoriented measurement of 'linear' time - for Ficino stresses that such a
process of knowing is a continuous one (actu perpetuo), effective through
simultaneous affinity rather than 'cause and effect' thinking.

He continues with the coninon Platonic notion that essence of the soul that which is unified - is divine In that It partakes of divine Intellect
in all Its simplicity and unchanging, eternally revolving harmony. The
essential being of the soul is therefore expressed via its intellectual
perception, where subject and object merge in an awareness of the divinity of
self as God:

-172-

"Our being is to know God, because the chief essence of the
soul is its intellect, in which exists the same essence
which comprehends divine things by perpetual action."(7)

The intellect embraces at its very centre this faculty of unceasing
intuitive perception, from which the intelligible powers of the soul
derive. This process of adaequatio, or similitude of knower with known, is
seen by Ficino to be accomplished in a single act of conformity in which
the intellect remains complete in itself as in God: "The intellect, maker
of all things, always approaches most fully all the gods through one act,
remaining in itself."(B) In a letter to the Cardinal of Aragon in 1478
Ficino had described such a process using the image of a sphere, a powerful
evocation of the internalisation of the macrocosm:
"Now Ferdinand, leaving behind te senses, turn your mind
back onto itself, by a complete observation of itself.
Having dismissed the body you will at once see your mind,
when it is turned in on itself, to be an incorporeal sphere,
of which the circumference, that is intelligence and will,
is revolved through incorporeal things. And the centre,
that is life and essential being, is independent; it does
not pivot around any corporeal thing.99)

It is through the powers of the circumference that "the habitual
discourse of human reason" may be transcended and access gained to the
intermediate spiritual hierarchies, the "servants of the gods", namely
daemons, heroes and pure souls.(1O) Ficino supposes that, after notlo has
been activated (as a direct intuition of contact with the eternal realm in
general), the lower echelons of numina are the first spirits to be reached
when the soul leaves behind "a mobile manner of understanding" (modum
cognitlonis mobllei) and contemplates the potentlaa rationalem, or
intellect applied as direct, enlightened intelligence (intellectum
adeptum). Conceptual thinking, or notitia is the fundamental mode of
'knowing' and stema from the active intellect. However, it lacks the
fertilisation of true divine intelligence and is incapable, because not
united to the intuition, of adaeguatio or the sense of affinity with divine
knowledge. It is only through notlo that the smallest glimpse (according
to our individual human capacity) of the eternal realm may be had - since
such a mode of knowing partakes in sufficient measure of those same
inmutable qualities. (11)
-173-

All this has profound implications for a 'psychological' application of
astrology, for incorporating the manifold constraints on one's individual
temperament (as syTnbolised by particular astrological configurations) into
one's own motivation - accepting limitations and taking them into account
while fully embracing them, at a radically subjective level, allows the
individual to transcend them, or at least, not to suffer their imposition
as an arbitrary operation of external 'fate'. There is the possibility of
'negotiation' with the gods - which is of course the basis of all
divinatory practices. But this will be explored more fully later.
The essential characteristic of notio is unity - overall unity of parts
of the soul naturally drawing together gifts ultimately derived from the
unity of the divine realm. Unity of perception enables a correct overview
and interpretation based on insight which is neither distorted by emotion
nor confused by the proliferation of detail. It is concerned less with the
study of separate things through comparing and opposing their particular
distinctions, than with referring their common qualities to a higher level
of discrimination, and thus understanding them as parts of a greater whole.

The false and the true can only be known, says Ficino, through the
similitude of such knowledge to the innate, natural faculty of intellect
and achieved through the processes of attraction and affinity together with
an alchemical operation of distillation, not through arbitrary
quantification:
"moreover it is acquired by a certain study of the power of
reason, not so much by comparison and conjecture as by the
operation of differentiation (separatlonis) and
purification. "(12)

The very manner of opposing and analysing In quantifiable terms, (for
example considering whether the gods are temporal or eternal), Ficino
suggests is in itself fundamentally opposed to the nature of unchanging
things, since it is changeable or inconstant in its methods of "comparison
and conjecture". When a philosopher is firmly embedded in such an attitude
(as Porphyry reveals himself to be In his bewildered incomprehension of
divine action and his demands for rational explanations), unity of mind and
soul is unobtainable and the individual remains stuck In the unreliable
realm of doxa. Ficino is of course struggling to explain a very complex
and subtle distinction In rigorous philosophical terms; but it is typical
-174-

of his constant desire to transcend the limitations of 'mobile' thought and
move towards unity that elsewhere we find the same notion presented not as
a philosophical definition but as a sensuous image.
In the Liber de Sole(13) (written about six years later), a work which
he specifically tells us is "allegorical and anagogic rather than
dogmatic",(14) Ficino appeals directly to the reader's imagination to
convey the meaning of notio. Here he abandons "rational arguments" for
"certain comparisons deduced from the light", (15) using the metaphor of
light and illumination to convey the same qualities of immeasurability and
all-pervasiveness evoked by notlo, arx to suggest that affinity with the
divine is achieved through a qualitative leap of direct apprehension, not
tortuous investigation:
"Whenever in your stodies you make a serious attempt to
postulate that there are many angelic minds beyond heaven,
like lights ... what then will be the use of pursuing your
investigations down long winding paths? Look up at heaven..
0 citizen of the heavenly realm.. ."(16)
Later in the same work Ficino attempts to find words to describe the
nature of this subjective insight and the experience of transcending the
boundaries of temporality, in a passage reminiscent of Plato: (17)
"you .. must abandon a definite quantity, and, moreover, the
potency of the light. Then there will remain the light
itself, cleansed by miraculous power, defined neither by a
definite quantity nor by any definite shape, and this light
itself filling with Its presence a space immense with
respect to the imagination. This pure light exceeds the
intelligence just as In itself sunlight surpasses the acuity
of the eyes. In this way, in proportion to the strength you
receive from the Sun, you will almost seem to have found God
."(18)
We are reminded, in Ficino's appeal to the faculty of the Imagination as
the 'middle ground' in which the quality of the divine may be humanly
experienced, of Jung's conception of the power of the archetypal image (the
Sun being a prime example):
"The use of these (Images] requires at any rate an alert and
lively fantasy, and this is not an attribute of those who
are inclined by temperament to purely intellectual concepts.
These offer us something finished and complete, whereas an
archetypal image has nothing but its naked fullness, which
-175-

seems inapprehensible by the intellect. Concepts are coined
and negotiable values; images are life."(19)
It must of course be remembered that for the Renaissance Platonist the
'real being' of the spiritual realm - understood by depth psychology to be
a projection of the unconscious - could never be in question.

A second passage in the Commentary on lamblichus deals more specifically
with the powers of magical operations,(20) restating lamblichus' insistence
that divine operations are not accomplished technically through any human
power but by disclosing the inherent gifts and qualities of the gods as
revealed in all things, and that the realisation of such properties
requires a purity and intent of soul (namely notlo) which precedes all
thought-processes:
"For universal causes are not moved by particular effects:
whence divine things are not originally moved to operate by
our intelligence, but it is necessary that the greatest
disposition and purity precedes thoughts, just as with
certain causes. Indeed those things which primarily summon
divine will are themselves divine sacraments, and so divine
things are invoked by themselves and do not receive the
origin of their action from anything inferior."(21)

No merely human invention (however boldly directed) may hold any sway in
the face of the gods' decrees, for even if we do attempt to intervene by
forming our own conclusions or fabricating results we will soddenly find
ourselves conforming to their will whether we like it or not.(22) This is
because the inscrutable power at work is beyond human knowledge; it is
"superior to thought", a "purified purity"(23) and not brought about by
anything in us (or perhaps we should add, by any conscious intention on our
part). When the priest constructs symbols and uses sacramental objects in

religious rituals, he knows how to prepare and dedicate them to be most
effective lures, in the Plotinian sense - but finally it is God alone who
"seals the effective force of the sacrament".(24) We can take this to
refer to adaequatlo of microcosm and macrocosm, a reaching down past all
arbitrary opinion and judgement to that sense of notlo which connects with

what we have described as the eternal realm and inf uses another dimension
into so-called reality. Ficino himself realised the psychological
potential of such a synchronous moment of coincidence in his ritual
-176-

singing, which, he assures us, depended on a combination of diligent
preparation and divina sorte for its therapeutic effectiveness.(25)
The third passage to be considered before addressing more specifically
Ficino's attitude towards astrology itself concerns statue-magic and the
presence of the gods in specific locations and materials, for this has
direct bearing on his own practical magic as demonstrated in the Llber de
vita. Again he uses the powerful metaphor of light to convey the subtle
quality of divine essences which pervade a particular receptacle:

"When the gods are said to choose their own various places,
towns, buildings and statues, understand that their essence
and power flourishes everywhere in those places,
illuminating most powerfully here and there; and just as
light, remaining uniform in itsef fin se aanensi, shines in
different places without different mixtures and divisions of
its light, likewise [do] the gods."(26)

The light of the gods Is thus uniform and all-pervasive; it is the
varying mixtures and qualities of earthly things (whether in material
objects or human beings) which determine the strength or weakness of the
divine power which can be perceived in them, not any variation in intensity
of the light Itself as it emanates from its one source; for the capacity to
receive and respond to it will vary considerably according to how each
thing is most accomodated to it. For Ficino, light serves as a metaphor
for the intelligible principle which transcends all opposites and unites
them (unitque cua extreils extrema).(27) It stands for the clarity of
insight which transcends and unites pure intellect and depth of intuition
as represented by the 'masculine' and 'feminine' principles of mind and
soul (anlus, anlia). Light is the medium in and through which all the
elements of the cosmos work together to produce ruslca aundana:
"it accomplishes all things and unites extreme parts with
each other, through a medium including all things in itself,
and thus reflecting itself to Itself completely united.
Indeed which function is Imitated too by the circular motion
of the world, and by the connection of the parts in the
whole, and by a certain uniting of elements to elements in
turn, and by virtue of higher things sending forth to lower
things."(28)

It is the linking of these unified motions with the motions of the human
soul, or auslca humana, that constitutes the art of attunement to the
-177-

heavens (which Ficino was to call De vita coelitus cornparanda), and we
shall see in chapter four that he considered this astrological or magical
art of self-adjustment to be therapeutically helped by the correct use of
auslca Instruenta1Is.

As part of the circuitus splritualis, the divine light, or intelligible
principle, will be present in objects specifically designed to receive and
reflect it - such as statues of particular gods - as a 'power point' of
spiritual energy. Again it is stressed that the power itself is uniform;
the degree to which it is present will depend on the suitability of the
material, the knowledge and skill of the operator or inventor, and above
all on the quality of perception of the participator. "It is necessary",
says Ficino, "to be totally reverent to perceive the causes of the mundane
gods in places (normally by nature] foreign to them."(29) This recognition
and use of notio is the only way in which the essence, strength and action
of the gods in the world will be experienced and so understood, and is an
act of intuitive comprehension, not a quantitative analysis of distinction
and separation. By "determination of how much pertains to distribution
according to place" and differentiation according to species and types, the
possibility of apprehending reciprocal and mutual qualities and powers of
occult properties in relation to their one source is severely
lnhibited.(30) In other words, the qualitative richness of the external
world is dependent upon a unifying act of imaginative perception, not
'scientific' analysis. Any part of the world, says Ficino, receives
something from God, according to its natural propensity; we can understand
that people, in the same way as places, receive varying degrees and
proportions of 'divine light' as it is refracted down through the elements
and material world - the horoscope in this sense becomes a symbolic
representation of strengths and weaknesses according to the manner in which
a particular Individual, like a prism, reflects the original light of God.
Ficino believed that this divine element could be made more wholly present
and benefically harmonised ("the gifts of the gods naturally attracted")
through purposeful invocations and material adaptations(31) - and
particularly through music composed in specific accordance with the
astrological 'signature' of the individual In a continuous process of
tempering and refining his soul.

-178-

3.2. Divinator y pod 'scientific' pstroloqy
Astrology is in a unique position to bridge and thus to unite the
eternal and the temporal; the empirical observation of universal motions
and celestial phenomena and the mathematical calculation of the laws of
regulation which arise, provide a framework within which the subjective
imagination may freely range and find meaning. In fact, as Garin observes,
it is precisely the impossibility of detaching the theories from the
experiential effects which gives astrology such potential as a tool for
attaining a holistic vision of the unity of heaven with earth - for it
becomes "the translation of reality into celestial language."(32) In
achieving this insight, a human being may become master of his fate as he
realises the union of the opposites within his own soul and ceases to be
thrown off course by 'fated' external events.

In his Etymology the seventh century encyclopedist Isidore of Seville
attempted to clarify the classical Ptolemaic tradition of astrology,
distinguishing between astrononiia and astrologia as follows:
"There is some difference between Astronomy and Astrology.
For Astronomy is confined to the changing of the heavens,
the rising, orbits and movements of the stars, or why they
are so placed. Astrology is partly natural, partly
superstitious. Natural, when it follows the courses of the
sun and moon, or definite stations/placings of the planets'
revolutions [temporum]. The superstitious kind is that
followed by the mathematicians, who augur from the stars,
and distribute twelve signs of the heavens to particular
souls or members of the body, and strive to predict by the
movements of the stars the births and customs of men."(33)

According to this definition, the astronomer measures phenomena and
traces their movements back to a first cause; the 'natural astrologer'
considers the movements of the heavenly bodies in time and their reciprocal
aspects, and the 'superstitious astrologer' adds meaning to such movements
by relating them to the microcosm of the human being and making assumptions
about the future from such observations of correspondence. However, in
regarding as 'superstitious' all astrology which relates to the condition
of the individual Isidore is smoothing over a distinction which Is
fundamental to the neo-platonic approach to the subject - that between true
'divinatory' astrology and the attempt to reduce the 'superstitious'
-179-

variety to a natural science. For the kind of astrological awareness
demonstrated by the neo-platonic philosopher/magician in his symbolic
cosmology of spiritual hierarchies reflected within the soul of the
individual is essentially divinatory, and of quite a different order from
the traditional 'natural scientific' model of predictive and deterministic
astrological judgement. We are dealing with two positions here which
derive from the fundamental dichotomy in human nature between rational
objectivity and intuitive, subjective insight. We might also view this
distinction in relation to what we have termed temporal and eternal time,
or quantitative as opposed to qualitative modes of comprehension. We have
suggested that it is the possibility of a moment of fusion of the two
orders which gives rise to the experience of unity of being and perception
(the unus undus of the alchemists) by fully embracing the underlying
paradox inherent in the two conditions of 'being' and 'becoming'.

Much of the confusion surrounding Ficino's apparently ambivalent
attitude towards the value of astrological techniques and judgement may be
clarified by bearing this in mind. He was a human being prey to all the
inner tensions and confusions of an extremely melancholic temperament,
which he understood to be signified by the presence of Saturn rising on his
ascendant. He acknowledged the constant, inevitable fluctuation of human
intellectual prowess, remarking "we are not always the same with respect to
knowledge",(34) and it is surely unfair to attempt to evaluate his
experience of meaningful symbolic correspondence with an expectation of
rational consistency. 'Magical' activity of any sort, in its complexity
and radical subjectivity, will of necessity elude all attempts at final
categorisation and analysis. We should surely regard Kristeller's opinion
that Ficino's position is "ambiguous and full of contradictions"(35) not as
a criticism of an inconsistent philosophical stance, but as an indication
of the richness and subtlety of his astrological experience and the
difficulties involved in both his expression of it and our clear
understanding of what he means.

Eugenlo Garin has effectively summarised the complex nature of the
astrological 'dilemma' which faced the humanist thinkers from Petrarch
onwards. The two ways of approaching astrology, as a theoretical science
or an occult art (that is, as an experiential 'moment') provided material
-180-

for a debate which was to reach polemical proportions by the 1490s with
Pico's massive outcry against a divinatory astrology based on pseudoscientific assumptions.(36) In the words of Garin:
"[one way of interpreting astrology] is conceptual and
mathematical and reduces the heavenly intelligences and the
souls of things to necessary principles of rationality
inherent in the picture of an absolute, completely
predetermined. The other instead accentuates the
personality of the divine and underlines the free
individuality of souls, and gives life and humanity to
everything, and is expressed in terms which are fantastic
and emotive, imaginative and poetic. In the first case one
risks losing human initiative and freedom; in the second the
trap is the destruction of rationality and a nature which is
regulated by laws. A continual tension emerges from this in
the oscillations of the thinkers ... an ambiguity which is
so deep that it is useless to think it can be resolved by
the commonplace of the oppositions between astrology and
magic."

It is useless, I would emphasise, because within each way of approach
lie as many modes of understanding as there are individuals, and because
ultimately both the objective and subjective viewpoints converge in a sense
of personal awe and wonder when the unchanging laws of cosmic working are
revealed. At the apex, the precision of 'scientific' examination and
determination of natural law should, according to Platonic thought, give
rise to true religious experience and intuition of the nuxninous.(37) But
as the strands diverge and separate myriad positions may be tenanted, from
blind adherence to rational 'scientific' norms to the hysteria of
religious fanaticism; from the Apollonine clarity of exact perception to
the enchanting images of poetic approximations and musical analogies. For
both Ficino and Pico astrology was "not so much a technique of prediction
as a general conception of reality"(38) in which man as magnum miraculum
triumphed in his self-determined freedom. In a letter to Poliziano
concerning his astrological views(39) Ficino congratulates both him and
Pico for disputing against the astrologers who "in the manner of giants, as
vainly as wickedly struggle to tear away Zeus' heaven from him" - in other
words, who attempt to de-mythologise and reduce to a quantifiable system an
art which must depend on a symbolic, open-ended imaginative response for
its effectiveness.

-181-

When the positions of heavenly bodies are observed and annotated at any
given moment one is conducting a 'scientific' or astronomical, operation.
When the result is taken up imaginatively in the act of divination, when
the operator participates in a meaningful relationship with the quality of
that moment, astrology becomes 'magic' - the wise astrologer observes,
interprets and uses operative magic to 'negotiate with the gods' and
transcend 'bad' fate; thus the formal structure provides the framework for
the content of the experience. Unfortunately it is all too easy to lose
the kernel of that irrational experience within a strict tradition which
upholds rational objectivity and thus becomes bound within the view of
structure as an end in itself. Ficino succeeded in maintaining a
divinatory attitode within the craft of astrological procedure, together
with a respect for disciplined interpretation which he found in Ptolemy and
the Arabic astrological writers. But he reacted against the tyranny of a
purely formal approach, and his criticism fell heavily on both the rulebound determinism and superstitious, fanciful soothsaying of ignorant
practitioners, never on the potential of astrology itself, in the hands of
the wise, as a tool for self-knowledge and, ultimately, for an experience
of unity of religious breadth and intensity.

3.3. Ptolenalc astroloqy
Before considering in some detail Ficino's condemnation of what he
regarded as Ignorant astrology, we should look briefly at the tradition of
astrology as a natural science which Ficino would have inherited through
medieval Aristotelianism. Although he respected such a view (Ptolemaic
astrological theory unquestioningly formed the basis of his own practice)
he recognised that it could, if it were allowed to impose its own hegemony,
negate the possibility of a transcendantal, 'eternal' order which would
thus deny any possibility of final pshological unity.

Ptolemy and Hermes Trismegistus can perhaps be viewed as the clearest
upholders of 'rational' and 'mystical' approaches to astrology. We have
considered in chapter two the Hermetic tradition in terms of its emphasis
on 'eternal time' and the implications of this on magical operations.
Apart from Manilius' didactic poem Astronoalca(40) (in which he
-182-

specifically presents astrology as a gift of Hermes - Tu princeps auctorque
sacri, Cyllenle, tanti) 'Hermetic astrology' is to be found chiefly in the
treatises of philosophers. In contrast, the traditional Ptolemaic model of
'scientific' astrology is represented by a series of astrological 'text
books', beginning with Ptolemy's Tetrabiblos in the late Hellenistic period
(c.150 AD).(41) The formulation of a purely 'scientific' astrology was
concerned with the correlation of effects from the heavens in 'objective
time' which leads to the inevitable, concrete outcomes of future events.
Ptolemy's work provides us with a definitive exposition of the conceptual
framework of astrology; an approach which developed simultaneously with the
enthusiasm for astral and solar cults and for the deep subjectivism of
experiental theurgic ritual in the early centuries A.D. Geoffrey Cornelius
has pointed out(42) that before Ptolemy astrology was essentially
katarchic in that it was inextricably linked to the practices of auspices
and augury - divinations and oracles which sought to clarify the
relationship of human conduct with the will of the gods at any given moment
of significance. He suggests that with Ptolemy, the katarchic elements
became suppressed In favour of a rationalistic model - a 'protective
overmantle' of natural-scientific rationalism(43) was superimposed on this
core of divinatory practice; a mantle which, I would add, is always in
danger of stifling rather than protecting its vulnerable content.
Ptolemaic astrology firmly upholds a natural process of causation,
following Aristotle,(44) but introduces an original concept of an ambient
or ether, whose quality depends on the heavenly bodies arid which is
suffused throughout creation(45) (a 'scientific' equivalent of anhia
undi?). Ptolemy promised man the ability to understand human temperament
and predict events "both scientifically and by successful conjecture"
through examining the quality of this airy, all-pervading substance. Of
utmost importance is the 'seed' moment, or moment of origin - which may be
that of birth itself or any moment in life from which predictions may be
made - at which time the heavens stamp an impression which impregnates and
marks, indelibly, the characteristics of the person or event:
"For the cause both of universal arid of particular events is
the motion of the planets, sun, and moon: arid the prognostic
art is the scientific observation of the precisely the
change in the subject natures which correspond to parallel
movements of the heavenly bodies through the surrounding
heavens, except that universal conditions are greater arid
-183-

independent, and particular ones not similarly so ... The
general characteristics of the temperament are determined
from the first starting point, while by means of the others
we predict events that will come about at specific times and
vary in degree .. . "(46)
Here there is no room for negotiation with the gods. Ptolemy regards
any form of participatory divination using astrology as merely deceitful
and profiteering soothsaying, (47) and rejects an intuitive, comprehensive
'ancient' form of prediction which takes all the stars into account
(practised by "those who make their enquiries directly from nature")(48) as
too difficult. He is much more concerned with "theorising on the basis of
the traditions" (49) than attempting to account for what actually happens in
the astrologer's experience. Neo-platonic or Hermetic astrology
fundamentally challenges the determinist stance by observing that the
correlation of an event with a particular heavenly configuration is neither
necessary or sufficient for the astrological effect to happen - that is, to
be experienced. The degree to which a meaningful connection between the
two is made will depend not on an empirical observation of external
factors, but on the capacity of the individual for insight - which thus
depends more on notio than notitla. This position remains in the realm of
the 'possible' and preserves the autonomy of the human will by allowing
freedom of choice with regard to the taking up of the symbolism - there is
room for manoeuvre, for the play of the imagination, as the responsibility
is removed from an invariable 'out there' and placed in the realm of
personal experience with its infinite variety of shades and intensities of
8UbieCtiVe meaning. (50) Ficino was to continually stress that human beings
inhabit a world of contingency. To reduce their experiences to either
necessary or Impossible outcomes - to adopt a fatalist view of astrology or
deny any possible symbolic signification - deprives man of the noblest part
of his soul- his divinity - which Is expressed through his capacity for
creative imagination. As Salutati cried, a hundred years before Ficino's
Dlsputatio: "Leave free will to humankind: if you take it away you will
destroy both the human and the divine."(Sl)

-184-

3.4. ArabIc astrolov
It has been pointed out by David Pingree(52) that a thorough scholarly
investigation of the vast amount of Arabic literature concerning astrology
has hardly begun. But from the available texts it is clear that the Arabs
were the great synthesisers of astrological tradition, translating into
Arabic Greek, Sanskrit, Syriac and Persian writings. Persian astrology
itself combined both Hellenistic and Indian doctrine. Persian astrologers
writing in Arabic began to create a literature based on Persian
translations of Greek and Sanskrit texts made in the third century A.D.,
and from the seventh to eighth centuries A.D. the two branches of
divinatory and genethlialogical astrology are found represented in Arabic
treatises. It has been assumed by modern scholarship(53) that Arabic
astrologers in general promulgated the Ptolemaic 'machine of destiny' in an
attempt to justify their art scientifically. However, it would appear that
already divination and horary practices, Involving a sub jective or
'experiential' dimension, played a large part in Islamic horoscopy in the
eighth and ninth centuries. The earliest known Arabic text relating to
astrology deals with celestial omens,(54) which were also to predominate In
the many Arabic translations of Hermetic texts. A feature of Arabic
astrology was that it established and clarified the different branches of
astrological practice. One particular source, evidently known to Ficino,
is the twelfth century Llber novem judlcum,(55) a Latin compendium of
Arabic astrological writings mostly from the eighth and ninth centuries
A.D., some of which were translations of astrological authorities from both
Greek and Persian traditions: Aristotle, Ptolemy, Dorotheus, Aomar ('Umar
Muhanuned Ibn al-Farrukhan al-Tabari, died 815), Alkindus (Al-Kindi abu
Yusuf Ya'Qub ibn Ishag al-Sabbah c.800-873), Zael (Sahi ibri Bishr ibn Habib
ibn Hani, died between 822-850), Albenait (also known as Abu All, Albohali,
Aichait, Yahya ibn thalib Abu Ali al-Khayyat, active c.854), Mesehella
(M3sha'allah ibn Athari al-Basri, died 815) and Jergis (unidentified).

Mesehella, a Persian Jew working in Iraq from 762 to 815, was the first
astrologer to Introduce elements of Aristotelian physics into Arabic, and
his work on genethitalogy survives in a Latin translation by Hugo of
Santalla.(56) In the text included In the Llber novea judlcum he
distinguishes between six categories of astrological practice: the
-185-

astrology of generations and nations, of families and single households,
kings and potentates, natal astrology, inceptions and elections, and
horary.(57) The divinatory branch of interrogations, which depends on a
subjective interrelationship between the condition of the inquirer and that
of the heavens, is regarded as a particular application of astrology which
may happily co-exist with the 'objective' methods of genethlialogy, for
which Ptolemy and Dorotheus provided the chief models. We know that
Mesehella, Aomar and two other astrologers cast the horoscope for the
foundation of Baghdad on 30th July 762.(58)

In his Disputatlo Ficino's most-quoted authority is Ptolemy, whose name
springs fro4n almost every page. However, many of his references are to the
spurius Centlloqulua or Liber fructus, now believed to be composed by the
Arab Haly Abenrudian (Abu Jafar Ahmad b. Yusuf b. al-Dayah c.920) whose
Coimnentary on the work was available in the Renaissance via the translation
by Hugo of Santalla.(59) The Arabic astrologer quoted most frequently in
the Dlsputatlo is Albumasar (Abu Ma'shar, 787-886), who had become a
principal authority in the Medieval period through his Introductorlum aaius
In Astronoiai, written in Baghdad in 848 A.D. and twice translated into

Latin in the 12th century.(60) His Justification of astrology as rooted in
the principles of natural science carried through the principle of
deterministic causation to embrace every aspect of the sublunar world, and
Ficino frequently refers disparagingly to what he regards as Albuinasar's
"silly similitudes" (pueriles slmiiitudlnes) which cannot give any sound
basis for Judgement.(61)
Albumasar firmly upheld astrological fatalism, establishing astrology as
an Intellectual discipline which could not In itself be subject to error any inconsistency or contradiction in Judgement was to be attributed to the
shortcomings of the practitioner, not to his art. Albuinasar's advice is
that the astrologer "must have confidence In his science while avoiding to
meddle with the unknown or with that which exceeds the power of reason in
order not to bring legitimate astrology into disrepute."(62) All human
qualities of body and soul Albumasar understood as part of one natural
movement, the ultimate source of which is God's will, but which are
nevertheless totally determined by virtue of the heavenly bodies. Ficino
would agree that, in the world of nature which included human bodies and
-186-

emotions, results of planetary activity could be directly observed
depending on the type of action and degree of receptivity of the material.
But he was to protest indignantly at the assumption that the great variety
of effects in this world could all be attributed to planetary movements,
aspects and figures - both observable and imagined. Although Alburnasar
acknowledged man's capacity to deliberate and exercise choice, ultimately
even contingency must for him be determined by the stars - for in what has
been termed "the ominous inclination toward elimination of contingency so
characteristic of Arabian philosophy"(63) his conclusion is that man viii

choose what is of necessity already implied in planetary motion.(64) If
God intervenes in this natural process through an act of providence, it
does not disrupt the system of regular cause and effect. Although he
professes to allow it, Lemay points out, Albumasar effectively does away
with the notion of contingency altogether. No possibility of
transformation through transcendence of 'fate' can be incorporated in this
system - for the strict rationalist, 'magical' operations claiming to do
this would be considered illusory and dangerous, not least because to endow
planets with the numinous qualities of divine personifications and to
presume to sunmon them would be polytheistic and reveal a dangerous and
presumptive faith in human, rather than divine, power. To this degree, the
Ptolemaic attitude would appear to stop short at the very moment when
psychic transformation might become possible. By its refusal to enter the
domain of the imagination (fearful perhaps of the consequences of an
incomplete notltla-type knowledge), rationalistic astrology forces man to
live in a strait jacket, prey to the infallible prognostications of
fallible astrologers.

Even Al--Kindi's De radlis,(65) to which Ficino owed much authority for
the 'natural' emphasis of his own astrological magic,(66) reduces all
occult or mysterious forces at work in so-called magical operations to a
rational theory of ray-emanation. For Al-Kindi the process of cosmic
sympathy determines and explains all possible phenomena; in the words of
his modern editor, "there is no shadow of esotericism in this system; once
the premiss has been adopted, that is the fundamental unity of the Cosmos
and its harmony, everything unfolds from there according to rational
norms."(67) Although Al-Kindi acknowledges the power of imagination,
intention and faith of the practitioner to provoke changes in other
-187-

elemental things, his theory is that human emotions such as desire, hop
and fear emit rays which may act on matter at a distance. Al-Kindi's
explanation of ritual magic allows no supernatural agency or theory of
occult synchronicity; rather, the spiritus imaginarius or seat of the
imagination emits rays which conform to cosmic rays. To obtain'an effect a
mental image must be formed, and the man must desire the realisation of it
(Al-Kindi does acknowledge that lack of faith would prevent success) then
precise acts such as invocations and prayers may follow, designed to
provoke specific movements of celestial rays.(68)

Specifically taken up by Ficino was Al-Kindi's emphasis on the power of
words to reinforce the effects of planetary rays.(69) The latter
recognised that formulas could act ondifferent kinds of beings according
to time and place; arid just as prayers recited in conjunction with an
intense desire could achieve a more powerful effect, so the potency of
astrological formulas was enhanced when they were linked directly to the
stars which were themselves linked by sympathy to elemental nature.(70)
Al-Kindi's theory of rays and sympathetic resonance provided a rational
explanation for the efficacy of talismans, magical mirrors, sacrifice and
images. He firmly believed that the success of a magical operation
depended on the favourable aspects of the planets and signs which governed
its inception, and that their names and characters should be written or
spoken to ensure the strongest concordance of cosmic rays for the
operation. He was determined to present 'occult' phenomena as the natural
consequences to be drawn from the overall principle of cosmic unity,
maintaining that what marl regards as 'hidden' does not therefore imply
origins of an unnatural, or supernatural, kind. (71)

Al-Kindi's natural-scientific theoretical position is often belied by
the implications of what he approved of in practice. For example, his
realisation that the 'meaning' of a ritual invocation is constituted from a
dual source - a combination of cosmic harmony and human custom (rnusica
mundana and rnusica humana) - would not seem totally divorced from the
intuitive notion of the theurgists, that the gods perfect the work of
humans:
"Moreover when in any invocation the attribution of meaning
from the harmony (already] created and from men concurs, the
virtue of meaning of this invocation is doubled. For if
-188-

this name, man, by its harmonic disposition may contain the
meaning of man, just as It has been agreed by the Latins, it
will operate through its rays in matter since it will be
amplified by a double virtue, that is natural and
accidental, and thus the effect will appear more strongly
."(72)
In the Llber de vita Ficino refers to Albumasar, Al-Kindi, Haly
Abenrudian, Haly Albohazen(73) and most frequently simply to thL
Arabes.(74) Carol Kaske suggests that when he refers to these latter

writers, Ficino means the authors of Picatrix, a treatise on sympathetic
astral magic dating from the twelfth century with a strong Hermetic
content.(75) Ficino would have been familiar with the Latin translation
which, as is the case with the Liber novem judicuni, differs somewhat from
the Arabic original.(76) In this work' he found a system of practical ngic
set in the context of Hermetic philosophical religion, with an emphasis on
talismans, alchemy, statue-magic and daemonology. For example, in a
remarkable passage in De vita coelitus comparanda(77) Ficino quotes "the
Arabs" as saying that in the fashioning of images, the human spirit "if it
has been intent on the work and upon the stars through imagination and
emotion" is joined with the spirit of the world and the rays of the stars
through which the spiritus mundi acts. This notion was to form the basis
of his astrological music therapy, as we shall explore in the next chapter.

It is important to realise that the Latin translations of Arabic texts
available in the Medieval and Renaissance periods were generally overlaid
with interpretations and elaborations by the translators - Hermann of
Carinthia's version of Albumasar and the Liber novern iudicum being only two
examples.(78) It would appear that the Arabic trend was towards
concretisation and the significance of particulars in both natal and horary
branches of astrology - a trend which was easily obscured by the Platonic
convictions of twelfth century translators and commentators.(79)

-189-

PART TWO: Ficino and Determinism

3.5. 'The affinit y of nature'(l)
To begin a consideration of Ficino's personal and innovative attitud
towards and use of astrology and music in such a fostering of divine power
through ritual, here is a letter, written in September 1462 when Ficino a
a young man of twenty-nine had just received news of Cosimo de' Medici's
patronage.(2) He was now enabled to embark on his career with the founding
of the Platonic Academy and the translations of Plato - to enjoy a country
house and a revenue which would remove all material and financial worries.
In appreciation, Ficino writes to Cos,mo, saying that the other day he hal
been singing a hymn of Orpheus to the Cosmos (ad Cosinum, which also means
'to Cosimo'), and he quotes the text of the hymn which ends "Hear our
prayers, Cosmus, and grant a quiet life to a pious youth."(3) He
continues:
"When I was celebrating that same hymn in an Orphic rite a
few days ago, letters were delivered to me from my father
[i.e. Cosimo, his 'spiritual' father], in which the wise
Cosmio de' Medici, most worthy doctor of my life, said that
he would reflect on my studies, that he would generously
provide for me, kindly help me, and hospitably and piously
receive me into his sacred dwelling. This thing came about
not only through your magnificence, which indeed I admire
greatly, but also through the ancient prophecy of Orpheus.
Because it seemed that he [Orpheus] directed at you the hymn
which he dedicated to the Cosmos, indeed to be asking on my
behalf those things which he asked for in the purpose of the
prayer. Moreover, you being moved by a certain heavenly
instinct seem to have heard the hymn at the same time at
which I was singing it and favourably to have granted those
things which the entreaty earnestly requested ... "(my
italics) (4)
This example of 'meaningful coincidence' in everay life tells us much
about Ficino's readiness to fully grasp, on a personal level, the
implications of ritual invocation. Through his instinctive sense of notio
he half seriously, half playfully connects his appeal to the Cosmos with
Cosimo's granting of his request - nearly thirty years before commenting on
Plotinus and lamblichus, Ficino gives us a beautifully simple example of
his belief in the power of the union of words and music to attract
-190-

beneficial heavenly influences and effect change in the material realm. In
the true Plotinian spirit of disinterested participation in the cosmic play
of forces and purity of intention, the intensity of Ficino's desire wa
directed upwards and not aimed directly at the person of his beneiactot.

In his Preface to the Commentary on Plotinus addressed to Cosirno's
grandson Lorenzo, Ficino makes a direct connection with this episode. H
suggests that at the same time as his translations of Plato are being made
available, the spirit of Cosimo (now dead) inspired Pico della Mirandola

to

come to Florence, who was born the same year that he embarked on the
Platonic opus and who was in some way sent to lead him on, as Cosimo had
wished, to Plotinus:
"By divine providence the outcom certainly seems to have
been that while Plato was as it were being reborn, the hero
Pico, who was born under Saturn the ruler of Aquarius,
(under which I similarly had been born thirty years
earlier), came to Florence on the very day that our Plato
was published, and miraculously breathed into me that
ancient wish of the hero Cosimo concerning Plotinus, a wish
totally hidden from me but breathed into Pico from
heaven. "(5)

It was deeply significant for Ficino that Pico, "sublirnis Saturni
filiuzn"(G) was also born under Saturn in Aquarius, and the two men's

correspondence is full of allusions to the Saturnine wisdom which drew them
together in a 'Platonic bond'.(7) Ficino's continual awareness of the
cycles of Saturn, its connection with his vocation, relationships and
temperament, is playful and imaginative and in no way bound by determinism.
The meaningful significance of correlations between the heavens and everyday life excites and delights him, but always serves as a guide to 'right
action' and never as an irrevocable limitation. We find him writing to his
friend Giovanni Cavalcanti despite adverse planetary indications, because
true friendship depends ultimately on God's decree, not the stars';(8) to
the Archbishop of Florence he uses the symbolism of a horary chart to
negotiate a profitable outcome to an adverse situation;(9) to Lorenzo de
Medici he warns of difficult transits but only at the last moment, in order
to save Lorenzo needless worry "for we are often accustomed to constantly
anticipate evil or distant things by our predictions or occasionally to
fabricate the present."(lO) To Zoenobius Romanus Ficino is reluctant to
-191-

make any judgement on a horoscope with traditionally 'malefic' aspects
since "it is of use neither to presage evil things nor is it appropriate to
believe much by those things."(ll) The constant reference to friends'
horoscopes, planetary significations of events, transits, portents,
synastry and elections together with an acute sensitivity to the
implications of his own natal chart reveal Ficino to be deeply immersed in
a symbolic attitude towards life(12) - an attitude which finds its finest
expression in the incorporation of astrology into natural magic in De vita
coelitus coparanda, to be discussed in chapter four.

3.6. The Dls p utatjo contra iudicjum astrologorum

I shall now consider Ficino's ' anti-astrological' texts in some detail,
for a re-appraisal of his often mis-represented position towards astrology
in general is an essential prelude to our understanding of his own personal
incorporation of the art into a system of natural magic, as he so describes
it in the Liber de vita. Garin's statement that Ficino, in the Disputatio
"attacks the whole of divinatory astrology, destroying it down to its
roots"(13) needs to be clarified - for the use of astrology as a basis for
divination was, on the contrary, upheld by Ficino as its most legitimate
application. His attack fell on those who abused the transformative
potential of the divinatory moment by wanting to reduce it to a pseudoscientific rational norm.

In June 1477, Ficino wrote to Francesco Marescalchi that he was working
on a book on "the Providence of God and the freedom of human judgement, in
which a case is moved against the predermination of the stars and the
prophetic utterances of the astrologers".(14) He succinctly summarises for
his friend the overriding message of the Disputatlo, that the limitations
experienced by a 'fate-bound' conception of universal law can be overcome
by the potential of human free-will to see, understand and co-operate with
personal destiny, which is determined by a higher (or more hidden) will
than ours:
"I practise philosophy chiefly for this reason: since events
themselves do not otherwise follow my will, at least I by my
will shall follow events, for it 15 to a will which follows
them that events conform ... But perhaps someone may say it
-192-

is foolish to wish to contend against unassailable fate. I,
however, reply that it can be opposed as easily as one may
wish to oppose it, since by that very opposition one may
immediately overcome what one wishes. Surely the movement
of the heavenly spheres is never able to raise the mind to a
level higher than the spheres. But he who puts them under
examination seems already to have transcended them, to have
come near to God Himself and the free decision of the will
Furthermore, although any adverse and, as I might say,
fatal action habitually proceeds from one contrary position
of the stars to another, no one dares to assert that will
itself and reason, resisting the assumed force of the stars,
arise from the force of the stars; but rather we understand
that they flow from providence and freedom itself . . ."(15)

To another correspondent, Francesco Ippoliti,(16) Ficino writes "I have
written a book opposing the empty pronouncements of the astrologers" and he
goes on to specify how such ignorant, 'petty ogres' deceive both themselves
and the public at large by assuming astral causation; for in doing so, they
deny the Providence of God, the justice of the angels, and the free-will of
man. Their concrete predictions make people either complacent and lazy, or
else terrified through anticiting imaginary evils - all of which is
unnecessary since "if the Fates cannot be avoided, they are foreseen and
foretold to no purpose."(17) Ficino condemns a totally deterministic
attitude which denies the humanist ideal of man as master of himself; for
human will, strengthened through philosophy, has "the power of something
contrary and even superior in virtue" to fate. He acutely observes that
"if we consider the matter more carefully, we are moved not
so much by the Fates themselves as by the foolish advocates
of the Fates. Believe me, you will not yield to the Fates
provided you do not believe these fools who veil in
obscurity not the truth ... but falsehoods."(l8)

Ficino's invective against these "word-mongers"

(homines loquacissirni.)

is ruthless indeed, and he urges philosophers to wage war against such
ignorance with the arms of wisdom, so that "those who aspire with such
arrogance to climb to the world of the gods will in humiliation be cast
down headlong to the infernal regions."(19) He appeals to God for strenqth
in this battle, and ends by exhorting the human race to preserve its
freedom and peace by triumphing over the "diviners .. who have for so long
been shackling us to their illusions."(20) We find an explicit
differentiation between such arrogant, "vulgar astrologers"
-193-

(plebei)

and

the "excellent authors of astrology" (praecipul) at the beginning of
Ficino's Coninentary on Plotinus' Ennead II.(21) He is at pains here to
point out that not all astrologers are the ignorant variety, who concede
far too much to the forces of the stars and know nothing of astronomy (and
we must remember that, following the Epinomls, for the Platonic astrologer
measurement and observation must provide raw material for the intuitive,
applied skill of interpretation). The vise astrologers, Ficino understood
from Plotinus, would refrain froni imposing systems or making cut-and--dried
prognostications through a humble recognition of the sheer complexity of
causation involved, but would nevertheless be open to all the possible
significations, inferences and incidental correspondences between heavenly
patterns and sublunar events, actions or personal tendencies of character.

To Bernardo Bembo, Ficino emphasises again that in his Dlsputatlo he is
not condemning astrology in itself, but refuting "those pronouncements of
the astrologers which remove providence and freedom."(22) No insIght may
be gained into the tangled web of human affairs without the ability to view
them from a higher vantage point - and many astrologers, then as now, are
as trapped In the world of opinion as those they attempt to advise:
"Indeed, as carefully as true astronomers measure the heavens, so do vain
astrologers misrepresent human affairs."(23)

3.7. Fate arx free-will

We can only guess at Fictho's motivation for writing, but not
publishing, a treatise which, to all but his closest circle, would suggest
his firm opposition to astrological practices. It is as if, adopting an
Aristotelian model of rational argument and writing in clear, exegetical
prose, he wishes to sweep away all the deadwood of fatalistic attitudes by
a co4mnon-senze critique of rigid and arbitrary astrological systems. Yet
in his very approach, 'playing the game' of the rationalist and ridiculing
a 'superstitious', literalist interpretation, he is in fact making the
point that the meaningfulness and experience of astrology is not to be
found by approaching it with such a linear, restricted logical viewpoint.
To attempt to reduce it to a natural-scientific system will inevitably
relegate its sphere of influence to the confines of the natural world and
-19 4-

the realm of temporality - and in Ficino's fervent humanism the human
reason may potentially, and freely, attain to universal knowledge through
transcendence of such a limitation. As he stresses in his detailed
consideration of the parts of the soul in the Theologia Platonica,(24) in
order to achieve true revelation even the condition of the philosophical
enquirer, "given to the investigation of divine and natural questions" must
be surpassed since it involves separation and measurement; the "dubiou
mind of natural philosophers" still remains embedded in worldly
considerations. Level of being and level of insight are interdependent as Trinicaus says, Ficino is continually trying to show "how man is the
measure according to how he experiences."(25) Only non-action and
purgation of the mind from earthly concerns may induce true prophetic
insight - and astrological symbolism igiderstood and taken up from this more
unified perspective becomes a divinatory tool rather than a pseudo-rational
'science'. Ficino confirms this in his commentary on lamblichus, echoing
the first aphorism of the pseudo-Ptolemaic Centiloquium:
"I am of the opinion firstly that most certain truth in
respect to the stars can be had through divine prophecy: and
we can find out the whole [truth) neither by an enumeration
of rules, nor by skilful declarations; and moreover I add
that you cannot show definitively the impossible idea of how
much pertains to mathematical knowledge, because opinions
differ amongst themselves ... Astronomy, and other arts
given by certain gods a long time ago, are confused by human
opinion, and now indeed retain a tiny amount of divinity and
truth ... it is impossible to give iudgements for definite
events, since we are unable to understand the confluence of
all causes, unless we grasp it through divine inspiration."
(my italics)(26)

The ability of the human reason to align itself with the will of God
Himself - to become divine in the very act of knowing the divine - implies
a complete transcendence of 'fate' in the liberation of the essential part
of the soul from the determination of natural law, for the soul is capable
of being freed from the common impulsion of fate and fortune by being
endowed with lntelligence.(27) It is this intelligence, affirms Jung,
which leads the individual on his journey towards greater consciousnebs
symbolised in the progressive differentiation and refinement of the
Zodiacal sign-qualities:
"the journey through the planetary houses boils down to
becoming conscious of the good and the bad qualities in our
-195-

character, and the apotheosis means no more than maximum
consciousness, which amounts to maximal freedom of the
will. "(28)
Once liberated, the soul can then exercise free choice and wiilinqiy
'choose' the life-pattern which appears, in some way, to be pre-ordained;
if such a pattern is seen to be meaningful, it can no longer be termrd
'fate' for the workings of divine Providence, experienced as fateful
intrusions in the natural world, manifest as destiny on the intellective
level of the soul. In a short section of his Plotinus commentary, includFd
in the Disputatio(29) Ficino calls on the authorities of Alexander of
Aphrodisias, Enomaus, Diogenes and Ptolemy to substantiate his belief in
the power of human will to counteract 'fate'. Through the exercise of
philosophy the soul may become strengthened to resist the adverse influence
of natural occuxences, so that the individual may be able to deliberate an
use his mature judgement to make a choice of action: "By using reason iran
can examine what happens in his imagination and if he approves of it can
then decide to act accordingly."(30) Ficino emphasises that in the working
out of the natural order events cannot all be traced back to a divine
origin - some things happen through natural causation, others through a
fortuitous meeting of random elements (what we would call a 'chance
ocurrence' like the finding of a treasure-trove), some through human free
decision and others through the direct will of the gods. Divine will is
experienced as 'fate' in the realm of nature because there appears to be no
alternative option on this level. Since no human action can be fated due
to man's capacity for responsible decision, it follows that if such actions
are experienced as 'bad fate' (such as, one might assume, robbery or
murder), the fault is entirely due to a human moral defect. Ficino points
out in his Disputatio that "Nothing disagreeable reaches us, without us
finding amongst ourselves its manifest and sufficient cause, whether this
concerns the body or the soul"(31) - a view echoed concisely by Jung:
"Much that proves to be abysmally evil In its ultimate
effects does not come from man's wickedness but from his
stupidity and unconsciousness . "(32)

The 'evil' effects of natural disasters, seen as acts of God, may be
accepted as part of the necessary workings of a harmonious universe, even
If they appear discordant to our distorted perspective. Ficino would Seem
-196-

to insist on a view of freewill which stretches the human intellectuil
potential to truly staggering heights, but he also acknowledges th
presence of deeply-rooted, instinctual motivating forces which lie f-dr
beyond the domain of conscious choice, forces which might be termed
'unconscious complexes' in the language of depth psychology:
"We are motivated by the dispositions which descend to us
from the universal natures in a long chain, through the
intermediary of our nature, and we are completely unaware of
them because they urge us on from within."(33)

Or, as Liz Greene observes,(34) "There are aspects to our motivation
which go beyond 'free-will' - they are transpersonal, autonomous, even
infernal and divine", starkly adding (with a pragmatic realism alien to
Renaissance idealism) "sometimes compliance with the order of nature may be
beyond the individual's resources."

It is certainly beyond the scope of this thesis to study in depth the
huge question of the extent to which human motivations and actions are in
some way determined by a force beyond our conscious control. But in the
light of Ficino's intuitive apprehension of kairos, or the 'right moment'
for freeing man's divine element and thus enabling him to overcome 'fate'
or materiality, it is important to consider the philosophical

and

religious

premises which underlay his imaginative response to such psychological
transformation. It is hardly an exaggeration to say that Ficino's work
with astrological music-therapy begins to heal the split in human
experience between the dark, pitiless, irrational intrusions of

heirnarniene

and the clear, purposeful sense of a personal destiny.
In his fervent defence of free-will, Ficino followed in the footsteps of
St. Augustine and the early humanists Dante, Petrarch, Salutati and Lorenzo
Valla. (35) Charles Trinkaus vividly and succinctly sums up the essential
innovation of the Renaissance humanists - the emphasis on man as an
Dei:
"Beginning with Petrarch, the humanists broke free from the
bonds of religious externalism and obiectivism that resulted
from the application of the dialectical procedures of
scholastic philosophy and theology to ordinary Christian
life. The humanist turned back to man as a living, feeling
subject ... God Himself had to be viewd by Petrarch as
majestically free and moved more by his outpouring of love
-19 7-

irnago

or anger than by any attempt to sit down and make precise
calculations. And man in his image and likeness would share
these qualities on a lesser and weaker scale ... aware of
the limitations of his capacity and the strength of the
vicissitudes with which his life was beset, but equally
aware of his position within the creation arid encouraged by
it, created in the image an likeness of God, destined to be
master of all the world, arid the replica in this of God and
the universe .. Man's dignity lies in his acting in a
providential way as he believed his God was doing, but not
as though he were not a subordinate part of the divine
providence itself and subject to it."(36)

Valla, in extolling the passionate side of human nature, justifying the
force of man's emotional responses to "sweep him beyond the intellect"(37)
through the power of images mediated by language and words, broke new
ground with his "profound and magnifident insight" into the individual's
potential for enriching and deepening his creativity with the fertilisationi
of a fully-experienced emotional life. The essential message in his Dc
libero arbitrio of 1439 was that God has foreknowledge of men's actions but
that this does not imply their necessity - f or man can change his mind.
This implication that within a determined pattern man can choose how, on
what level, his particular 'fate' will be manifest - that he has the option
of 'negotiating' and freely working within the confines of his personal
destiny - was to be developed by Ficino into a system of practical magic
not reserved solely for the high-minded theurgist, but accessible to all
those sincerely seeking to improve their quality of life. In an early
letter to Giovanni Rucellai on the nature of fortune,(38) Ficino advises
his friend that the blows of ill-fortune may be overcome through exercising
the gift of wisdom, which is not acquired through human effort but is a
product of the outflow of the Good throughout the cosmic system, stemming
from the first principle:
"This substance (intelligible life) in a circular movement
begins and ends in itself, and all the movements of the
circle return to the centre from where they move out to the
circumference ... and because there must be harmonious
proportions between the agent and that which is acted upon,
Nature moves that in us which is natural, and the origin of
nature moves that in us which is vital and intellectual and
has the form of the Good."(39)
Human nature becomes the instrument of the Good, not disconnected and
polarised, but far enough removed In the intricate web of creation from th
-198-

original impulse that the purity of intention of the Creator rriy be
obscured and confused. For, suggests Ficino, our desires often become
misdirected by the instinctual pull of bodily arid sensual appetite - in
this sense, 'fortune' appears to be in opposition if it does not conform to
such desires. But, Ficino, points out in the Disputatio, man cannot desire
against his will, whose very action is to desire.(40) The will is self-moving and cannot be compelled - when the good is grasped by the intellect
and shown to the will it may then, propelled by the force of desire (and we
must remember the etymological origin of desiderare - 'from the stars')
voluntarily align Itself with its destiny, which could be seen to be
already implicitly ordained in the symbolism of the birth horoscope.
"Desire Itself causes understanding of the good" says Ficino(41) - and we
have already seen how the desire of thee heart is an essential ingredient
for the efficacy of theurgic anagg.(42)

In the letter to Rucellai, Ficino explains that events experienced as
fate are simply indications of God's will, manifesting in various guises as
it works its way throughout the chain of being, and experienced differently
according to the individual's level of awareness:
"That which we call fortune and chance, can be called fate
in respect to universal nature and providence in respect to
the intellectual and law in respect to the highest
good."(43)

If man can align his free-ranging faculty of reason with the highest
good itself, then he may resist fate by understanding the fundamental law
from which it proceeds. To battle powerlessly against the inevitable is
degrading and exhausting - far better, says Ficino (anticipating Jung), to
make peace by
"conforming our will with its will and going willingly where
it indicates, in order that it should not drag us there by
force."(44)

This emphasis on the benefits to be gained from alignment with cosmic,
as opposed to personal, law is found time and again in Ficino's
correspondence. In a letter addressed to 'Mankind' he stresses the pcirddox
that only by willingly accepting what is 'fated' (through self-

-199-

transformation, not manipulation of external events) can it be effective'y
changed:
"Why do we scheme audaciously to change fortune? To alter
the course of fate? 0 Soul, I pray you, change this game,
set your form aright! For thus shall you change fortune and
alter the course of fate, and in an instant change for the
better the form of the world itself for you."(45)

And in a letter to the Bishop of Volterra Ficino relates such an
attitude to common assumptions regarding 'malefic' planetary positions, for
to the extent to which one blames the stars, or other people, for one's
ills, so one will suffer unecessarily: "We think", says Ficino, "thdt starE
and men's minds are adverse only to those who interpret these things with
perverse minds."(46)

In another letter to his great friend Giovanni Cavalcanti(47) Ficino
emphasises the importance of non-identification with the material realm in
order to avoid being buffeted by the blows of fate. If one lives purely on
the physical (or rather literal) level, then divine law will be experienced
as the darkest face of Moira - 'fateful' events will be seen to occur as
obstructions to instinctual desire or as external disasters sent to oppose
and upset. The human body is attracted by the body of the world through a
literalised, concrete manifestation of a 'fate' which, fixed within
limitations, contains no possibility of transformation. It follows that
predictions, astrological or otherwise, which concern themselves with
literal, irrevocable outcomes (rather than with the psychological impulses
which propel and attract them) can only come to pass on this level and
allow no potential for inner transmutation and psychological tempering.
Ficino tells Cavalcanti:
"Yet the force of fate does not penetrate the mind unless
the mind of its own accord has first become submerged in the
body, which is subject to fate ... Every soul should
withdraw from the encumbrance of the body and become centred
in the mind, for then fate will discharge its force upon the
body without touching the soul. The wise man will not
struggle pointlessly with fate. He will rather resist it by
flight ... that is why Plato advises us to retreat ... from
attachment to the body and involvement with worldly affairs,
to the cultivation of the soul."(48)

-200-

Through the victory of spiritual over material values, the separation of
body from soul, evil may be overcome. This alchemical notion, the
separatio prerequisite for eventual re-union of the spiritual and material

preoccupied Ficino in the first half of his life, finding fruit in his
great Theologia Platonica on the immortality of the soul. But it would be
wrong to assume a rejection or repression of the earthly nature in the
Theologia(49) Ficino asks "is the human body endowed with such dignity that

it deserves to receive an immortal mind as its guest?" and replies "without
any doubt", referring to the "marvellous beauty of all the various
members." It is rather a matter of conscious self-observation and
regulation of instinctual response. To all accounts Ficino never
experienced sensual desire,(5O) but he did enjoy the natural and material
pleasures of good wine, music, and hea1thy living. James Hillrnan has
pointed out that for Ficino the issue is one of life-perspective, not
irrefutable dualism:
"When 'body' is disparaged in Ficino in order to affirm
soul, it can be psychologised to mean the empirical,
literal, physical perspective, particularly the perspective
of practical actions which had less significance in Ficino's
scheme of things than did Venus and the voluptuousness. The
opposition is less between soul and fleshly sensual oy f or voluptuousness in Ficino was a model for spiritual
delight - than between interiority and outwardness, or what
we have called the metaphorical and the literal
perspectives. "(51)

Happiness, for Ficino, can only be achieved by the wise man who
transcends the irrational chaos of nature through heroic adherence to the
light of consciousness. As he wrote to the Cardinal of Pavia, "No one
ever falls into the abyss who, established on high, looks into it with
clarity and cornpasslon".(52) Ficino's personal struggle for selfknowledge, his concern with disentangling his rational soul from the grips
of powerful emotional drives (exemplified in the strong Aquarius/Scorpio
polarity of his horoscope), is inextricably woven into the very fabric of
both his philosophy and his practical life. The unity of sp1ritul
aspiration with concern for soul in the world, the "univer5al understanding
of things"(53) which he found in Plato, was complemented by the Intuitive
mysticism of Hermes Trismegistus. Together, these 'divine' representativ
of the paths of speculative philosophy and revelatory religion led, for
Ficino, to a possible conjoining of the objective and subjective rea1m in
-201-

an all-embracing wisdom of being. Yet it must be pointed out that there
was an abyss which he could never cross - Mother Nature in her chthonic
aspect remained anathema, and one can only speculate that Ficino's complete
lack of relationship with the earthly feminine (with the crucial exception
of his mother) may have been a direct reflection of a deep-rooted fear of
his own contra-sexual nature with its powerful emotional drives. Within
the safety of sublimated Platonic homosexual friendships the dark aspect of
the ania does not have to be met. But the psychological implications of
Ficlno's theory and practice of love are the subject for another study.
Suffice it to say that as torchbearer for the immense surge of
enlightenment in the West known as the Renaissance, Ficino fulfilled his
destiny to the hilt. He could only follow his desire, which manifested in
allegiance to Minerva, not Helen,(54) an4 in 'marrying' the Church (thus
'sanctifying' the Platonic Academy), Ficino fully embraced the truth of his
convictions.

In his Commentary on lamblichus, Ficino tackles the subject of fate from
the religious perspective.(55) Iamblichus presents the material and
spiritual parts of the soul as separate entities, affirming that we are
freed from fate through the higher part which may be strengthened through
religious observances. It is through this first soul that we are joined to
the gods, and j ust as the pursuit of philosophy will strengthen its
capacity for intellectual understanding, so a similar devotion to
cultivating a deep religious faith will re-affirm our innate sense of
notio.

Again, it is emphasised that only at this level of awareness may

one's attitude towards fate be transformed; the supra-mundane gods, not the
lower celestial ones, instigate the natures which carry out the already
implicit fate in the world, so they alone can free us:
"For when the most important of them, which are In us, act,
and the soul is called back to the higher parts of Itself,
then it is completely separated from those who subjugate It
in generation."(56) (my italics)

As a complementary method to philosophical speculation, religious ritual
dedicated to the higher gods may purify the soul, "dissolving lower things
with a greater power", as we saw in the processes of theurgy. To view the
cosmos with the inner e attuned to the eternal, rather than temporal,
dimension is to perceive the numinous quality of all natural things - to
-202-

see innumerable gods at work in natural processes. A humble devotion to
these powers will free the ego-centred will and cultivate the very faculty
of innate intuition necessary to grasp the workings of a higher will arki
thus overcome the adversities of blindly suffering fate. The common goal
of these two perspectives - the transcendent intellectual and the deeply
religious - confirms for Ficino "that there is the greatest kinship between
Wisdom and Religion", as he entitled the proem to his De Christ lana
religione,(57) where he goes on to say:
"(the soul] as it pleases our Plato can, as though by two
wings (that is by intellect and will) fly back to the
heavenly Father and fatherland, and the philosopher relies
on the intellect and the priest especially leans on the
will, the intellect illumines the will and the will kindles
the intellect . . ."(58)

Ficino is insistent that the effects of bad fate are to be overcome
through exercising the virtues of prudence, justice and piety, which he
defines as a discrimination between spiritual and material concerns and the
appropriate personal adherence to each.(59) He is no advocator of an
unearthly spirituality - he begins the Dizputatio by stressing that the
order of the universe may only be understood through a thorough appraisal
of both its higher and lower elements, and that both are necessary in
correct proportions, although our ability to apprehend how everything fiUtogether is limited. The "good" or God is not to be found in a
transcendent paradise, but in the quality, or divinity, perceived in any
part of the cosmic hierarchy (apprehended, as we have seen, through the
corresponding human act of notio).(60) It is a question of how one sees,
for God's wisdom is latent and hidden in the world, and qualitative
perception, opening the t inner eye s , reveals It. Ficino's quotation from
Orpheus, "you [divinity] observe inside all things, you hear inside all
things and you arrange all things" (omnia intus inspicis, ornnia incus audis
omniaque distribuis)(61) in the Disputatio (his only reference to a prisc'us
theologus amongst many astrological and Biblical authorities) focusses the
attention on both the immanence of God in the world, and on the intuitive
faculty required to perceive the 'occult' properties in nature. In the
context of the work, this only serves to highlight the lack of such inner
vision on the part of the ignorant, 'petty ogre' astrologers.

- 203-

In particular, to achieve alignment with God's will in order to attain a
clearer insight into his arrangement of human affairs, Ficino emphasises
that patience is required, which accomplishes three things: firstly a
contradiction of natural impulses through use of the will in suffering
misfortunes gladly; secondly a conversion of what is necessary into what is
voluntary; and thirdly the transformation of what appears to be evil into
good.(62) In such a process, man strengthens his rational soul and
approaches the condition of God Himself who acts through voluntary
intention, not necessity.(63) Offering advice to his nephew Sebastiano
Balvinl,(64) Ficino urges him to transform his attitude towards suffering a

difficult situation by willing it, for, he says, "unless you suffer
willingly, you will certainly suffer unwillingly; arid unless you allow
youself to be led, you will be seized and violently dragged away." He
continues:
"it is patience more than all the other (virtues] that
conquers fate; for patience, being in accord with the will
of divine providence, changes what fate has decreed to be
immutable and unavoidable, so that it makes the unavoidable
voluntary. Just as he who acts badly turns what is good for
him Into evil, so he who suffers well turns what is bad for
him into good ... Therefore, my Salvini, overcome fortune by
bearing it, and that you may overcome all else, overcome
yourself, as you have already begun to do."(65)

It is worth drawing a brief parallel here with the strikingly similar
conclusions of depth psychology concerning the gradual reconcilation of
opposing forces within the human psyche. In the words of Aniela Jaffé, one
of Jung's mo5t distinguished interpreters:
"The experience of meaning - which is what, ultimately, life
is about - is by no means equivalent to non-suffering; yet
the resilience of the self-aware and self-transforming
consciousness can fortify us against the perils of the
irrational and the rational, against the world within and
the world without."(66)
In order to understand Ficino's condemnation of the practices of the
'petty ogres', it Is necessary to summarise his arguments concerning the
nature of the soul and autonomy of the human will (drawing on both the
Dlsputatlo and the Theologia Platonica, sections of the latter being
Incorporated into the former work). That he felt It important to begin the
Disputatlo with a detailed exposition of Aristotelian principles regarding

causation reveals his concern to emphasise the distinction between the
intellectual speculation of true philosophy and the limited, and often misguided, attempts to form 'rational' explanations of astrology from within a
merely human, or temporal, frame of reference. At best, the latter allows
for laudable astronomical measurement and the examination of astrological
configurations, a framework which the wise astrologer will use as a
necessary basis for insight and understanding which, however, derive from a
higher source - "with celestial virtue (man] ascends the heavens and
measures them. With supercelestial intelligence he transcends the
heavens."(67) At worst, such a short-sighted viewpoint encourages arrogant
assumptions and dangerously inaccurate judgements - and Ficino's main aim
is to prove that astrology cannot be stripped of its divinatory, or
eternal, dimension and reduced to a pseudo-rational 'science' if it is to
be used for the purposes of deepening self-awareness and re-connecting man
with his divine nature.

3.8. The Rational soul
Man's unique position as a mean between heaven and earth was, for the
Platonists, determined by the basic tripartite nature of his soul which
partook of both realms. Plato understood the human soul to be composed of
reason, appetite and the irrational spirit (thuznos), which must be
harnessed and regulated to serve Reason in the overcoming of the appetite's
demands.(68) Harmony and rhythm were to be employed as an essential part
of this training. Ficino, in the Theologia Platonica, describes a threefold order within the soul of Mind, rational Soul and Idolum (imaginative
faculty);(69) in his Commentary on the Pbaedrus he incorporates the fourth
element of nature and compares each order to the cosmic hierarchy:
"The understanding's swiftest circuit resembles the
firmament's diurnal motion and the whole celestial
machine's. The reason's slower circuit resembles the
planets'motions: its more universal and contemplative
circuit resembles Saturn, Jupiter and the Sun, its more
particular and practical circuit, Mars, Venus, Mercury and
the Moon. The imagination's period is like the aether's
subcelestial revolution; nature's period, like air and
water's revolution."(70)

-205-

Following Plotlnus,(71) Ficino later elaborated on this basic structure
with a further five-fold division of the soul: the lower soul,
corresponding to man's material nature, consisted of firstly the bodily
functions of propagation, nourishment and growth, secondly the five senses
of external perception, and thirdly the imagination, or interior
perception. The higher soul on the other hand comprised reason and mind.
It is thus reason which occupies the mediating position between the
material and the immaterial parts of the soul. In the Disputatio Ficino
correlates this division with a five-fold progression of effects ranging
from the necessary to the impossible, the rational soul corresponding to
the central position of possibility which may be coerced by either side and
which may voluntarily join itself to either.(72) As the mean between
corporeal matter and the Good, It Is "the mean between time and eternity,
partly eternal and partly temporal, the mean between natural and divine
things."(73) This part of the soul is autonomous - It may both enter Into
the passions of the body and ascend to the realm of the angels, being
compelled by nothing other than Its free choice. This voluntary act of
direction, Ficino says, adds intelligence to the action, through which it
Is master of the limits arid conditions surrounding It(74) - and it Is the
particular duty of man to develop arid apply the understanding which allows
him to exercise the judgement and choice of his rational soul. Things In
the natural world come to pass through blind necessity - since the heavenly
bodies partake of this order, they can In no way determine the actions of a
man who Is conscious of his soul's potential to transcend its temporal
limitations:
"But if anyone should say that the movement of understanding
is set In motion by the stars, whose nature is determined,
then he shall remove this very reason of Judgement, which is
directed In a certain broad, unfettered and free motion In
all directions, and in place of good judgement he brings In
a certain limited Instinct."(75)

This limited, human instinct Is a far cry Indeed from the deep,
intuitive insight of notlo or the discriminating awareness of the intellect
through which an individual may "proceed from the principles of things In
temporal succession to the conclusions in a universal concept."(76)
However, the soul Is connected to the order of fate through Its lower
faculty or idolum, which touches and exercises a guiding power over the
body:
-206-

"through the idolum the soul is in the order of fate ... but
is not under fate ... Thus the soul is placed in the laws of
providence, fate and nature not only passively but as an
actor ... Although in these three parts we are partially
bound to the order of things and partially not bound, in a
fourth we are entirely free and our own. This is the reason
which we locate in the middle between the mind, the head of
the soul, and the Idolum, the foot of the soul."(77)
Ficino describes the vim Idolum or imaginative power as a "vivifying
force" which guides and nourishes the body" and which is an image or
likeness of the rational soul. As an intermediary, it is like "a certain
trace of the soul in the body, or a shadow" and maintains the life of both
soul and body in a healthy co-operative balance.(78) In a remarkable
passage, he appears to anticipate the Ji.irigian concept of a collective
unconscious or archetypal unifying stream of psychic life from which all
individual minds, imaginations and bodies emerge:
"all minds like lights are reduced to one mind like one
light, all imaginations (Idola] and likenesses of souls to
one imagination or the universal soul, all bodily natures,
as if shadows of souls, rightly to the corrunon nature of one
body, as if the shadow of one soul. Our soul through its
head, that is, mind, is governed by higher minds; through
Its lower power, that is, the imagination by which the body
is governed, it unites with the imagination of higher souls;
through the nature of its body, into which the imagination
penetrates, it is united with the nature of the mundane
bodies [i.e. planets], which it follows with the nature of
this body."(79)

If the rational soul, through its voluntary action, chooses to follow
the ldolum, then it "sutits to fate by a certain love"(80) and through
purposefully directing the imagination may be understood to transform the
adverse psychological effects of desire, pleasure, fear and pain (through
which the Idol ura directly affects the physical body) into selfunderstanding. The idea that man may control his instinctual nature
through what we would now term sublimation - using the imagination to
contain, refine and transform the 'irrational', primitive and raw emotional
responses, and that the deprivation of physical comforts and sensual
pleasures may Increase human creativity by forcing this very process ("(it]
expands and proves its productive power")(81) is an astonishing
psychological insight for the time, anticipating Jung's conclusions on the
reconcilatory function of the symbol.(82) In Ficino's terms, under such
-207-

conditions man imitates God's act of creation in his artistic enterprises;
he can improve and perfect nature through conjoining his reason to his
phantasy, which in turn is fed by the "delights of the senses". In an
encomium to the creative power of man, (83) Ficino places him at the centre
of the universe, having the power to use all living creatures, whether
animals or angels, "for learning and the miracles of magic."(84) So
fervent Is his belief in man as an lmago Del that he even suggests that man
could recreate the heavens themselves if he had the right instruments and
materials. It was certainly through the Imaglnal recreation of the
heavens, as we shall see in the next chapter, that Ficino advocated working
with one's natal horoscope. Such a process bears a striking resemblance to
both ancient alchemical and modern psychotherapeutic techniques of active
imagination. (85)

3.9. Contingency
In the Dlsputatlo Ficino stresses the impossibility of predicting
particular effects by observing that they proceed from God through the
heavens towards lower things "not always inevitably ... for they can be
changed and impeded, both by the occasional resistence of inferior natures,
and by art at the same time as wisdom."(86) They will also vary according
to local diverse conditions such as climate, upbringing and education.(87)
He distinguishes three types of effects in the natural world which
correspond to the three orders of Providence (wholly voluntary), Fate
(negotiable) and Nature (necessary), which are voluntary (such as a person
of sanguin temperament deliberately choosing serious occupations),
contingent (such as changes in weather or ill-health) and necessary (such
as the movements of the heavenly bodies). He gives the practical example
of placing wax behind a stone so that it will not melt to illustrate the
way in which human ingenuity may counteract natural effects. As man
occupies the realm of contingency, he is given room for negotiation within
certain limitations. It is not only by adopting a far-sighted and patient
attitude that fate may be transformed - the wise man may also knowingly and
skilfully Intervene to manipulate matter In order to alter the way it
receives or repels the natural, unchanging influences of heavenly bodies:
"with the advice and help of the wise man and the physician things may be
-208-

avoided which will be produced as a result of the heavens."(88) Because of
the superior motivating strength of the rational soul to that of the body,
it has the ability to "mix together or reject the inclination of the
heavens coming into the body"(89) - and in the third part of the Liber de
vita we learn how this can be done through the arts of herbal medicine,
talismanic magic and musical performance.
In ascending the Platonic hierarchy - the chain of animate creation all diverse particulars are progressively reduced to single principles, and
ultimately to the Good, One or God. Since the Good may only generate good,
it follows that what is humanly experienced as evil or sin is a result of
the mis-direction of the will, in the contingent realm. Since God acts
voluntarily, and maintains the whole in proportion and harmony, it Is not
possible for vice to be generated in the order of providence. The harmony
of the heavens can in no way cause the disharmony of man, whose suffering
may always be attributed to his own ignorance and weakness. Both in the
Dlsputatlo and Commentary on Plotinus(90) Ficino is at pains to illustrate
how the heavenly bodies can in no way be evil in nature, nor move men to
evil actions, as they are animated by a rational soul uncontaminated by
earthly nature therefore superior to that of man. Human will is free to
Interpret astrological effects as 'good' or 'bad' - it is free to either
reinforce the natural tendency or to counteract it, since man's voluntary
action forms the mean between natural necessity and divine will. Thus,
planetary influences may be strengthened or diverted in many ways, and not
only through art and 'magical' knowledge; also general human customs,
regional characteristics, upbringing and education may modify, challenge or
reinforce the general instincts signified by the heavens at the particular
time and place of the soul's entry into the body. (91)

3.10. Providence
In a letter written towards the end of his life to Johannes
Pannonius,(92) Ficino explains that in his practice of astrology his
intention "was above all to serve divine Providence in the resuscitation of
the ancients". He continues:

-209-

"If you have read attentively my disputation on the Star of
the Magi, the chapters of our Theology and the books of
Plotinus which deal with this question and which I have also
translated, you would clearly understand that the care of
public good which is concern for souls depends effectively,
as their first and general causes, on higher spirits who are
the ministers of all-powerful God; and at the same time
proceeds in a certain way, as their proper and near causes,
from human intelligences, as soon as they harmonise
themselves with the superior spirits. Now, all this is
signified by the heavenly figures and movements, in as much
as they are instruments of divine spirits. Furthermore, you
would learn that 'fate' which is the working out of heavenly
causes, serves divine Providence. One can moreover say that
our souls are most free when they respond fully to divine
will."(93)
By naming Providence "the succession of minds"(94) in the Theologla
Platonlca Ficino is referring to the level of intellectual perception from
which man may know, and conform to, the will of God. SUCh knowledge Is
absolute, transcending all divisions of past, present and future, creating
"the external and internal coincidences of life perpetually afresh in every
moment because every moment is one eternal moment."(95) At this level, all.
is understood to be directed towards the good, whereas natural processes in
themselves do not necessarily lead in this direction. Any tendency towards
defect of the will by the lower nature is ordered by God into something
good, although this may be experienced as ill-fortune or disaster by
individual human beings; for the ordering takes place "according as the
dissolution of that one is the composition of this, and the misfortune of
one or a few is the advantage of many."(96) God's ultimate justice and
compassion is enacted through his punishment and forgiveness, his intention
always being to lead the soul of man to its most perfect end. Thus direct
divine intervention in the form of miracles or retribution may also play a
part in the 'taking care' of the human race.(97) In this Aristotelian

ordering of the world from a first cause, the human will, through trial arid
error, will be inevitably led back to an Ininutable higher will - namely
that of God, not of the heavenly bodies as independent from the first
motion. (98)
The connection of the intellectual level with Providence suggests the
possibility of true prophecy, and indeed all forms of revelation through
'divine frenzy'. For when the free-ranging soul aligns itself with the
-210-

eternal order - transcending linear time-divisions of past, present and
future - it may attain universal knowledge and thus predict events which
will inevitably occur as part of the overall design. But in order for this
to happen, says Ficino, the rational soul must be entirely emptied of
earthly concerns, so that it is free, when prompted by the impulse of the
sensual imagination, to participate in another order:
"When that influx of minds finds our reason emptied or free
for the intellect, it shows it something of those things
which pertain to universal knowledge of eternal matters or
to the government of the universe, so that it foresees
either the law of God and the orders of angels or the return
of the ages and the revolutions of kingdoms. When the
impulse of the Idola and of the natures comes upon an
entirely emptied reason and phantasy, something is revealed
to it concerning the vicissitudes of times and the
disturbances of the elements so that it can foresee future
rains, earthquakes and similar things."(99)
This condition is very difficult to achieve, for although many of a
philosophical temperament may receive insights or unexpected solutions to
problems during sleep, the true prophet must transcend all attachment to
"that customary investigation of the speculative reason" and embrace a
condition of complete openness and non-action: "Their soul is more
withdrawn while awake than that of any others, in sleep it is entirely
withdrawn. Therefore the supernal impulse Is easily observed by
them. "(100) When a human soul has become such an instrument of God, it may
initiate or participate in events which appear to the ordinary man to be
magical or even miraculous. In the Theologla Platonica, in agreement with
Plotinus, Ficino presents a view of man as magus with no need for external
ceremonial or theurgic ritual - for by virtue of purification of his soul
alone man may realise a divine potential. In the words of Trinkaus:
"In the Theologla Platonlca Ficino leads up to magic through
man's rational, artistic, productive and scientific
capacities. Here it is regarded essentially as a divinely
aided extension of the rational and psychic, even protodivine, powers with which man is endowed."(101)

-211-

3.11. 'Petty ogres'
I have already mentioned amusement afforded Pico, Poliziano and Ficino
by the activities of some of their contemporary astrologers (see
Introduction, page 13). But what kind of astrology does Ficino explicitly
condemn in his Dlsputatlo and Conmentary on Plotinus? He begins the
Cocmentary by making it clear that not all astrologers are to be
criticised:
"the first chapter narrates in what way Astrologers - I
don't say all of them, but many - think that by the forces
and characteristics of the stars individual things are both
signified and caused (both as regards external things and
the body, or the mind and its actions) to be either good and
honest or on the other hand evil and ugly. Indeed you will
remember that the excellent authoth of astrology do not tell
of these things, but certain vulgar astrologers, completely
igorant of astronomy, divulge such things."(102)
In the Dlsputatlo Ficino ridicules short-sighted literalism,
superstitious generalisations and the limitations of making iudgements from
a merely empirical perspective, at the expense of the subjective fluidity
of a metaphorical one. One finds here a parallel with his exhortation to
"petty philosophers" (ainutl phllosophi)(103) to transcend the limitations
of the judgement of the senses and purify their connection, through the
soul, with divine things:
"They should become pure, and they will perceive pure
things. They should finally experience in thenelves, and
they can, if they wish to, what they have been
denying/desiring [deslderant] in the universe for a long
time ... ?nd they will prove in fact Socrates' opinion
that there is but one way not only to reach but also to
possess incorporeal things, namely, to make oneself
incorporeal .. ."(104)
To desire to be in harmony with the universe is to willingly work with
one's given destiny - but to perceive a horoscope as an indicator of this
destiny involves a fundamental change of perspective, a renunciation of
human values in a voluntary alignment with divine. The 'petty ogres'
remain in the world of opinion, catching unsuspecting clients like flies in
a spider's web, which however may be easily broken by the wise man's
superior strength.(105) Quoting St. Augustine on Job, Ficino adds that he
-212-

who visits such 'mathematicians' "buys masters from him, which it will
please the mathematician to give, either Saturn, or Jupiter or Mercury. He
entered a free man, so that having given coins he may leave a slave.."(106)
Much of the Disputatio is devoted to a vehement critique of the
fallacies of such astrologers with their literal presumptions, particularly
the arbitrary and variable nature of their 'rules'. If astrologers
disagree so much amongst themselves, complains Ficino, how can they ever
give accurate judgements? He ridicules their direct attribution of human
gifts to planets (orators and prophets are not 'made' by Mercury, kings are
born under the sane star as servants); (107) of animal powers and images to
constellations (their images are fabricated in the sky and "rather it
should be said that the heavens give something to those animals than
receive from them"); (108) their unimaginative, literal application of
rulerships of signs to regions, occupations and parts of the body with no
attempt to look beyond disjunct particulars for a higher connecting
principle (How can the same signs cause different things in different
regions? How can Saturn with the Sun rule both leatherworking and
monotheism?);(109) their arbitrary divisions of the zodiac, illogical
attribution of good and evil qualities to illusory parts of heaven (the
moon's nodes);(l10) of masculine and feminine, hot and cold properties to
signs and planets; (111) the inconsistency of planetary significators (if
Saturn is significator of both the first and eighth houses, "therefore it
signifies life and death which is inconsistent to reason")(112) - the list
is endless. "All this is poetic metaphor", says Ficino, "not reason or
knowledge".(113) The irony of this statement, in the light of his
appreciation of poetic metaphor as a most powerful y of conveying eternal
truths, cannot be fully appreciated without a clear understanding of the
level at which his criticism is aimed. From the standpoint of the naturalscientific mind of the practical astronomer, such pseudo-rational claims
are indeed fanciful and without foundation. It does not suit Ficino's
purposes here to attempt to convince sceptical opposition (perhaps
ecclesiastical) of the rightful place of such rules within a metaphorical
rather than literal approach to astrology, for he evidently wishes to
convince his readership of his apparent rejection of the practice as they
understood It. That, in his later writings, he fully embraces and applies
traditional astrological rules within his Imaginative system of
-213-

psychotherapy, fully accepting the implications of the framework as a
container for a most powerful 'poetic metaphor' implies no contradiction.
If the realm of the imagination is valued, 'poetic metaphor' speaks
directly to the heart. If 'scientific' objectivity is the judgemental
norm, then it vii]. mean nothing. In appearing to be disparaging, Ficino is
in fact confirming his own symbolic approach. In the Cosmientary on
Plotinus he specifically draws attention to the importance of urxierstanding
astrological figures as both literal and imaginary phenomena:
"Plot inus and Origen say that future things are in heaven
from the beginning, as if in the form of letters or texts,
which are to be explained gradually, or are perpetually
written, [and] they understand the stars and figures to be
both constructed out of the stars, and imaginary: likewise
the degrees and parts and minutes of the signs: lastly the
aspects and movements of the planets, and (those things
which] proceed from them or are combined together anywhere.
Indeed by this you may understand the universal heaven. For
heaven is everywhere ... Indeed just as causes are coion to
things above the Moon and to inferior things, so are signs
coon: below the Moon indeed are particular causes, by
which known things particular indications are derived from
coinon things, and the whole of its body exists as if of one
animal. Therefore it is necessary to consider carefully
this animal of the world, all things both above and below
the Moon, and to ponder on both things."(114)
By "above and below the Moon", we can understand eternal and temporal,
or in terms of modes of perception, symbolic and literal. Without taking a
unified perspective, the ccmplexity and apparent contradictions stermaing
from partial vision will deter true understanding; in this Ficino likens
the astrologer's task to that of the physlognomer. (115) The deterministic
'petty ogres' in their exclusive concern with quantifying particulars,
predicting behaviour instead of being attuned to inner propulsions of the
soul, reduce the infinite mystery and grandeur of the cosmic dance to
delimiting, narrow categorisatlons, "puerile similitudes" (pueriles
sl.11ltudlnes) as Ficino eloquently puts it.(116) Reading between the
lines, his message is that both the pure fatalists and the scientific
rationalists miss the point - using fixed reductionist assumptions to
remain at a safe distance from the dangers of acknowledging their own
participation in the mysterious play of cosmic forces, they avoid
confrontation vith the deeply disturbing and awesome issue of fate with all
that it implies for human suffering and personal responsibility. As Liz
-214-

Greene asks, "How can one measure the places where fate enters a
life?"(117)

,l2. Sicznification
In his exasperation with the practitioners of deterministic astrology,
Ficino in his Disputatlo asks how predictions can be made from a horoscope
when a hundred thousand man born at different times may die in a shipwreck,
fire, battle or plague on the same day. (118) He attacks vehemently a
literalist assumption that particulars may be concretely predicted in the
realm of contingency from astrological rules alone - but does not deny the
possibility of prediction through a divthatory attitude, which may or may
not use astrology as a tool. The most important point is that the
individual's quality of being will determine the clarity and depth of his
vision - our judgements will be confused to the extent that our perceptions
are confused. Ficino quotes Ptolemy, that
"Our judgements fall between the necessary and contingent,
nor must they be made distinct, but rather remain confused
in he who observes the matter from a distance. "(119)
He holds Plotinus as an example of an exalted state of being by whose
purity of soul (via aniaae) rather than mare knowledge of techniques
foreknowledge of the future may occur, adding "hence that astrological
iudgement from the stars is not only made through their inspection, but
also from the nature of he himaelf who judges." (120) There is no doubt, in
Ficino' s mind, that as we are part of universal nature so we are affected
by the movements and changes of the heavenly configurations, and that all
particular effects viii turn out in accordance with this natural pattern in
a process of reverberation. (121) But the nature of such events, he
maintains, may only be predicted through the ability to see symbolically,
and then only obscurely - because as we have seen, the exact nature of
finite human acts depends on so many factors, in particular, the influences
of natural instinct and human freewill. "Nor", says Ficino, "in the
present appearance of the universe may indications of things in the past or
future be presented unless in an arbitrary and indiscriminate vay."(122)

-215-

In his Cormentary on Plotinus Ficino gives "five indications why the
stars signify our things, rather than cause them"(123) in an attempt to
convince the reader through rational argument that 'cause and effect'
astrology kills autonomy of will, whereas the reading of signs opens
meaningful potentialities within personal destiny. Firstly, since an
efficient cause cannot precede the first cause, and astrological figures
are often perceived to be significant in retrospect, they cannot (in
temporal, linear time) be said to be causes of past events. By this
reasoning, neither can they be causes of future events; in both cases
however they may announce them. Ficino is again drawing our attention to
the nature of time - for the coincidence of 'eternal' and 'temporal' time
cannot be evaluated in terms of a causality that implies a purely linear
structure. The mode of connection in 'eternal' time is not causality but
significance, which might be more accurately described as 'circular' and
self-referencing as the meaningfulness of the event depends on the
participation of the observer. Ficino gives the concrete example of Mars
falling in the fourth house of a horoscope as corresponding to the sodden
death of the parents or dissipation of an inheritance. He stresses that
such events cannot be caused, in any technical sense, by this horoscope but, we might say, these particular experiences - the concretely embodied
'fate' - may be signified for the individual by the highly-charged and

often violent energies of Mars at work within the arena of family life,
when the planet is activated by an appropriate transiting configuration.
The actual manifestations may be variable and certainly impossible to
predict, and how much the individual is adversely affected by an 'event'
will depend on the degree to which he is identified with material, as
oppposed to spiritual, existence. To 'negotiate' with fate in this
instance might be to transform the 'evil' effects of Mars by understanding
the lessons to be learnt by self-reliance or poverty. The problem lies in
the determinism of a future event, not in the symbolic reflection of such
an event in the heavens - to make a concrete, material prediction deprives
the soul of the ability to make such a transformation and may even provoke
the occurence on this level. As we saw in Ficino's letter to Lorenzo de'
dici (page 192), he s very reluctant to encourage negative emotions in
his friend by predicting difficulties under particular transits, indicating
that the more one anticipates a fearful event, the more one is predisposed

-216-

to experience one.(124) The 'petty ogres' are not only to be laughed at,
they are to be feared, for they unwittingly play with fire.
Secondly, Ficino points out that since the horoscopes of relatives, or
anyone closely connected to an individual, will represent something of the
nature of their relationship to him and will in some way reflect a violent
or traumatic event (such as his murder), the sheer complexity of
associations cannot be understood as causes: "where things are dispersed in
diverse or different things they are not causes but signs."(125) Most
importantly, Ficino does not deny the validity of a birth horoscope but
suggests that it signifies the freely-chosen destiny of the soul before
incarnation within which Implicit and ordained framework it is free to
shape the course of a man's life, rather- i than an ininutable, imposed set of
fixed characteristics:
"If through the heavenly figure at birth the fate of the
child is predicted and already laid down, this very figure
does not carry out this destiny but declares it, and the
child is not then constituted (by it] but signified. And
the Platonists shall say that one's destiny was determined
before conception when the soul chooses the body as It
pleases."(126)
The third indication Is the most important for our understanding of
Ficino's divinatory attitude towards astrology. He reasons that since
prediction of the future may occur through oracles, auguries, auspices,
dream-interpretation, portents of doctors and farmers, omens and
physiognomy, all of which rely on the examination and interpretation of
signs, why should the pattern of the heavens not be used In the same way,
as figures thscribed by divine influence, manifesting future things, but
not acting or causing them. He asks, "Is this figure not clearly above us?
But so are the flight of birds and claps of thunder, nor yet is it usual to
expect future things through these phenomena as causes, but as
Indlcations.9127) And in the Dlsputatlo Ficino had already stressed that
heavenly configurations should be read as signs "no differently than in
augury and auspices, when many things are thought to be portended through
birds which are not at all made by the birds."(128) In fact through a
divinatory approach, not through merely obeying rules, Ficino held that It
was even possible to gain foreknowledge of particulars:
-217-

"... the aspect of the heavens shall be able to be free in
which inscribed figures manifest future things by divine
influence, bit do not act: especially by consideration of
celestial bodies those things may be foreknown which are
unable to come into being in the normal course of that (the
heavens' I bodily nature, such as certain human honours and
oppress ions, discoveries of treasures, thoughts of
deliberation, changes of fortune which are peculiar to our
affairs."(129)
I shall return to the emphasis Ficino places on divination a little
later. To conclude his indications of signification, he fourthly stresses
that if either evil or good things are portended by a particularly
configuration of stars, it is more probable that they are declared by it
than, since the stars cannot be evil in themselves, cause evil things or as
in the inmaterial soul which lies beyond corporeal
nature. Fifth].y, Ficino draws our attention to the practice of
bodies, cause effects

interrogations, or horary, where a question is posed and the answer divined
from the current constitution of the heavens. He distrusts the ability of
the astrologers to make accurate pronouncements about ininediate, physical
phenomena whose causes are to be traced to human temperament, custom,
knowledge, and action or the chance convergence of circumstances, but does
acknowledge the possibility of revealing more remote factors influencing
the interrogation through signification:
"Of alien things and things very remote from us, (the
astrologers] confirm that whatever may be replied from the
present hour of interrogation is answered not through a
cause but a sign. "(130)
In the Disputatio Ficino explains the reason for his scepticism, for the
efficacy of an interrogation depends on the intention and attitude of the
querent, in the same way as that of a talisman or remedy will depend on the
faith of the patient in the cure. This conviction is not a rational
appraisal of the intellect alone, but includes a deep faith in the
unfathomable workings of the 'unknown' powers of divinity. He quotes the
Arabic astrologers I4essalac (Masha'allah) and Zahel, the former advising
that an interrogation should only be asked with great care about a thing of
the utmost necessity, and the latter saying "Don't answer the player or the
frivolous querent, but only he who eagerly desires and for whom the matter
lies close to his heart, because the thing turns out in proportion to the
-218-

solicltude"(131) (my italics). The correspondence between the 'solicitude'
or intent of the questioner and the movements of the heavens is, for
Ficino, the essential point of mergence of the temporal and eternal. If no
effort is made to 'tune in' to or engage with the divine dimension through
a suspension of logical thought-processes, the verdict can only be
dependent on human ingenuity, or simply be the result of natural workingout:
"Zael and Messalac say that the interrogation only has
judgement and effect when it is with [made] with great
sollicitude, as if they desire that that alone is moved by
the heavens, indeed that which is without sollicitude, of
whatever kind, often does not depend on the heavens.
Therefore ... not all the acts of men are made by the
heavens."(132)
Both interrogations and elections (the timing of particular activities
and events in accordance with the stars) preserve intact the free-will of
the enquirer. Ficino would have found authority for confirmation of his
views in the writings of Albertus Magnus, (133) who saw in astrological
judgements "the natural tie between philosophy and mathematics". Albertus
understood any moment of interrogation to be an opportunity for an
Individual to gain fuller insight into the path of his personal destiny:
"when a man interrogates, he comes then from his birth to the good or evil
which his birth indicates."(134) Such intimations are beyond the
accessibility of normal human consciousness, but may be encouraged by
intentional participation In enhancing the quality of the moment. Ficino
quotes Albertus to confirm his own view of elections: "Freedom of will is
not repressed by the election of an excellent hour; rather, to scorn to
elect an hour for the beginnings of great enterprises is not freedom but
reckless choice."(135) For Ficino, the understanding and art of man - his
quality of being and degree of wisdom - must precede any power of the
heavens alone in the composition and use of images (he quotes the Ptolemaic
dictum, sapiens doalnabitur astris),(136) whether material, musical or
divinatory (such as the horoscope itself). Then the rules of the game may
be put to the service of (not substituted for) true insight, for "only the
vise man, fortunate by nature, is capable of foreknowing any effect by the
rules of science."(137)

-219-

Coniinting on Plotinus, Ficino fully admits the possibility that
contingent effects In the sublunar realm may veil be indicated by heavenly
movements and configurations; that signs may coincide, in the natural
course of things, with human free choice. Sometimes on the other hand
signs may be of no use if the efficient cause actually changes, through
natural processes or human intervention, the implied outcome of the
signification.

3.13. Portents
astrological interrogations are, in the same way as oracles, auguries,
and the portents observed by doctors and farmers, all ways of examining and
assessing the future through signs, by the use of a flexible, imaginative
but essentially natural faculty. Mention should be made here of the
phenomena of portents as direct Interventions by God, to be interpreted as
signs of significant, dramatic changes in earthly affairs - 'bolts from the
blue' which shake up the temporal order, intrnding Into human consciousness
to disturb the comfort, but blindness, of its coimnon condition. Of
interest here is a letter by Ficino to Filippo Valori in 1492 on the nature
of portents,(138) for it was coanonly believed that a comet had signified
the recent death of Lorenzo de' Hedici. These sorts of prodigies, says
Ficino, do not occur through chance or natural means, but "they contain in
themselves an entirely superior mysterious nature. "(139) He considers the
idea that they derive directly from a divine order which surpasses all
natural forces, and this leads him to formulate three kinds of portents
with three particular spiritual origins: firstly the sublime order of
spirits and angels who bring about comets, thunder, burning stars and
similar phenomena, portending the deaths of noble souls; secondly the
spirit or genius of a particular place or city which gives forth oracles,
moves auguries and causes storms which announce the collective disasters of
peoples and warn of Inininent dangers; thirdly man's personal daemon or
guardian angel who smmons forth dreame and such occurences as the frenzied
barking of dogs which may warn either of death or recovery from illness.
As ever, Ficino stresses that our interpretation of the various events and
patterns will depend on our level of perception, our capacity for symbolic
connection, not on the apparent literal significance of the event in
-220-

itself. The meaningfulness of the subjective experience cannot be judged
from a rational viewpoint.

314. Prediction
Ficino continues with a detailed examination of the problen involved in
giving judgements of future events. (140) How can we possibly discern, he
argues, every particular event on earth from the general movements of the
heavens, arid how can we have the capacity to examine exactly their effects
throughout creation? He admits that general effects or tendencies may be
determined from studying a horoscope, but never the innumerable internal
and external movements of a lifetime, even if we apply ourselves to the
task daily. Ficino does not deny that the complex mass of stars and their
motions convey some effects which are "accomplished through the nature of
the place and the material", (141) but since astrologers believed there to
be between 25,002 arid 400,076 stars, many of which were hidden from human
sight, in no way could they Judge the absolute condition of all their
effects. Ficino is awed by the sheer magnitude of the universe, arid
suspects the existence of planets as yet undiscovered due to their extreme
altitude, but whose possible existence prevents the possibility of our
obtaining definitive information. Man's life is too short to gain the
complete knowledge of all individual powers and motions that would be
required to make infallible Judgements from 'scientific' evaluation alone.
It is interesting here to compare the view of the Roman astrologer
Firmicus t4aternus,(142) a stoic fatalist for whom astrology, as a
predictive science, is infallible in its ability to make exact judgements
from minute data. In the Llber primus of his treatise Matheseos he attacks
those who maintain the impossibility of determined judgement:
"There are some ... opponents who say that they agree with
us to a certain extent. In order to throw the whole
doctrine into doubt and despair they say our teaching has
great force. But they add that no one can get definite
results because of the smallness of the degrees and minutes,
the tremendous speed of the stars' orbits, and the
inclination of the heavens. Thus they try to subvert the
entire essence of our science by their apparent
plausibility. "(143)
-221-

In upholding "the unchanging nature of the astrological responses"(144)
Firmicus' position is anathema to the neo-platonic philosopher for whom the
individual's capacity to define meaningfulness depends on the quality of
his being. Whether deterministic astrology 'works' or not is not the
issue. The point is that it stripe man of his autonomy and does not take
account of the essential truth revealed by divinatory practices - that in
the mirroring process of 'above' with 'below' man may choose to seek his
'good fortune' but is never compelled.
ie of Ficino 's most important points is that the heavens are in a
continual state of flux so no assumptions may be held about the similar
characters of individuals (he gives Romulus and Hannibal as examples) from
single identical aspects - every moment in time will be of a different
quality. It see that Ficino knew about the precession of the
equinoxes,(145) for he illustrates his point with the observation that even
the fixed constellations move and change sign (one degree in a hundred
years), and that it takes 36,000 years for the positions of all heavenly
bodies to make an exact return. Appealing to a rational viewpoint, Ficino
uses this information to point out that in no way can two people with
slallar configurations in their horoscopes but born at different times be
predictably similar in character. The inevitable partial validity of all
judgements according to rules alone is recognised by the wiser astrologers,
who do not attempt to make them: "whoever is most learned in astronomy
rejects Judgements, indeed whoever is most ignorant daily makes them."(146)
We have ample evidence that in practice Ficino seriously studied his own
horoscope and those of his friends, and was continually mindful of
correlations, significations, retrospective schronicities and warnings of
difficult times. He had no doubt of the constant interplay between
material and celestial. life ("the fortune of life in the body, I say,
greatly follows the current constitution of the heavens");(147) what he
stresses here, however, is the impossibility of applying a purely rational
analysis of all the ramifications of a fixed "heavenly figure whIch (the
astrologers) fatally determine to each person"(148) in order to make a
concrete prediction of particulars. Such astrologers profess to know the
contingent through the necessary, an impossible philosophical premiss.
Exasperated, Ficino asks "how may the astrologer know what the heavens may
-222-

be about to do tomorrow and after ten years, when he himself does not know
what he is about to do today?"(149) He is particularly sceptical of their
ability to catch the exact moment of birth, and convinced that the moment
of infusion of the soul is impossible to determine in quantifiable terms.
If the heavens are continually changing, different bodily parts of the baby
will emerge at different times, and by the arguments of astrologers should
therefore be ruled by different signs. Ficino stresses "it is impossible
to understand such particular small parts of time"(150) and that the 5mall,
local movement of birth, no matter how accurately measured, cannot In
itself give qualitative characteristics to the child. All these arguments
of Ficino's lead to the central conviction that human knowledge Is too
limited to be able to comprehend, in purely quantitative terms, the
complexity of factors at play in the 'freezing' of the birth moment - the
positions of the heavenly bodies at the moment of conception, the moment of
the soul entering the body, the exact time of emergence into light, the
interplay of harmonious and inharmonious aspects, the powers of natural and
material causes. His argument leads us to understand that the astrological
birth moment cannot be regarded as purely 'objective' - it is as much a
'divinatory moment' to be understood symbolically as an Interrogation.
Ficino does not deny the importance of the ritual of observing the moment,
but would object to the assumption that one can 'take up' such a moment
according to a rational scientific norm arid subject it to a similarly
'scientific' astrological analysis. This would deny the intrinsic
coincidence of 'eternal time' in the equation, arid prohibit the awesome and
humbling intuition of an unkown dimension at work. Many different human
tendencies, says Ficino, may stem from a single principle, and many diverse
causes may lead to the same effects. Only a superior wisdom to ours, that
of God, can know these things, for "the numbers arid types of causes are
concealed from human wisdom, and experiment errs, and signs deceive" and
"all these things certainly embraced together, is the business of
divinity. "(151)
Having dismissed the false experimentation, illusory opinions and
distorted prophecies of the petty astrologers, Ficino reveals how he
believes prediction of events may genuinely take place:
"by whatever means, either by a rite about the future, or by
some secret method, truths may be told to men, often this
happens by chance, especially amongst those who say many
-223-

things ... for there are many things in life almost coimnon
to all, arid happen contingently everywhere daily in many
ways: for often either by chance or by skill ft seeas to be
observed to be aapllf led by a natural, deaonlc or divine
instinct ."(152)(rny italics)
Ficino himself (during the same period as the composition of the
Disputatio), with a group of astrologers and philosophers predicted two
years of plague, war, famine, deaths of princes and the appearance of a
false prophet from particular astrological configurations. (153) That he
was not always accurate somewhat ironically confirms his own misgivings,
for the dedicatee of De vita coelitus coaparanda,(154) to whom Ficino
predicted a long life, died within a few months.
Ficino distinguishes between three ways of predicting, or rather, three
levels of being which each provide for progessively limited contact with
divinity arid therefore diminishing capacity for unimpeded insight; divine
infusion, natural instinct, and art. (155) The first way he describes as
"that which happens from a divine cause, is formed by the cult of magic and
by connection with daemons arid the divining of the spheres."(156) It may
occur when the human reason is subjected to the power of the divine mind,
as in the rapture of divine frenzy, and is dependent on the receptivity of
the individual to the influx of the numinous, which may be attained through
magical rites which are a combination of both divina sorte and purposeful
manipulation. The mediation of daemons was considered rather more
dangerous, for it depended on the imagination of the individual being so
disordered "that it is aptly affected by a daemon".(157) In their position
in the spiritual hierarchy between human and divine levels, such spiritual
beings are able to see more clearly; those abiding in the aether have more
access to the portents of heaven, those in the lower air partake in earthly
affairs arid those in the middle, having recourse to both earth and heaven,
mediate prophetic insight to man. But as their messages are mediated
through the sensory imagination, rather than the intellect, the effects of
their Interference may be distorted, perpetrating illusory images of divine
reality arid confusing human understanding of divine portents. Not all
daemoris wish the human race well - some penetrate the imagination causing
visions and dreams, distracting the intellect and selfishly converting it

-224-

to their own will, "[moving] the soul by means of illusions towards those
things [they wish] to show it."(158)
In the DIsputat10 Ficino echoes St. Augustine's misgivings about such a
method of prediction, for when astrologers predict by a "certain very
hidden instinct" (instlnctu quodai occultlsslno) they may be
misrepresenting the truth and deinding the unknowing minds of their
customers. Of most interest to us is Ficino's belief that prediction may
occur through the "divining of the spheres", that is, the use of astrology
as part of a magical ritual of preparation and purification leading to
unification with the divinity and facilitating a penetrating insight into
the nature and workings of both the cosmos and the human soul. Natural
prediction on the other hand is
"That which is by nature, is assisted by a certain
melancholic temperament or tempered at the same time by
celestial powers, by which the mind easily composes itself
and divines by its own power of prophecy, or by the
observation of the heavenly patterns."(159)
When hwian nature is so harmoniously tempered that it naturally works in
accord with universal law, insights may be gained which are prevented by
the conunon condition of mis-alignment of will which results in distorted
perception. Such a refinement and purgation of the soul results in its
apparent separation from the body and allows prophetic insight via dreams,
visions caused by extreme illness and the intense introversion of the
melancholic temperament. In the Theologla Platonica Ficino suggests that
the minds of augurers, diviners, mathematicians (astrologers) and
magicians, freed from their bodies, may comprehend past, present and future
as one time:
"Thus when the mind of man was wholly separated from his
body, he understood every place and every time (as happens
amongst the Egyptians). Indeed the mind is naturally like
this at all places and times, so that it may consider
carefully many very remote things, remember all past time,
anticipate the future, and is not forced to move outside
itself, bet turning inwards by leaving the body, it follows
itself completely, either because its nature is omnipresent
and eternal, as the Egyptians think, or because when it
draws back into its own nature, innnediately all things are
ioined to the divine will, and the limits of times and
places are able to be understood."(160)
-225-

Since insights into the 'eternal' realm are not easily expressed in the
language of the temporal (artistic forms being the most powerful mode of
their direct comnunication), Ficino stresses the difficulty involved in
interpreting dreams in everyday speech, and the ifmnense skill and wisdom
required to understand the significance of all the details.(161) This Is
why interpreters are often required, since the quick, intuitive Hermetic
gift and the tranquil, profound stirrings of the Saturnian temperament are
rarely found in the same person. tholeric and fiery people, says Ficino,
need others to interpret their dreams, but melancholics (in which category
he firmly placed himself) do not need intermediary interpreters since the
things they foresee remain firmly embedded in their memory and are not
confused with other more fleeting and less substantial images.(162) Nor is
honest prediction solely the province of the learned or skilful man - for
the simpler souls often have stronger intuitive gifts than those whose
business it is to accumulate knowledge. Here Ficino was speaking from
experience, for both his mother and maternal grandmother were
'clairvoyants', his mother Alessandra predicting several exact events
through dreams.(163)
Prediction through art is divided into four methods: medicine,
physiognomy, ausplclum and astrology. In each case Ficino points out that
judgement is very difficult for several reasons; firstly that a man's life
is too short to learn all that would be required to make a perfect
judgement; secondly that the mind is not always precise and clear at the
exact moment when judgement is possible, and may easily misinterpret;
thirdly the knowledge gained will often be ambiguous and deceptive in
experimental conditions which can never be repeated exactly; lastly that
judgement is impaired by the encroaching of both the imagination and the
concerns of the body on the clear-sighted intellect.(164) This is the most
fallible method of prediction, most reliant on purely human resources, and
although beneficially operative in the physical realm through the
prognostication of illness from a decumbiture chart, prediction of
temperaments from a natal chart or general mundane trends from a solar
return chart, or personal strengths and customs from physical
characteristics, it will be severely limited if not applied in conjunction
with either divine infusion or a natural instinct. But the art of augury
through the interpretation of physical phenomena as signs has its place in
-226-

the hierarchy - "The person about to divine things from the world must
observe from the world",(165) says Ficino, although great caution is needed
as human, and even daemonlc, vision is necessarily imperfect. Certainly
Ficino likens the art of the horary astrologer to that of the diviner, who
"shows that all things far and wide can be caught in particular
moments"(166) - but this is a practice limited to literal effects in the
material world and not to be confused with prophetic insight.

It is clear now that the astrologers who receive the full brunt of
Ficino's condemnation are those who are unable to raise themselves from the
world of opinion, full of snares and traps, and who rely on their own
judgement instead of humbling themselves before a higher authority:
"Avicenna says astrologers are not to be believed because
they do not have the full understanding of the whole heavens
nor of the natures of lower things necessary to make a
judgement, nor do they rely on demonstration, but on a
certain experiment or prophecy and on oratorical and poetic
trials. For human ingenuity conceals the number and quality
of causes, experiments fail, signs deceive."(167)

(Jung sui up Ficino's very conclusion when he warns "We should be
careful not to pare down God's omnipotence to the level of our human
opinions").(168) The wise astrologers will be very reluctant to make
specific iudgements, and here Ficino presents an amusing anecdote
concerning a certain "excellent astronomer" Paulus Florentinus, who was
unable to find anything in his horoscope which would confer on him
longevity, yet he lived to be eighty-five. (169) It they do make accurate
pronouncements, it would be due rather to the quality and strength of their
soul than any skill at juggling information:
"Hence that astrological iudgement from the stars is made
not only through their inspection, but also from the nature
of he himself who judges. Hence Ptolemy says: judgements of
these things are uncertain to he who considers the
(material I nature of things and the stars: indeed those who
know future things from their superior nature are nearer to
the truth on account of the dominant strength of their soul,
although they may not have much knowledge derived from skill
of this art."(170)
The 'petty ogres' live in a quantitative universe where it is not
possible to preserve human free-will. It was abhorrent to Ficino to accept
-227-

the determinist proposal that astrologers could certainly foresee human
acts for the principal reason that in such clear-cut predictions the
infinite challenges of the 'possible' are fatally reduced to the necessary
or the Impossible, free-will is thus negated and choice denied. On this
level, the more unconscious the Individual, the more 'predictable' his fate
would be, and this tenet negates everything Ficino strove for. "stro1og1a
non est scientia" says Ficino,(171) because true knowledge of first
principles, "of determined and universal and eternal things", (172) can only
stem from an inner unity of being, not a set of rules:
"Astrology is not great knowledge, for it is not knowledge,
since it always proceeds from effects and indeed from those
rarely proved and from greatly removed examples. But
because the heavenly things from which it operates are
great, It seems great to the small jidgement of men."(173)

In a letter, incorporated into the Dlsputatlo, entitled Comiunls religio
non f It a stellls(174) Ficino gives as an example the simplistic

attribution of Christianity to a conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, which
itself recurs every twenty years.(175) Rather, the great event of the
birth of Christ may be signified by such a conjunction, but it would fall
to the "experts in astronomy" who are Inspired by divine truth and not
reliant purely on astrological techniques, to foresee the Christian law
through the added gift of prophecy:
"they may be able to distinguish something, since they
understand what most powerfully follows out of the various
strings of the lyre of the world, either consonant or
dissonant, nay rather, If I may speak more truly, they
prophesy. "(176)

We shall continue in the next chapter with Ficino's appreciation of the
psychological value of active Imaging, but already In the Dlsputatio we
read that astrological images, such as that of the virgin In the first face
of Virgo, speak to the imagination and are meaningless fabrications if
regarded purely literally.(177) Symbolic astrology can only be validated
by those who are able to follow the signs, like the interpretation of a
person's will through the observation of his gestures and words.(178) The
emphasis Ficino placed on the meaningfulness of this Intuitive, Irrational,

connective vision cannot be too highly stressed. R.J. Stewart in his
excellent little book on Prophecy illustrates the process underlying the
-228-

V

use of archetypal patterns, astrological or otherwise, in the Socratic
journey to self-knowledge:
"What is important is that any well-balanced pattern, be it
simple or complex, will be sufficient to trigger our deeper
levels of perception. Any pattern viii suffice, providing
we work in as honest and disciplined manner as possible
any set of patterns must be followed through to its ultimate
conclusion, which is, paradoxically, liberation from the
patterns themselves."(179)

Such insights are achieved through the transmutation of everay events
into a symbolic pattern,
"re-attuning them so that their filtering effect becomes
helpful and clarifying, rather than obstructive and
obscuring. Only at this stage may e liberate ourselves
from the apparent sequence of cause and effect. "(180)

Ironically, it is perhaps only through the ability to find hidden
meaning in the 'silly similitudes' so abhorrent to the rational mind that
this can be achieved, and it is this intention, I believe, which lies
behind Ficino's apparent condemnation of astrological procedures. What may
seem to be a ridiculous superstition to some is an opportunity for engaging
the imagination for others - we can take Ficino on a literal level and
accept his criticism of 'scientific' astrology from a rational viewpoint,
or we can 'turn around' and look underneath his words to discover his
conviction of its value as a framework for irrational, subjective
experience. This conviction is nowhere better illustrated than in Ficino's
practical system of natural magic which uses astrology and music as the
'patterns' of the most radical transformative potential. But above all,
his emphasis lay on the responsibility of the individual to use his
imagination profitably - to tune and temper his inner being in order to
reach his full potential as an instrument of divine will. It was in this
process that astrology, for Ficino, found its most noble application. In a
letter to a young member of the Medici family (probably commissioned to
accompany Botticelli's Prl.avera)(181) we find a truly inspired testimony
to 'humanistic' astrology. Ficino advises the young man to embark on the
task of "disposing for hinself" celestial things:
"... approach the task with good hope, free-born Lorenzo;
far greater than the heavens is He who made you; and you
yourself will be greater than the heavens as soon as you
-229-

resolve upon the task. For these celestial bodies are not
to be sought by us outside in some other place; for the
heavens in their entirety are within us, in whom the light
of life and the origin of heaven dwell."(182)
Ficino points Lorenzo towards emotional equilibrium using the symbolism
of the continual movement of the Moon, which should "avoid the excessive
speed of Mars and the tardiness of Saturn" through dealing with each thing
as it arises. The Moon should be directed to observe the benefits of
Jupiter and of Venus, who signifies the precious nobility of human nature.
Ficino warns that men can achieve nothing great on earth unless they first
possess themselves, and that "men can be taken by no other bait whatsoever
than their own nature." Self-knowledge leads to transcendence of 'fate':
"if by this reasoning you prudentlyternper within yourself
the heavenly signs and the heavenly gifts, you will flee far
from the menaces of the fates and without doubt will live a
blessed life under divine auspices."(183)

I have attempted to show that Ficino criticised and ridiculed
astrological practices not because he considered the framework or
techniques per se to be worthless, but because he evidently felt that so
many practitioners lacked the unity of perception required to penetrate
beyond their literal application and understand that they were dealing with
an experience which demanded total awareness of their own participation.
Such an ability to marry the subjective and objective, eternal and temporal
Is a "gift of the soul"(184) which super5edes mere rational jndgement, an
innate praesagiu. tIbI naturale that brings us back to the crucial concept
of notlo with which we began this chapter. Determinist prediction deprives
the soul of the qualitative depth experienced when the 'eternal' or divine
dimension interweaves in everay events. Instead of encouraging the
openness of heart which enables one to fully grasp every moment for its
gifts, fatalistic prediction para].yses the very core of human potential by
stripping man of his ability to create his own meaning. To live fully in
the present, in Ficino's terms, Is to make every temporal, sensual
experience a contemplative one. "Laetus in praesens" was Inscribed on the
wall of his Acadeniy,(185) a maxim echoed in advice to Giovanni Cavalcanti:
"We must live today, since he who lives for tomorrow never
lives. If you desire to live now, live for God, in whom
yesterday and tomorrow are nothing else but today."(186)
-230-

i'EJ(ES to thatDter Three
PART ONE: On the Knowledge of Divine Thinas
1.

Pseudo-Ptolemy, Centiloquli aphorism 4. See ref.59 below

2.

For reference see chapter two part two, ref.6

3.

See chapter two p.153

4.

Op.om. p.1874

5.

ibid. p.1874

6.

For an explanation of Platonic thought in relation to the psychological
implications of the four elements, see Jung 'A Psychological Approach
to the Trinity' in Psychology and Western Religion pp.177-193

7.

Op.om. p.1874

:Esse nostrum, est Deum cognoscere, quia praecipuum
esse animae, est Intellectus suus, In quo idem est esse
quod intelligere divina actu perpetuo.
8.

ibid. p.1875:
Intellectus omnium opifex adest semper omnibus diis
plenissime per actum unum in seipso nnentem.

9.

ibid. p.817:
Age lam mentem, Ferdinande, tuain in se ipsam, relictis
sensibus, circulari quadam sui ipsius anindversione
ref lecte. Videbis protinus mentem tuam quando in
seipsam, demisso corpore flectitur, esse incorpoream
quandam sphaeram, cuius cirumferentia quidem, id est,
intelligentia et voluntas per incorporea voluitur.
Centrum vero, id est, vita atque substantia, corporis
alicuius cardini non innititur.

10. ibid. p.1874:
Non possumus solitis humanum rationis discursionibus
attingere deorum pedisseguos daemones, heroes, animos
puros.
11. See Plato, Republic 484b. He distinguishes between the philosophers,
who are able to perceive eternal and unchanging things, and others who
"lose themselves and wander amid the multiplicities of multifarious
things."
12. Op.om. p.1874:

acquiritur autem in rationali potentia studio quodani,
nec tam comparationis, et conciecturae, guam
separationi, et purificationis officio.
13. Flcino, Liber de Sole, Op.oi. pp.965-975
-231-

14. Op.oa. p.965:

librum hunc allegoricam et anagogicum esse pot lus quan't
dogmat icum.

15. ibId. p.965:
Ab hoc Igitur nos ad 111am non tam rationibus in
praesentla, quam comparationibus qulbusdam deductis ex
lumine, pro viribus accedemus.
16. IbId. p.966:
Quamobrem ubi multas supra coelum mentes angelicas
quasi luces, earumque ordinem et invirem, et ad unum
Deum patrem luminum asseverare studes, quidnam tibi
longis investigationum anbag1bus opus erit? Coelum
suspice precor coelestis patriae civis
17. See Plato, Republic 507c-511e
18.

Op.oa. p.971:

tu certain similiter quantitatem sed interea cum luce
relinque virtutem, ut supersit lumen ipsum mirifica
virtute refertum, nec quantitate certa, nec figura
aliqua definitum, ideoque immensum inginat1one spatium
sua circum praesentia tangens. Ita nunc excedens
intelligentlam, sicut In seipso nunc exuperat aciem
oculorum. Hac ferme ratione Deum ... ac Sole pro
viribus invenisse videberis.
19. Jung, Mysterlum Conionctionis para.226
20. Op.om. p.1882, De virtute sacramentorum
21. ibid.:
Universales enim causae a particularibus effectibus non
moventur: uncle nec ab iritelligentils nostris divina
principaliter moventur ad operandum, sed intelligentias
et affectionem opt imain, puritatemque praecedere
necessarium est, tanquam con causas quasdain. Quae vero
principaliter divinam provocant voluntatem, ipsa sunt
sacramenta divina: atque ita divina a seipsis
incitantur neque ab ullo subdito principium actionis
accipiunt.
22. ibId.:
Nam nec etiam si noverimus, quae genus guodlibet
proprie conseguuntur, subito consequimur ipsain eorum in
opere veritatem.
23. ibid.:

sed super cognitionem unita est, et pun ficata
puritas id est, per potestatem cognitione superiorem.

24. ibid.: Deus autem vim efficacem imprimit.
25.

FIcino, Liber de vita 111.21.47. See ch.4 pp.283-4

-232-

26. Op.oM. p.1876:

Quanclo dii varias mundi partes urbes, aedes, statuas
proprie sortiri dicuntur: intellige essentiam
potentiamque illorum ubique in se vigentem, hoc aut
illtxl potissimum illustrare, atque sicut lumen in se
nnens, sine mixtione divioneque sui diversa passim
Iliuininat, ita dli.

27. ibid.
28. ibid.:
Unde perficit omnia unitque cum extremis extrema, per
media comprehendens in se omnia, et se ad sic
reflecteris sibi prorsus unitum. Quod quidem munus
imitatur et mundus circulari motu, partiumque in unum
connexione, et concillatione quadam transferente
elementa vicissim in elementa, atque virtute superioruni
ad inferiora mittente.
29. ibid.:
vererl debet oinnlno de this mundi causis ailena
sent ire.
30. ibid.:
Si nonnulla est conmuinio mundi ad numina quo ad
essentia, vim, actionem spectat, nullaque
condistributio, vel consortium, nulla nimirum nec
coextenslo, et condistributlo secundum locum, atque
determinans quantum ad Iflud pertinet, specie vel
genere cogitato stint, mutua comprehensio, et permixtio
esse potest. Quae vero Si totius omnino differunt,
reciprocaiu inter si condistributionem, vel utixtionem,
vel comprehensionem nuilam prorsus admittunt.
31. Ibid.:
Certis nainque materlis, invocationibusque munera deorum
naturaliter attrahuntur.
32. Eugenio Garin, Astrology in the Renaissance p.74
33. Isidorl Hispanlensis Episcopi, EtyologIarui sive orlginum libri XX,
iib.3 (XXVII):

Inter Astronomlain autern et Astrologiam aliquid differt.
Nam Astronomla caeli conversionem, ortus, obitus
motusque siderum continet, vel qua ex causa ita
vocentur. Astrologia veto partim naturalis, partim
superstitiosa est. Naturalis, dum exequltur soils et
lunae cursus, vel stellarum certas temporum stat Iones.
Superstitiosa veto est ilia quam mathematici sequuntur,
qui in stellis auguriantur, quique etiam duodecim caeli
signa per singula animae vel corporis membra disponunt,
sideruinque cursu nativitates hominum et mores
praedicare conantur.
34. Ficino, De aiore VI.11, Jayne pp.12-13, Op.om. pp.1349-50:
Qulnetiaxn guod mirabilius est, scientiae quoque non
-233-

soluni aliae evanescunt, aliae surgunt, neque semper
secundum scient ias idem sumus, verumet lam una quaevis
scientiarum ferme idem paritur.
35. Kristeller, The Philosophy of Marsillo Plclno p.310
36. See Eugenlo Garin, Astrology in the Renaissance pp.28-96, on Pico
pp.78-96. This reference, p.61. See Pico's Disputationes adversus
astrologiai divinatrlcei
37. See Plato, Epinoiis: science and religion are united by number. See
chapter one, pp.34-40.
38. Garin, Astrology in the Renaissance p.93
39. Ficino, letter to Poliziano Quid sentiat de astrologla; Op.om. p.958.
This letter can be interpreted as a warning to Poliziano that his life
may be in danger. "You have known about these omens of the
astrologers for a long time now" says Ficino, and urges his friend to
overcome them with the strength of Hercules. He ends "Meanwhile on
earth live a long time." In his reply (Supp.Fic.II pp.278-9)
Poliziano acknowledges the presence of "evil and envious people" who
appear to be a cause for some anxiety, and thanks Ficino for his love
and concern.
40. Manillus, Astronomica, Rome 1st c.AD. For modern edition see
Astronomica trans. G.P. Goold
41. Ptolemy, (c.100-78 A.D.) Tetrabiblos (150 A.D.), trans. F.E. Robbins
42. G. Cornelius 'The Moment of Astrology' pt.II1
43. ibid. part I p.98
44. For a succint presentation of Aristotle's theories of causation, see J.
Barnes, Aristotle pp.51-7
45. Ptolemy. Tetrabiblos 1.2.1
46. ibid. 111.1.103-4
47. ibid. 1.2.6
48. Ibid. 111.1.107
49. ibId. 111.1.107
50. Of interest here is the motto of the most famous of English
astrologers, William Lilly, whose frontispiece to Christian Astrology
pronounces definitively "non cogunt" - the stars do not compel.
51. Coluccio Salutati, De fato, fortuna e casu quoted in Garin, Astrology
in the Renaissance p.33
52. David Pingree, 'Astrology' in Religion, Learning and Science in the
'Abbasid Period pp.290-300. This reference p.291
-234-

53. Richard Lemay, 'The True Place of Astrology in Medieval Science and
Philosophy' p.70
54. This text is the Apocalypse of Daniel, preserved in a Greek translation
by Alexius of Byzantium in 1245 AD "who reports that the Arabic text
that he translates was turned into that language from a manuscript
discovered by Mu awiyah (reigned 661-80) In the course of his campaign
in the environs of Constantinople during the reign of Constans II
(reigned AD 641-68)." (Pingree, 'Astrology' p.291)
55. Ficino vould appear to refer to this work in his references to Messalac
and Zahel (Masha'allah and Zael) in his Disputatio contra iudicium
astrologorua, Supp.Fic.II pp.39,60
56. Masha'allah b. Athari al-Basari. Extant works survive in Latin, Hebrew
and Persian. His book on genethilalogy, Kitab al-Hawalid al-kabir
survives in Latin translation by Hugo of Santalla, 1141-51. See
Pingree, 'Astrology' p.294
57. From the Latin text (1509 edition), translation runs:
Of everything which has its being and, once created,
flourishes beneath the orbit of the Moon, God the
creator of worldly substance included in a six-fold
order certain universal groupings of equal distinction
Francis Carmody (Arabic Astronomical and Astrological Sciences in
Latin Translation: A Critical BiblIography) p.108 mentions that "the
many important variant readings (of this text] indicate that the
editions are very corrupt and unreliable for detail." See Carmody
pp.107-112 for details of sources and variants. The Liber novem
iudicum was pubished twice anonymously in the 15th century.
58. Pingree, 'Astrology' p.293
59. ibid. p.298; Lemay, 'The True Place of Astrology' p.70. See also
Lemay, 'Origin and Success of the Kitab at-Tamara, iiber Fructus...'
60. The two 12th century translators of Albumasar's lntroductoriui in
Astronomlam were John of Seville (1133) and Hermann of Carinthia
(c.1140). See tharles Burnett, 'Hermann of Carinthia and his Arabic
sources'; carmody, Arabic Astronomical and Astrological Sciences
pp.88-91 (he calls Albumasar 's work "one of the basic technical
sources of Latin scientific literature" p.88); Lemay Abu Ma'shar and
Latin Aristotellanism In the twelfth century. For information on
Albumasar and his ideas I rely on Lemay.
61. Supp.Fic.II p.77. Other references to Albumasar: pp.32,33,36,38,39,
41,42,43,44,60,62. In the Llber de vita he is mentioned at 3.VI.79,
3.XVIII.8, 3.XXII.54
62. Lemay Abu Mash'ar and Latin Aristotellanism p.54
63. ibid. p.49
64. ibid. p.50
-235-

65. Al-Kindi, De radlis Baghdad 9th century. The edition by M.-T.
d'Alverny and F. Hudry is of an anonymous Latin translation, the only
one extant. The original Arabic text has not been discovered.
66. See Picino, Liber de vita 3.)0I.15. Carol Kaske draws attention to the
similarity between Al-Kindi's and Ficino's chapter headings (3.XXI note
3 p.453)
67. De radlis, d'Alverny & Hudry edition p.141
68. ibid. p.143
69. Ficino, Liber de vita 111.21
70. De radlis ch.6: 'De virtute verborua'

71. ibid. chs.7-9
72. ibid. ch.6, d'Alverny & Hudry pp.236c7:
cum autem in aliqua voce concurrunt impositlo
significationis ab armonia facta et ab hominibus,
geminatur virtus significationis illius vocis. Si enim
hoc nonn, homo, ab armonica dispositione haberet
significationem hominis, sicut habet ab impositione
hominum latinorum, operaretur suis radiis in materiam
cum fuerit prolatum virtute duplici, scilicet naturali
et accidentali, et sic fortius surgeret in effectum, et
idem est de omnibus aliis.
73. Haly Albohazen (1016-40) the son of Abenragel wrote De iudiclIs
astrorui. See Kaske, Ficino, Three books on life p.412, 1.IV note 1.
74. Ficlno mentions Al-Kindi at fAber de vita 3.)CXI.15; Haly Abenrudian at
2.XVIII.142; 2.XX.23; 3.XIII.4,13; 3.XVIII.183; Haly Albohazen at

3.VI.159; 3.XVIII.183; 'Arabes' at 1.XX.24; 3.11.14,89; 3.XXII.51,59;
3.III.23; 3.XII.36; 3.XVIII.18; 3.XX.21,36.
75. See Yates, Giordano Bruno pp.49-58
76. For a critical edition of the Latin version of PIcatrix see David
Pingree, (ed.) Plcatrix, the Latin version of the 'Ghayat a1-Hakim'.
The treatise was translated into Latin from a Spanish intermediary
translation, renamed Picatrix in 1256 at the court of Alfonso el Sabio
and has been the most comprehensive work on astral magic available in
Western Europe. See also Garin, Astrology in the Renaissance pp.4655; Yates, Giordano Bruno pp.49-56
77. Ficino, fAber de vita 3.XX.36

78. See Lemay, 'The True Place of Astrology' p.72
77. There is so much work still to be done on the original texts of Arabic
astrological treatises that at this stage it is impossible to have a
clear understanding of the main differences between their mode of
thought and their Latin interpretations.
-236-

P?RT TWO: Ficino and Determinism
1.

Ficino, De aaore VI.1O. Jayne p.127, Op.om. p.1438. See chapter four
pp.268-9 and part one ref .67

2.

Supp.Fic.II pp.87-8

3.

ibid. p.87:
Exaudi nostras Cosme preces vitamgue quietam pio luveni
tribue.

4.

ibid. p.87-8:
Eundem ipse quoque hpnum cum paucis ante diebus ritu
Orphico ad Cosmum celebrassem, extemplo ad me genitoris
mei littere perferuntur, quigus certiorem eddit guam
prudenter Cosmus Med ices vite mee saluberrimus med icus
sttxliis meis consuluerit, guam benigne provident, guam
humaniter favenit, gum hospitaliter atque pie me sacris
suis in lanibus excepenit. Qua de re contigit ut non
modo magnificentiam tuam, que quidem in nos
ingentissima extitit ad te retulisse videtur hymnum
quem Cosmo sacravit, pro me vero rogasse gue in
orationis calce rogavit. Tu autem celesti quodam
afflatus iristinctu exaudisse videnis eo ipso tempore
quo a nobis relatus est hymnus atque eadem gue votum
obsecrat tradidisse.

5.

Ficino, Preface to Commentary on Plotinus, Op.om. pp.1537-1538:
Divinitus profecto videter effectu, ut dum Plato,
quasirena sceretur, natus Picus heros sub Saturno
Aquaniu postdente: sub quo et ego similiter anno pnius
tnigesimo natus suera ac peruenies Florentia, quo die
Plato noster est editus, antiquum illud de Plotino
herois Cosmi uotu inihi prorsus occultu, sed sibi
caelitus inspiratu, inde et mihi mirabiliter inspira
writ.

6.

ibid. p.901

7.

e.g. ibid. pp.888-9, letter to Pico
Sed nonne et magnum aliquid fore decreult Platonicorum
documentorum copula ab initlo supernus file Saturn, in
natali utriusque figura dominus.

8.

Ficino, Letters vol.2 p.11, Op.om. p.724

9.

ibid. pp.15-16, Op.om. p.726

10. Op.om. p.831:
Solemus enim saepe praedictionibus nostris mala vel
procul futura anticipare dui, vel interdum fingere non
futura.
11. ibid. p.857:
...sed neque mala ominani luvat, neque his multum decet
credere.
-237-

12. See for example, Letters vol.1 pp.125-6, 196; vol.2 p.30;
vol.3 pp.32-3; vol.4 pp.52-3; Op.om. pp. 886,889-90,8945,919,948,951,892,918. Ficino describes his own horoscope vol.2
pp.31-4 (Op.oa. pp.752-3) and Op.om. p.901
13. Garin, Astrology In the RenaIssance p.67
14. Letters vol.3 pp.63-4, Op.om. p.776:
Compono librum de providentla Del et humani arbitrius
libertate. In quo agitur contra astrorum necessitatem
fatumque Astrologorum.
Ficino's Disputatio, composed in 1477 was, for whatever reason, left
unpubished. It Is found In Supp.FIc.II pp.11-76
15. Letters vol.3 pp.63-4, Op.o. p.776:

Hac potissimum rat lone philosophor, ut quarxio quidem
res ipsae aliter voluntate non sequuntur nEam, ego

saltem voluntate res sequar, sic enim voluntati
sequenti res obsequuntus.. .At vero dixerit forte
quispiam, fatul esse contra inexpugnabile fatum velle
pugnare. Ego vero respondeo, tam facile posse hoc
impugnari, ut quando quispiam impugna re voluerlt, tunc
primum eo ipso quod uult expugnet. Nempe coelestium
sphaerarum motus nunquam altius mentem attollere
potest, guam ad sphaeras. Nunc vero gui disputat
contra illas eas lam transcendisse videtur. Atque ad
ipsum Deum liberumque voluntatis arbitrium access isse..
.Praeterea cum actio quaellbet adversaria, et ut Ita
dixerim, peremptoria a contrario quodam In contrarium
procedere soleat, nemo audeat confiteri voluntatem
ipsam disputationemque fictae violentiae s3erum
repugnantem a syderum violentia proficisci, imo ab
ipsamet providentia libertateque manare intelligamus,
cuius gratla dixerimus contra fatum.
16. ibid. p.75, Op.o. p.781:
Librum scripsi contra vana Astrologorum iudicia...
17. ibid.:
Denigue si fata vitari non possunt, frustra
praevldentur et praed icuntur...
18. ibid:
At gui si diligentius rem ipsam consideremus, non tam
fatis ipsis, guam fatuis fatorum assertoribus agimur.
Non cedetis mihi credite fatis, si fatuls non credetis,
gui obscur is non vera.. . sed falsa involuunt.
19. ibid. p.76:
Sed gui tam superbe ad superos ascendere moliuntur,
miserabiliter praecipitabuntur ad Infernos.
20. IbId. p.76 Op.o. p.782:
Ut postgue de divinatoribus non divinis, sed valde
profanis, gui taniiu suis non prestigius mancipant
triumphaverimus, libere tamen clamare possimus.
-238-

21. Op.o. p.1609

22. Letters vol.3 p.48, Op.o. p.771:
...in quo lila Astrologorum iudicia, quae providentiae
ithertatigue detrahunt...
23. ibid.:
t4empe quam diligenter coelestia vere metiuntur
Astronomi, tam multum circa humana manes Astrologi
mentiuntur.
24. See Trinkaus, In our Image and Likeness p.481
25. ibid. p.471
26. Op.om. pp.1905-6:

Ergo vero censeo primum quidem haberi posse per divinum
vaticiniu veritatem certissimam circa stei].as: nec nos
omnino regularum dthumeratione, ec artificiosis
praedicationibus indigere: et insuper addo, te non
penitus iinposslbilem inde notitia demonstrare quantum
ad mathematicam scientiam pertinet, quod diversae
inter illos seruntur opiniones quodue theremon and
quluis alius contradicit...Astronomia, et aiiae artes
quondam a this datae ].ongo rempore humanis opinionibus
confurxluntur, exiguumque divinitatis, et veritatis
denique retinet...Ergo est impossibile iudicare certos
eventus, cum omnium causarum concursum comprehendere
nequeainus, nisi per inspirationem divinam Id
assequamur.
27. See Ficino, Theologla Platonica XIII.2, Op.oa. pp.289-90 (trans. Garin,
Astrology In the Renaissance p.71):
Ergo us quasi tribus rudentibus toti rnachinae
colligamur, mente mentibus, idolo idolis, natura
naturis, non aliter ac foetus in allo toti corpori
materno per continuata lingamenta connect itur, unde et
animae maternae, et corporis, et spiritus materni ipse
quoque per animam suam corpus et spiritum percipit
pass iones. Anima igitur permentem est supra fatum, in
solo providentiae ordine tanquam superna imitans, et
infer iora una cum illis gubernans. Ipsa enim tanquam
providentiae particeps, ad divinae gubernationis
exemplar regit se, domum, civitatem, artes et animalia.
Per idolum est in ordine fati similiter, non sub fato.
Siquidem animae nostrae idolum, natura sua cum supernis
idolis concurrit ad formandum corpus atque movendum.
Per naturam quidem corpus est sub fato, anima in fato
naturam movet. Itaque mens super fatum in provident Ia
est, idolum in fato super naturam, natura sub fato,
supra corpus. Sic anima in providentia fati, naturae,
legibus, non ut patiens modo ponitur, sed et ut agens.
28. Jung, ?fysterlum Conlunctionis para.309

29.

Op.OI. p.1682
-239-

30. Ibid.:
culus quldem usu quae in phantaslam inciderunt
exami nans, s iqu idem examinando probat, phantas iae
concedit, atque ad agendum deinde movetur.
31. Supp.Fic.II p.29:
Nihil nobis incoiunodi contingit, quin manifestam et
sufficientem apnd nos causam reperiamus.
32. Jung, Psychology and Western Religion para.291
33. Ficino, Theologia Platonica XIII.2, Op.om.p.29l (trans. Garin,
Astrology in the Renaissance p.72):
Sununatim his saepe pulsamur affectibus long ordine a
naturis universalibus per propriam in nos
descendentibus, et unde nobis ingerantur, penitus
Ignoramus.
See also quotation from Op.oi. p.289, ref.79 below
34. Liz Greene, The Astrology of Fate p.34
35. See The Cambridge History of Renaissance Philosophy pp.641-9, Trinkaus,
In our Image and Likeness pp.761-74
36. Trinkaus, In our Image and Likeness pp.768-S
37. ibid. p.771
38. Supp.Plc.II pp.169-72, see Kristeller, The Philosophy of MarsilIo
Flcino pp.297-300
39. Ibid. p.171:
questa substantia circularmente da se principiando in
se finisce, e tutti I movimenti per circulo ritornono
al centro donde si mossono alla circunferentla ... Et
perche intra l'agente et patiente debbe essere conforme
proportione, la natura muove quello che in noi e
naturale, et 11 principlo della natura muove quello che
in noi è vitale et intellettuale et boniforn.
40. Supp.FIc.II p.72
41. ibId. p.73
42. See chapter two pp.124,129
43. Supp.Flc.II p.17l:

Sicchè quello che per rispetto dl nol Si chiama fortuna
et caso, so puó chiamare fato rispetto della natura
universale et providentia rispetto del princlpio
intellettuale et regola per rispetto del sommo bene.
44. ibid. p.172:
conformando la volunt nostra colla sua et andare
volentieri dove ella accenna, acciocchè per forza non
tin.
-240-

On Jung and free-will, see particularly The Structure and Dynamics of
the Psyche para.379, Two Essays on Analytical Psychology para.87
45. Letters vol.3 p.13, Opom. p.755:
Quid sortem nostram fortunamgue deflemus? quid mutare
fortunam temere cogitamus? quid flectere fatum? muta
precor hunc anima ludum, tuani hanc figuram verte. Sic
enim fortunam mutaveris fatuinque flexeris, et mundi
ipsius figuram in melius tibi subito verteris.
46. ibid. vol.2 p.24, Op.om. p.729:
Profecto putamus Authori et stellas, et hominum mentes
us solis adversus esse, gui haec perversamente
interpretantur.
47.

Letters vol.1 pp.94-S, Op.om. p.633

48.

ibId. p.95:
nec in mentem nostram fati vis penetrat, nisi ipse
sua sponte prius in corpus fato subiectum Immiserit.
Nemo igitur adeo consilio suo viribusque confidat, ut
morbos corporis, rerumgue lacturas, devitare omnino
posse se speret. Recipiat a corporis peste seipsum
animus quisque, et in mentem suain se colligat, tunc
enim vim suam fortuna explebit in corpore, in animuin
non transibit. Non pugnabit incassum vir sapiens
contra fatum, se fugiendo potius repugnabit. Fugarl
non possunt adversa, sed fugi. Igitur hinc Illuc, Id
est, ab ainore corporis externarumque rerurn cura ad
animi deriique cultum aufugere a Platone iubemur, aliter
enim mala declinari non possunt.

49.

Ficlno Theol.Plat. X.2, Op.om. p.224 (trans. Trinkaus In our Image and
Likeness p. 478):
Sed numguid humanum corpus ea est dignitate donatum ut
mentem perpetuam excipere hospitem mereatur?
Proculdubio.

50.

See for example, Llber de vita 2.xV.56; 2.XVI.35; 3.XXV.22; De amore
VrI.3,4,6,7

51. James Hiliman, Revisionlng Psychology p.255
52.

Letters vol.2 p.68, Op.om. p.745; see chapter one part two, ref.57

53. Ficino, Prooemiue, Theol.Plat., Op.om. p.78 (trans. Trinkaus, In our
Image and Likeness p.465):
in quibus universa consistit rerum perceptio et
omnis institutio vitae totaque felicitas.
54.

Letters vol.3 p.15, Op.om. p.756. See chapter one part two, ref.58

55.

Op.om. p.1904 De llbero arbitrlo et quomodo solvatnur a fato

56.

ibid.:
Quando enim praestantiora eorum, quae nobis insunt,
-241-

agunt, et ad praestantiora sul Ipsius anima revocatur,
tunc ab illis, quae earn in generatione devinciunt,
penitus segregatur...
57. ibid. pp.1-77
58. Ficino, be Chrlstlana religione, Op.o. p.1 (trans. Trinkaus In our
Iaage and Likeness p.735):
Narn curn animus ut Platoni nostro placet duabus tantum
allis (Id est intellectu et voluntate) possit ad
caelestem Patrem et patr lain revolare ac philosophus
intellectu maxime, sacerdoes voluntate nitabit, et
Intellectus voluntatem illuininet, voluntas intellecturn
accendat.
59. Letters vol.1 p.95, Op.om. p.633:
Prudentla, iustltia, sancitate. Prudentia quid Deo,
quid mundo debeamus agnosclt, iustitia quod suum est
inundo, sanctitas Deo quod suum est, tribuit. Itaque
vir prudens corpus quidem suum mundi membruni, mundi
ipsius revolutioni concedit, quocumque contigerit
agitandum.
60.

Supp.Fic.II p.14:

bonum ipsum ordinis universi est partis culuslibet
qualitate praestantius.

61. ibId. p.21
62.

Op.om. p.802, see Kristeller, The Philosophy of Marsilio FIcino p.299

63.

Supp.Fic.II p.12

64.

Letters vol.4 pp.17-18, Op.om. pp.788-9:

Quod nisi patiare libens, omnino patleris invitas, et
nisi te dud permisserls, traheris violentius et
raptabere.

65. ibid.:
Patientla vero vel sola, vel maxime omnium expugnat
fatum, quae enim faturn iinutabi1ia necessatiaque fore
decrevit, patientia cuin divinae providentiae voluntate
consent iens, ita quodammodo mutat ut ex necessarius
faciat voluntaria, sicut gui male agit, bona sibimet
convertit in malum, Ita gui bene patitur mala sibi
vertit in bonum, nempe in perferendis malls ipse bonus
evadit ... Ergo Salvine ml, fortunaxn vince se tendo et
ut alia vincas, (sicut coepisti) vince te ipsum.
66. 14.niela Jaffé, The ryth of meanIng p.56
67. FIcino, Theol.Plat. XIII.2, Op.om. p.296 (trans. Trinkaus Image and
LIkeness p.483):
Caelisti vlrtute ascendit caeluni atque metitur.
Supercaelest i mente transcend it cae lum.
-242-

68. Plato, Republic IV 439-40, Phaedrus 246-57
69. Ficino, Theol.Plat. XIII.2, Op.om. pp.295-98. See 'Frinkaus, Image and
LIkeness p.476
70.

Op.om. p.1368:

71.

Op.om. p.1549, Liber de vita 3.XXrI

Circuitus autem intelligentie velocissimus similis
diurno firmamenti totiusque celestis machine motui.
Circuitus rationis tardior similis est motibus
planetarum: universal ior quidem magisque pract icus
Marti, Veneri, Mercurio, Lime; imaginationis nature
revolutioni aeris atque acque.
(translation in H. Allen, Harsilio Ficino and the Phaedran Charioteer
pp.100-i)

72. Supp.Fic.II p.23

73. ibid. p.23:
Unde media inter eternitatem et ternpus esse videtur,
partim eterna partim etiam temporalis, media inter
naturalia et divina.
74.

ibid. p.69

75.

ibid. p.24:
Si quis autem dixerit consilli motuni ab astris, quorum
determinata natura est, impelli, hic ipsam auferet
consilii rationem, que in anipla quaclam et soluta et
libera ad omnes partes motione versatur, et pro
cons ii io angustum guendant inducet inst i nctum.

76. Ficino Theol.Plat. XIII.2, Op.om. p.290 (trans. Trinicaus Image and
Likeness p.477):
Verum ratio interponitur, vis quaedani verarum propria
animarum, per guam in universall conceptu a principils
rerum ad conclusiones temporali successione discurrunt
effectus resolvunt in causas, causas iterum In effectus
deducunt, discurrent etiam conceptu particulari ad
discursionis universalis exemplar.
77.

ibid. (trans. Trinkaus Image and Likeness p.477):
Per idolum est in ordine fati similiter, non sub fato
Sic anima in providentiae, fati, naturae legibus,
non Ut patiens modo ponitur, sed ut agens ... Cum vero
ex tribus illis partibus astringamur partim rerum
ordini, partim non astringamur, ex quarta praecipue
solvimur nostrique suinus omnino. Haec ratio est, guam
inter mentem animae caput et idolum anlmae pedem mediam
collocamus.

78. ibid. Op.om. p.289 (trans. 'Frinkaus Image and Likeness p.477):
quasi quoddam vestigium animee in corpore, sive uTnbram
-243-

79.

ibid. (trans: Trthkaus Image and Likeness p.477)
omnes mentes tanquam lumina ad unam mentem tanquam

lumen, omnia animarum idola et simulachra ad unum
universalis animae idolum, omnes naturae corporurn,
quasi animarum umbrae, proprie ad coamunem naturain
unius corporis, quasi umbram unius animae reducantur.
Anima nostra per caput suum Id est, mentem,
superioribus mentibus rectitur, per vim infimam, id
est, super thrum conspirat, per naturain corporis sui,
cui idolurn se Insinuat, conciliatur naturis corportnn
inundanorum, quas natura huius corporis sequitur.

80.

ibid. Op.oi. p.290 (trans. Trinkaus Iiage and Likeness p.477):
Quandoque ratio menti cohaeret, ubi surgit in
provident lam, quandoque idolo obsequitur et naturae,

ubi fatum suo quodam subit arnore, durn sensibus confisa
huc et illuc rerurn sensibilium occursi distrahitur

81.

ibId.XIII.3, Op.oi. p.296 (trans. Trinkaus IMage and Likeness p.483:

In quibus componerwfls saepe nullum corporis respicit
conunodum, nullum sensuum blandimentum, cum aliquando
sponte ex us incouanodum et molestiam patiatur, sed
fecundae suae ainpi if icationem appropbationemque
virtutis.

82. See Jung, Psychological Types XI paras.814-29
83. Ficino, Theol.Plat. XIII.3, Op.om. p.296; see Trinkaus Image and
Likeness pp.482-4
84. ibid. (trans. Trinkaus Image and Likeness p.483):
Non solum ad corporis necessitatem noster animus

respicit, sicut bestlae naturae imperio mancipatae, sed
ad oblectarnenta sensuurn varia, quasi quaedam pabula
phantasiae ... Atque non modo eleinentis, veruinetiam
elementorum anirnalibus utitur omnibus, terrenis,
aquatalibus, volatilibus ad escam, coinoditatem et
voluptatem, supernis caelestibusque ad doctrinam
magicaeque miracula.

85. See Marie-Louise von Franz, Active Alcheilcal Imagination

86. Op.oa. p.1682:
non semper inevitabiliter ... Permutari enim et
impediri posse, turn naturis inferioribus abiliter, et
ordine coelitus inchoato.
87. ibid. p.1682
88. Supp.Fic.II. p.19:
uterque fatetur prudentis et medici consllio auxilioque
posse multa celitus proventura vitari.
89. ibid. p.28:
...ita ut possit inclinationem celitus in corpus
venientem admictere vel re Icere.
-244-

90.

Op.om. p.1609

91. Supp.Flc.II pp.28,31; see also Liber de vita III.XXI on Ficino's rules
for composing astrological music, which must take all these factors
into account.
92. Op.om. pp.871-2, see R. Marcel Marsile 71cm p.586
93.

Op.om. p.872:

Tu quoque si istolam noetram de Magorum stella et
similem in Theologia nostra disputationem, item Plotini
libros hac ipsa de re tractarites, quos et traduximus,
diligentissime legeris, plane intelliges off ida
publici boni ad animos pertinentia, dependere guides
praecipue velut a coinibus primisque causis a
supernis mentibus Del suntn.i ministris, proficisci etlam
quodaumodo tamque a causis proprius atque ultimis, ab
humanis consilius, ubi se supernis accomodant.
Signlficari autem a figuris motlbusque coelestibus,
velut divinarum mentium thstrtentis. Disces praeterea
fatum, id est, coelestium feriem causarum providentiae
divinae servire. Mimos veto nostros tunc maxime
liberos ludicari, quando maxime cum divina voluntate
consent lunt.
94. Ficino, TheoI.Plat. XIII.2, Op.om. p.288 (trans Trinkaus Image and
Likeness p.476):

Tres rerum ordines ad humanum animam pertlnere
videntur: providentia, fatum, natura. Providentia est
series sent lum, Latum series animansa, natura series
corporum.
95. Liz Greene, The Astrology of Fate p.281
96. Supp.P'ic.II pp.44-5:
... prout dlssolutio illius est hulus composition, et
incomnodum unius vel paucorum fit aultorum coimnodum.
97. See Letter to Pope Sixtus, Op.om. pp.813-4; in this letter Ficino
recounts how he and three others "equally devoted to both prophecy and
astrology" considered the implications of a series of miracles which
took place at Vo]terra and of disatrous forthcoming astrological
transits, from which terrible famine and war were predicted. The
purpose of the letter was to equate the power of Sixtus (signifed by
the miracles) to "tame fierce Mars and stern Saturn by his
benevolence" with that of Divine Providence, which will always
overcome fate. The malevolent planetary influences, says Ficino, were
providential in that they allowed Sixtus to show his true colours and

overcome his enemies - as the miracles signified he would.
98. See Aristotle, On the Heavens 111.1, On Generation and Corruption 11.10
99. Ficino, fheol.Plat. XI1I.2, Op.om. p.291 (trans. Trinkaus Image and
Likeness pp.480-i):
Quando mentium ille Influxus ratlonea nostram sortitur
otiosam sive menti vacantem, ipsi aliquid ostendi
-245-

eortm, quae ad universalern aeternarta rerurn cognitionern
seu aundi gubernatlonem pertinent, ut vel Del legem et
otdines angelor.rn vel saeculor restitutiones et
regnorum autationes praevideat. Quando idolor
naturarLaque instinctus rationern omnino et phantasiarn
offendit vacuan, aliquid sibi portendit eor guae ad
teaport vicissitudines elentorunque turbat lanes
attinent, ut futuraia praevldeat pluviam, terrae tus
atque similia.
100. ibid., Op.oi. p.293 (trans. Trinkaus, Iaage and Likeness p.481):
... hort animus in vigilia vacat prae caeteris, vacat
in sois omnino. Quapropter supernus lapulsus ab eo
facile animadvertitur.
101.See Trinkaus, Iaage and LIkeness p.487
p.1609:
In primo igitur capite narrat, guemadmodum Astrologi,
non omnes inquam, sed multi putant auribus moribusque
stellarum et significari, et Lien singula, turn ad
externa, turn ad corpus, ti.m ad animum actionesque aniiul
pertineatur, sine bona honestaque sint, slue mala rusus
et turpia. Tu vero mento non actores quidern Ipsos
Astrologlae praeclpuos haec tradere, sed plebelos
quosdam Astrologos, Astronomiae prorsus ignaros, talia
dluulgare.

102. Op.o.

103. Op.oa. p.159, in Knisteller, The Philosophy of MarsllIo FIclno
pp.217-8:

Resipiscant Igitur quandoque minuti Philosophi, gui
sensuum indicio freti, incorporalem divinamque esse
anlmam cogitare non possunt.
104. Op.oa. p.159:

Purl fiant, et pura percipient. Expeniantur aliquando
In seipsis, possunt enim modo velint, quad lam dlu In
universo desiderant, perciplunt . . .Socraticamque mox
sententia re ipsa probabunt.. .atque unicam ad
incorporea non attingenda solum, sed etiam possiderda
usam esse, selpsLmI videlicet incorporei.mi redere.
105.

Supp.Fic.II p.39

106. ibid. p.26:
• Intrant ad mathematicum ut emant sibi dominos, quos
mathematico dare placuerit, vel Saturnum vel Jovem ye].
Mercunium. Intravit liber, ut datis nunais servus
exiret.
107. ibId. p.34
108. ibId. p.47:
Dicerduza est potlus celum animalibus istis dare aliquld
guam ab ipsis accipere.
-246-

109. ibid. p.38
110. ibid. p.39
111. ibid. p.42
U2. ibid. p.41:
Ergo significat vitarn et mortem quod ration! repugnat.
113. ibid. p.43:
Totia hoc poetica metapIora est, non ratio vel
scientia.
114. Op.om. p.1622:
Proinde quod Plotinus, et Origenes alunt, futurornn
quasi literas in coelo, vel scriptas esse ab initlo,
paulatirngue expi icar I, wi perpetuo scr ibi, Intell Igunt
stellas, figurasque t.mi consectas cx stellis, tim
imaginarias: Item signorum gradus paresque minutas:
denique Planetarum aspectus et motus, et quae
consequuntur haec ubilibet, vel comitantur. Tu vero
coet,m hic intellige universurn. Est enim ubique
coelum: ... Supra Lurnan quidera sicut return inferiorum
cause sunt couunes, ita et comnunia signa: Intra Lunam
veto sunt causae propriae, quik*is cognitis coinia in
porpria derivantur Indicia, totunxue hoc quasi animalis
unius corpus exist it. Oportet Igitur in mondano hoc
animal!, tum supra Lunam, t.mi infra circuznspicere
cuncta, atque inuicem pensitare.
115. ibid.
116.

Supp.Flc.II

p.37

117. LIz Greene, The Astrology of Fate p.37
118. Supp.Flc.II p.70
119. ibid. p.68: (Pseudo-Ptolemy Centlloqulu. aphorism 1)
Judicia nostra sunt inter necessarium et contingens
negue dat! dlstincta debent, sed confusa Instar elus
gui rem eminus inspicit.
120. Op.oa. p.1626:
Hinc Astrologicum Illud iudici.nn ex stellis non solum
fit per earurn inspectionem, sed etlam ex ipsius natura
gui ludicat.
121. ibId. p.1632
122. Ibid. p.1621:
neque enim possent in praesenti hac universi fade
praeferri Indicia praeteritorurn atque futurori.zn, nisi
res pass Im rebus, tempora temporibus certo quodam et
ocnsequenti ordine necterentur.
-247-

123. ibid. p.162l: Indicia quique quod stellae significant: potius nostz-a,
qua. agant
124. See part one, ref.1O above; Opo.. p.831:
Soleaus en!rn saepe praedlctionibus nostris aaia vel
procul futura anticipare diu, vel lnterd I thgere non

I utura.
125. ibid. p.1622:
ubi vero in diversis haec dispersa sunt, non causas,
sed signa videntur.
126. ibid.:
E)enlque si per coell in nativitate I igura. fatum puerl
lam pride. fact! praedlc!tur, haec Ipsa I igura fat
non elficit, sad declaret: sicut et puer non tunc

efficitur, sed declaratur effectus. Sed et ante
concept lone. fatum Platonic dicent fuisse conceptum,
quando videlicet anima corpus elegit.
127. ibid.:
An videlicet nobis est lila I igura superior? Sed avium
quoque volatus, et tonitrus super lores sunt, neque
tarnen per haec Ut per causes, sed tanquam per indica
solent aucupazi futura.
128. Op.oa. p.851:
... non al iter guam in augur! is auspici isque muita per
ayes portend I putantur, quae tamen per a yes minime
sunt.
129. ibid. p.1622:
.poter it et coeli fades esse ilber, in quo I igurae
scriptae divinitus. praeferant ventura, non agant:
praefertlm el confideratione coelestium corporum
praenoscantur, ea quae 11cr I nequeunt corporal is
illius naturae tenore, scilicet certae certis
temporibus hoalnum dlgnitates atque depresslones,
invent lones thesaurorum, cog! tata cons 11 lorum,
autatlones fortunae que propriae atque nostrorum.
130. ibid.:
Vel de praesentlbus utrum fiant de rebus et alienis a
nobis et longe distantibus, confirmant quicque ex
praesentl interrogatlonis hora respondetur, non per
causarn responder I, sad s ignum.
131. Bupp.71c.II p.39:
Noli respondere locanti vel leviter guerenti, sad solum
arthelanti et Cu! maxime cord! res lila sit, qula res
exit secundum quantitatea sollicitudinis Interrogantis.

132. ibid. p.60:
Zael et Messalac dicunt Interrogationem habere ludicium
et effectum sole., quando est ctau solIic!tudlne magna,
quasi velint earn sola mover! a celo, 111am 'vero que
-248-

est sine so11icitilne quails fit sepe non pendere a
celo.
go ab illis habeaus non canes homlni actus a
celo Lien.
133. Albertus Magnus, Speculua astronomiae quoted in (nin, Astrology in the
Renalssaace p.115

134. ibid.
135. Llber de vita 3.XII.122:

Non enia libertas arbitril ex electione horae
laudabilis coercetur, sed pot ius in magnanm rerum
inceptionlixis electionem horae contemere est arbitnil
praecipitatio, non libertas.

136. Op.oa. p.1628

137. Supp.Flc.II p.66:
.. .solus sapiens naturague fortunatus effectum allquem
scientle regulis presagine valeat.
138. Op.om. pp.931-2, letter to Valoni, Causae prodigorum in obitu
princlplls contlngentlu..

139. ibid. p.931.
... habent in se mystenia natura porsus super bra.
140. ibid. p.1623: aultls de causis Iudlclum de futuris est dlfflcllllaua
141. ibid.:
Sapiens ne negabit, stellas canes, guae nobis
Innumerabiles sunt ad effectum quemliber conferre
nonninil, ex earum que confluxu conimme aliquld, et Id
quidem pro natura loci et mater iae confici.
142. Firmicus Maternus (335 A.D.), Matheseos libni VIII trans. Jean Rhys
Bran. This treatise was the most complete Latin work on astrology in
the ancient world.
143. Jul11 Firilcl Katernl matheseos llbrl VIII ed. W. Knoll & F.
Skutsch, I.III.18 (Brams pp.15-16):
3dunt etlam quidam, ut nobis ex aligua parte
constentiant et ut eblandito consensu totam istain
scient iam dubitatbonis desperatbone exturberit, habere
quidea doctzinam Istam vim maximam, sed ad ]iquidum
propter pentium minutorumque brevitatem ac velocissiaum
siderum cursum caelique prorsi.in rotatae vertiginis
lapeum neminem pervenire posse confirmant, ut ista
eorum yen simili definitione sermonis totius scientiae
substant Ia subruatur.
144. ibid. I.III.25 (Brams p.16):
Nos veto, licet sit nobis tenue ingenluin et angustiae
orationis paene inefficax sermo, cum deberemus ipsius
tel vet itate refutare quae dicunt et responsionum
-2 49-

apote1esmatunKue constant Ia dlvthae Istlus sclentlae
confirmare praecepta
145.See also Ficino, De 3teIla Nagoru., Op.oa. p.489, where he gives the
supposed horoscope of thrist.
146.Supp.Pic.II p.48:
Hinc fit ut doctisalmi quique in astronoia ludicia
sperant, ignorant las Irni veto quique quot Idle ludicent.
147. Op.oi. p.1625:

Sors quoque vitae in corpore, inquam, sequitur aaxii
praesentern coeli constitutionem.
148. ibid.:
figuram certe coelestem guam destinare fatalem
unicuique so]ent...
149.SuppJic.II p.34:
Denique qucodo sciet astrologus, quid celurn facturun
sit cras postque annos decern, cun Ipse nesciat quid
ipsemet hodie alt facturus.
150. ibid. p.46:
Impossibile eat autem tarn minutas temporla particulas
coprehendere.
151. Op.om. p.1626:

Hurnanum naue Ingeniun tum causarum nurnerus et
qualitates ].atet, turn experientla fault, turn sigma
deciplut...
curn veto ex omnium mixt lone dico, non lumiria tantum
coelestia, sed etlam infer iorimt vires te cornplecti,
divinitatia eat proprium.
152. ibid. p.1625:
Sed
nto quocunque modo, vel ritu circa futura, vel
quornodocunque abstrusa horninibus vera dicantur, Id
saepe casu contingere, apx sos praesertlm, qul plurima
dicunt:.. .quia multa aunt in vita omnibus ferme
cciunia, multisque uudique modis quotidie
contingentia: nonnunquam quod vel casu, vel arts
videtur ease perspectum, Instinctu potius naturali,
sive daemonico sive divino fuisse prolatun.
153.See part two, ref .97 above. LIE configurations were a Mars/Saturn
conjunction In Virgo, Eclipse of Moon in Aquarius, ami difficult
Mars/Jupiter aspect.
154.Ficino, Prooeal urn In llbrua de vita coelltus coiparanda 1.18
155.Supp.Flc.II p.49, Op.orn. p.1620
156.Op.orn. p.1620:
M 111am gus fit ex causa diviria, recipitur magica
culta et cognatione demonum spherarurnque divinans.
-250-

157.ibid. p.1626:
Iemonico, quando imaglnario sic affecta, ut opportune
puisetur a daemone.
158.Supp.Flc.II p.27:
It.a per phantasmata illuminata animam ad ea que vult
monstrare movet.
In his Apologia contra Savonarola (Supp.Flc.II p.77) Ficino
states his belief that evil daemons were responsible for the wicked
friar's behaviour:
Qulbus autem rationibus Astrologi simuique P].atonici
Savonarolam multis diversisque vel infelicibus s1erum
influxibus inflatum fuisse conicerent, in presentia
disputare non expedit. Sed ut sumnatim dicam, ex
diversis infortunatisque serum influxibus atque
confluxibus saitem velut ex signis quibusdam Astrologi
forsitan cum Piatonicis coniecturam facerent
Savonarolam inuno ut rectius loquar Sevonerolam varils
improbisque demonibus fuisse subiectum.
159.Supp.Pic.II p.49:
lila que fit natura, adiuvatur a complexione quadam
melancolica vel temperata simuique celesti virtute,
quibus facile anirnus in se colligitur et sua divinitate
divinat, vel impressionis celestis animadversione.
160.Op.oa. p.28B:
Ergo quando animus hominis oinnino erit seiunctus a
corpore, omnem (Ut est apud Aegyptios) comprehendet
locuxn, et omne tempos. Imo vero lam pene est tails
animus suapte natura ubique et semper, qul ut mu].ta
loca et remotissima circunspiciat, atque ut totum
recolat praeterltum tempus, et futurum anticipet, non
cogitur extra se progredi sed relicto corpore in se
adversus, id prorsus assequltur, aut quia natura sua
ubique est et semper, Ut arbitrantur Aegyptius, aut
quia cum in naturam suam se recipit, statim numini
coniungitur omries et locorum, et temporum terminos
conprehendenti.
161.ibid. p.293
162.ibid.
163.See incidents related in Letters vol.1 pp.49-50 (Op.oa. pp.615-6) and
Kristeiler, The Philosophy of Harsillo Flclno pp.309-10
164.Supp.Fic.II p.49
165.Op.oi. p.1622:
Idem observare debet in mundo divinaturus ex mundo
166.ibid. p.1626:
auspex et aruspex, siguid in hoc est yen, ostenta
passim et omnia singulis aucupari momentis.
-251-

167. ibid. p.1626:
Hinc Avicenna in aetaphysicis neget Astrologis esse
credendu, qula neque cuncta coelestia teneant, neque
naturas inferiorL ad indIch riecessarias, neque
nitantur demonstrations, sed experientia quld3m, vel
vaticinlo, probationibusque Oratorius atgue Poeticis.
Htanu naue ingenlu t causari nrus et

qualltates latet, turn experlentia fault, b.a signa
decipiunt.
C the essence of Avicenna's philosophical stance, I can do no better
than quote S.H. Nasr, An Introduction to Islamic Cosmological
Doctrines p.191 (source: Gitas, Avlcenna pp.3-4):
A close study of the 'esoteric' writings of Ibn Sina
will reveal that the 'Oriental Philosophy' is not a all
a philosophy in the rationalistic sense, nor a system

of dialectic to fulfil certain mental needs; rather, It
is a form of wisdom or a 'theosophy' which has for its
purpose the deliverance of nan from this world of
imperfections to the 'world of light'. It is non-(keek
in the sense that the specific 'genius' of the Oreeks
of the historical period was dialectical. They even
hid Egyptian, Orphic, and Babylonian mysteries, upon
which Pythagoreanisa was based, under a veil of
dialectics. The 'Oriental Philosophy' removes this
veil and seeks to present the philosophla perennls not
as something to satisfy the need for thinking but as a
guide, or at least doctrinal aid, for the illination
of n which arises from the inner experience of Its
author. Its language is therefore primarily symbolic
rather than dialectial even If it begins with
Aristotelian logic and employs some of the cosmological
ideas of the Peripatetic philosophers.
168.Jung, Psychology and Western Religion para.291
169. Op.oa. p.1626, Supp.Fic.II p.66

170. Op.o.. p.1626:
Rinc Astrologicurn illud iudici ex ste].lis non sol
fit per earum inspect ionem, sed etiam ex ipelus ratura
gui iudlcat. Hinc Ptolemaeus: ludicla hulus amblgua
aunt el, gui rerum naturas stellasque considerat: cui

Illi vero, gui ex mellon parte futura congnoscunt,
propinqulores aunt venitati propter vim animae in eis
doininantem, quamvis non multam huius antis peritiam
habeant.
171. Supp.Pic.II pp.33,68
172. ibId. p.33:
...de determinatis et universalibus et sempiternis...
173. Ibid. p.68:
Non eat magna scientla astrologia, gula nec scientia
eat, cum ab effectibus semper et illis quidem raro
probatis exempllsque procedat valde remotis. Sed quia
-252-

magna sunt celestia de quthus agit, parvi iudicii
hominits magna videtur.
174.Op.oa. p.851, letter to Federico of Urbino
p.849. On the significance of the Saturn/Jupiter conjunction
for the birth of thrist, see (rin, Astrology in the Renaissance
pp.21-3 (on k1basar's De agni conlunctionibus); Jung, Mon
paras.128-9; M. Hyde Jung and Astrology pp.13-26

175. Opo.

176. Op.oi. pp.849-50:

atque tunc dem cernere nonnihil possint, curn quod
potissium ex divers is aundanae citharae fidibus vel
consonum, vel dissonu sequatur, intelligunt, irno, ut
venus loquar, vaticinantur.
177. IbId. p.851
178. ibid.
179.R.J. Stewart, Prophecy p.38
180. ibid. p.8
181. Letters vol.4, pp.61-3, Op.oi. pp.835-6

182. ibid. p.835:
Magnum certe, aggredere tamen bone ape, ingenue
Laurent!, maior adinodum eat ille coelo, qui te fecit,
ma ion coelo ens et Ipse cum pnimua aggredi
constitueris. Non eriim aunt haec alicubi nobis extra
quaerenda, nempe totum in nobis eat coe].um, quibos
igneus vigor meat et coelestis origo.
183. ibid. pp.835-6:
Si hac ratlone prudenter tibi Ipse in te coelestia
signa, tum unera temperavenis, owes fatorthn mines
procul effugies, auspici Isque divinis vitam absque
dublo beatam as.
1.84. Supp.FIc.II p.50
185. Op.oa. p.6O9

186. Ibid. p.632, in Knisteller, The Philosophy of Narsllio Picino p.295:
Vivendum eat autem hodie, qui enim cras vivit nunguam
Vivit. SI via hodie vivere, vive 1o, In quo her! et
cras nihil aliud aunt, guam hodie.

-253-

CThPTR FJR; MARSILIO FICINO, THE SEOJND ORPHEUS

PART ONE: Natural Magic

4.1. FIcino, Doctor of Souls

"What human music is, anyone may understand by examining his
own nature. For what is that which unites the incorporeal
activity of the reason with the body, unless it be a certain
mutual adaptation and as it were a tempering of low and high
sounds into a single consonance?"(l)

In this chapter I shall attempt to examine the ideas underlying Ficino's
practical music-making, and the role of astrological music in his system of
natural magic. In the second part of the chapter I shall consider the role
of Orpheus as Ficino's musical authority and model, the tradition within
which he worked, his own performance practice, and his contributions to
early Renaissance music-theory. For Ficino, the combination of words and
music, together with carefully prepared circumstances of performance, were
in service to nothing less than an alchemlcal process (expressed above by
Boethius in a musical analogy) of uniting the conflicting elements of mind,
soul and body into a harmonious whole. The chief text to be considered in
this context is the third part of his medical treatise, the Llber de vita,
which Ficino wrote when he was fifty-six years old in 1489. This text, De
vita coelitus comparanda ('On fitting one's life to the heavens') draws

heavily on neo-platonic magical sources (lamblichus, Proclus, Synesius) as
well as the Hermetic Ascleplus and particularly the Arabic treatise on
sympathetic magic, Plcatrlx, which Ficino would have known from its Latin
version(2) and in which he would have read: "All sages agree that the
planets exercise influence and power over this world ... from this it
follows that the roots of magic are the movements of the planets."(3)
However Ficino's chief inspiration was undoubtedly Plotinus.

The text was included by Ficino amongst his Commentaries on Plotinus,
being an elaboration on Plotinus' Ennead IV.3.11.(4) In this work Ficino
relies on medical, astrological, magical and theurgic sources to achieve a
-254-

unique synthesis with an overall emphasis on the value of the subjective
role of the imagination in achieving bodily and spiritual health. The
'complete' man must be both scholar and magus, understanding his position
as a link between planes of reality as well as knowing what practical
action to take to maintain and enhance his harmony and equilibrium. The
mutual dependence of music and astrology as an integral part of medical and
therapeutic practice was of course well-established in the Arabic
tradition, (5) and astrological knowledge was an indispensable requirement
for the European physician and herbalist.(6) Music theorists had long been
speculating on the correspondences between musical pitches and heavenly
bodies,(7) but it was Ficino who integrated all these strands into a
practical system of psychological tempering which foreshadows modern
techniques of holistic therapy.
I shall begin with a passage from a letter written by the young Ficino
to his friend Peregrino Agli on the nature of 'divine frenzy'(8) - a
subject to which I shall return later in this chapter. Here we find a
beautifully evocative philosophical justification for the power of music,
revealing the intensity of the twenty-four year old Ficino's enthusiasm for
Plato and his youthful ardour in pursuing the spiritual path of
purification. He describes musical experience as one of remembering - the
drawing-together of the soul as it is enticed back to the condition of
divine unity whence it came:
"But the soul receives the sweetest harmonies and numbers
through the ears, and by these echoes is reminded and
aroused to the divine music which may be heard by the more
subtle and penetrating sense of mind. According to the
followers of Plato, divine music is twofold. One kind, they
say, exists entirely in the eternal mind of God. The second
is in the motions and order of the heavens, by which the
heavenly spheres and their orbits make a marvellous harmony.
In both of these our soul took part before it was imprisoned
in our bodies. But it uses the ears as messengers, as
through they were chinks in this darkness. By the ears
the soul receives the echoes of that Incomparable music, by
which it is led back to the deep arid silent memory of the
harmony which it previously enjoyed. The whole soul then
kindles with desire to fly back to its rightful home, so
that it may enjoy that true music again. It realises that
as long as It is enclosed In the dark abode of the body it
can in no way reach that music. It therefore strives
wholeheartedly to imitate it, because it cannot here enjoy
its possession."(9)
-255-

The imitation of musica iwndana is then a most effective way of
stimulating the desire of the soul to realise its divinity, to achieve
self-knowledge. Following Plato, Ficino calls purely instrumental music
"superficial and vulgar", but music combined with poetry is able to capture
the essence of "heavenly harmony" through the numerical proportion of the
verse, whose meaning reaches the mind: "It expresses with fire the most
profound and, as a poet would say, prophetic meanings, in the numbers of
voice and movement. Thus not only does it delight the ear, but brings to
the mind the finest nourishment, most like the food of the gods . . ."(lO)
As we shall hear from the Bishop Caxnpano (see pages 289-90), Ficino himself
was observed to reach such heights of frenzy in his own improvisation to
the lira, and I shall be discussing in more detail later the implications
of Platonic frenzy for the Renaissance performing artist. Most
importantly, in this letter Ficino sets the precedent for the exalted
function of the Orphic hymn settings which were to become the means for the
psychological transformation pioneered in the De vita coelitus comparanda.
In later writings we find Ficino exploring in more detail the theory of
hearing, and also justifying his use of music as a medicine of the soul.
He clarifies his position as a 'doctor of body and soul' in a letter to
Antonio Canigiani, written in 1476, on the sub j ect of music.(ll) His theme
is the close connection between medicine and music, which he introduces by
way of astrological analogy:
"Astrologers might relate these two, Canigiani, to a
conjunction of Jupiter with Mercury and Venus. They
consider that medicine comes from Jupiter and music from
Mercury and Venus. Followers of Plato, on the other hand,
ascribe them both to one god, Apollo, whom the ancient
theologians thought was the inventor of medicine and lord of
the sounding lyre."(l2)

Apollo, as the numinous representative of the Sun, is, for Ficino, the
exemplary regulator of the cycles of nature. It is Apollo's four-string
lyre which resounds in the ordering of the seasons which is itself imitated
in the healthy balance of humours in the body: "So, since the patron of
music and discoverer of medicine are one and the same god, it is hardly
surprising that both arts are often practised by the same man."(13) But
most importantly, the parts of the soul are maintained in harmony with the
parts of the body, and music will act on the soul in the same way that
-256-

medicine acts on the body - this, says Ficino, has been proved by his own
experience. In this letter, Ficino draws our attention to the theory of
the transmission and perception of musical sound which underlies his own
improvisatory hymn-singing. Since song is the product of mind, imagination
and feeling, it will act powerfully on all these faculties in the listener:
"For sound and song arise from consideration in the mind,
the impulse of fantasy and the desire of the heart, arid in
disturbing the air and lending measure to it they vibrate
the airy spirit of the listener, which is the link between
body arid soul. Thus sound and song easily arouse the
fantasy, affect the heart and reach the inmost recesses of
the mind; they still, and also set in motion, the humours
and the limbs of the body."(l4)

Ficino cites Pythagoras arid Eipedocls(l5) as examples of magi who used
"serious music" to quell unruly passions, arid "different modes" (allis
modulisl to stimulate lazy minds. We shall find ample evidence that he
modelled his own practice on these classical precedents in De vita coelitus
coparanda. I shall consider the vital concept of spiritus in relation to
Ficino's music-theory a little later, but in this letter to Canigiani it is
important to focus on Ficino's allusions to the 'fantasy' as the mediating
realm between incorporeal sound and physical sensation. Ficino understands
the Boetl-iian distinctions between musica mundana, humana and iristrurnentalis
to correspond to the functions of intellectual speculation, imagination and
speech - but he extends the musical analogy to the harmonious physical
movements of dancing. It is the "first music" of the soul which may be
reflected in any human art-form:
"The first music takes place in reason, the second in
fantasy and the third in words; thence follows song and
after that the movement of the fingers in sound. Lastly the
movement of the whole body in gymnastics or dancing. Thus
we may see that the music of the soul is led by steps to all
the limbs of the body. It is this music that orators,
poets, painters, sculptors and architects seek to imitate in
their work. Since, therefore, there is such strong
communion between the music of the soul and of the body, is
it surprising that both the body and the soul may be set in
order by the same man?"(16)

Ficino ends his letter with Plato's recommendation that solemn and calm
music is "the most wholesome remedy for spirit, soul and body" and adds
that he himself often sings to the lyre "to banish vexations of both soul

-257-

and body, and to raise the mind to the highest considerations and to God as
much as I may."(17)
In his extensive Comnentary on the ?Iaaeus(18) Ficino again deals with
the nature of musical sound, distinguishing between its material and
spiritual action, and confirming its superiority over any other form of
sense-perception through its action on the airy spin tus and its congruity
with the human soul.
Plato's succinct definition in Timaeus 67a ("Sound
may be generally defined as an impulse given by the air through the ears to
the brain and blood and passed on to the soul ... rapid movement produces
high-pitched sound, and the slower the motion the lower the pitch") he
comments:
"ifusical consonance occurs in the element which is the mean
of all Li .e. air 1, and reaches the ears through motion,
spherical motion: so that it is not surprising that it
should be fitting to the soul, which is both the mean of
things, and the origin of circular motion. In addition,
musical sound, more than anything else perceived by the
senses, conveys, as if animated, the emotions and thoughts
of the singer's or player's soul to the listener's souls;
thus it preeminently corresponds with the soul... musical
sound by the movement of the air moves the body: by purified
air it excites the aerial spirit which is the bond of body
and soul: by emotion it affects the senses and at the same
time the soul: by meaning it works on the mind: finally, by
the very movement of the subtle air it penetrates strongly:
by its contemperation It flows smoothly: by the conformity
of its quality it floods us with a wonderful pleasure: by
its nature, both spiritual and material, it at once seizes,
and claims as Its own, man in his entirety."(19)
The sympathetic action of like on like, as the singer transmits his emotion
to the listener, is a direct reflection of the conformity of the enraptured
performer's soul with God, and thus a channel is forged, with the singer (or the
skilled orator) as the finely-tuned mediating instrument, between the listener
and the divine realm. (20) As Ficino wrote to Lorenzo Lippi:
"... the speaker who is most deeply moved himself will move
others most deeply, whereas the man who sings one tune and
plucks another from his lyre totally offends the ear.
Divine music is the true harmony of thought, word and
deed. "(21)
With the emphasis on the refined quality of being of the performer as a
prerequisite for a truly moving performance we find a parallel with Ficino's
-258-

discriminatory attitude towards astrologers. The musica instrumentalis of the
astrologer, his rhetorical gifts and interpretative skills, are meaningless and
misleading unless he has become a channel for a higher wisdom. Indeed all forms
of artistic expression will ultimately depend for their effects on the clarity
with which the artist receives intimations of divinity - which could be defined
as glimpses of the archetypal forms which underlie and empower conscious life
experience - symbolised in planetary characteristics, and conveyed as 'affects'
through the half-corporeal imaginative faculty. To Nero Varini, Ficino complain'
about the sorry condition of those artists who are purely concerned with the
technicalities of the material aspect of their practice, and unable to bring it
into harmony with the qualitative dimension of the soul:
"For there is a constant battle between body and soul,
between the senses and reason .. (mprtal men] lay out the
parts of buildings to a measure, and tune strings on a lyre
to a hair's breadth, but they never attempt to harmonise the
parts and movements of the soul."(22)

Whereas a true musician is one whose technical expertise is in service
to the promptings of his soul, who understands the value of self-knowledge:
"The duty of the musician is to portray the beauty of song
in sound, arid the fineness of speech in song. It is also
his duty to remember that harmony in the motions of the soul
is far more needful than harmony in voices. For illproportioned and a stranger to the muses is the musician to
whom, while voice and lyre sound harmoniously together, mind
sounds discordantly. "(23)

Hearing is more powerful than smell, taste or touch since they are
entirely material and do not penetrate the depths of the soul. As for
sight, it may only transmit static images, for visual impressions have no
direct contact with the airy spirit present in the ear.(24) Hearing puts
the soul in direct contact with the movement of the cosmos - musical sound
links the soul and body through acting on the splrltus, the words of a text
reach the intellectual faculty and move the mind. Hence, for Ficino, the
recitation of a text highly-charged with meaning to musical accompaniment
was the most all-embracing means of tempering the whole man and bringing
his soul and body into conformity with the rnusica mundana of the macrocosm:
through the movement of the air a song acts on the body, through the
emotion of the performer it acts on the senses and the imagination, and

-259-

through the meaning of the text rational content is transmitted to the
mind.

4.2. SDr1tus
Ficino is of course not original in his theory of hearing which is
essentially Aristotelian(25) and owes much to the writings of Boethius,
Avicenna and Albertus Magnus. (26) But he goes beyond the Ar istotel ian
theory of the air inside the ear resonating to external vibrations(27) by
identifying it with the spiritus, the airy element which connects body and
soul through a process of attraction: "in the universe a sort of bait or
kindling for linking soul to body is that very thing we call spirit"(28) he
writes. In his alchemical endeavour to unite psyche and soma into a
harmoniously functioning entity, the spirit becomes the essential element
of mediation between the realm of sense-perception and the soul, bringing a
desired effect to bear through its affinity with 'airy' sensations - as
Ficino explains in a letter to Francesco Musano, where we also find a
direct reference to his therapeutic music in practice and evidence of his
struggle to master the techniques of natural magic:
"As soon as you were cured of your wrongly diagnosed tertian
fever by our medicines, both you and Giovanni Aurelio paid
your respects to our Academy, as if it were your own doctor.
You then asked for and heard the sound of the lyre and the
singing of hymns ... within us nature has bonded body and
spirit with the soul. The body is indeed healed by the
remedies of medicine; but spirit, which is the airy vapour
of our blood and the link between body and soul, is tempered
and nourished by airy smells, by sounds, and by song ... In
nature a union is made from soul, body and spirit. To the
Egyptian priests medicine, music and the mysteries were one
and the same study. Would that we could master this natural
and Egyptian art as successfully as we tenaciously and
wholeheartedly apply ourselves to it!"(29)

Ficino is also original in his very desire to bring speculative
analogies between cosmic, human and instrumental music into a practical
therapeutic context, and to explore the reasons for specific types of music
achieving specific psychological reactions.(30) In this respect he
preshadows the aims and practices of the musical humanists of the
Florentine Camarata, a century later. Since D.P. Walker has written
comprehensively about Ficino's music-spirit theory,(31) I only intend to
-260-

suinmarise here the chief characteristics of the spiritus and its important
role in the transmission of musical sound.
Spiritus, for Ficino, was an active connective principle at work in both

macrocosm and microcosm. s such, it corresponded to all orders of
creation, operating in cosmic, imaginative and physiological realms but
always in service to the functions of the aniina jiundi and the human soul.
We saw in chapter one (page 34) that in the Theologia Platonica he desribes
its movement as a clrcuitus spiritualis, "a divine influx, flowing from
God, penetrating through the heavens, descending through the elements and
finishing up In lower riature".(32) In De vita coelltus cornparanda,
splritus is described as the medium through which stellar Influence reaches
the human soul, a medium which is captur ' d most effectively by music. In
the first chapter of this treatise we read that the cosmic spirit, as the
active agent of the World Soul, spreads the power of Soul through all
things in the form of a quintessence which can be found most concentrated
in certain substances such as wine, white sugar, gold and precious
stones.(33) When the human spirit is strengthened by the cosmic spirit
through absorbing the rays of the stars, then their gifts may pass into our
soul and body.(34) The spirit may be separated from the grosser material
which contains it and generate its own properties when applied to other
matter - in one of his rare direct references to alchemy, Ficino suggests
that this is how baser metals may be turned into gold: "Diligent natural
philosophers, when they separate this sort of spirit from gold by
sublimation over fire, will employ it on any of the metals and will make it
gold."(35)
In quality, the spirit is a subtle body composed of fire, air and
water which in the human being is drawn out of the four humours by the
soul. D.P. Walker understands it to be synonymous with the neo-platonic
astral body which the soul acquires from the stars and planets as it
descends into the physical body,(36) referred to by Ficino in his
Commentary on the Phaedrus as a "celestial, sempiternal body" (coelestia
corpora atque sempiterna) which acts like a chariot for the individual
soul(37) In the De amore he explains:
"Any soul which falls into its earthly body under the
domination of Jupiter conceives for itself during its
descent a certain pattern for making a man corresponding to
the star of Jupiter. This pattern the soul is able to
-261-

imprint very exactly on its astral body because that is very
veil disposed to receive it. If the soul finds on earth a
seed which is similarly well disposed, the soul then
imprints on that seed a third image which is very much like
the first and second ..."(38)
In the same chapter Ficino goes on to describe the splrltus in
physiological terms as "a certain very thin and clear vapour produced by
the heit of the heart from the thinnest part of the blood"(39) which
receives the powers of the soul and transmits them to the body. It is the
spirit which also transmits the images of incorporeal substance - such as
music or visual impressions - through the organs of sense to the soul, and
may be activated by the desire of the individual to align his spirit with
that of the cosmos:
"Our spirltus is in conformity with the rays of the heavenly
spiritus, which penetrates everything either secretly or
obviously. It shows a far greater kinship when we have a
strong desire for that life and are seeking a benefit that
is consistent with it, and thus transfer our own spiritus
into its rays by means of love, particularly if we make use
of song and light and the perfume appropriate to the deity
like the hymns that Orpheus consecrated to the cosmic
deities."(40)

In De vita coelltus comparanda Ficino, in an attempt to stay within the
bounds of Christian orthodoxy, does not refer to the astral origins of the
spiritus, but concentrates on the procedures through which the human spirit
may become more celestial. When the cosmic spirit flows into matter it
necessdrily loses its efficacy and becomes obstructed, but its true power,
diffused via the planetary and stellar rays, may be identified by those
practised in 'magic' and astrology who experiment with the re-distribution
and intensification of spiritus in the material world. The chief aim of
such natural magic, defined by Ficino as "the kind of magic ... practised
by those who seasonably subject natural materials to natural causes to be
formed in a wondrous way"(41) is self-knowledge through bringing one's
musica humana into accord with musica rnundana - "attuning one's life to the

heavens" (as the title suggests) drid thus to a divine cosmic order. For
Ficino, this process involves a conscious regime of purification through
constant application to the rays of the Sun, the image of God, which in
itself contains a synthesis of all the other planetary qualities. When the
spirit has become truly solar, "the celestial gifts located mainly in it
-262-

will overflow not only to our body but also to our mind".(42) For Ficino,
there could be no more effective way of purifying the spirit than through
an Orphic incantation to Apollo, the Sun god.

4.3. The alchemica]. cpniunctio
"The practice of Magic is none other than marrying the
universe"( 43)

The 'mutual adaptation' of the incorporeal and corporeal aspects of the
human being referred to by Boethius (see quotation on page 254) required
the mediation of a middle ground where the materialisation of spirit and
the spiritualisatlon of matter could takt place and thus forge a unity
between seemingly irreconcilable opposites - the realm of the soul, to be
engaged both through the workings of the imagination and the reality of
sensory experience. The transformative potential of Ficino's music-therapy
cannot be fully appreciated without an understanding of the central notion
of alchemy - the purification and refinement of the soul which would
eventually lead to total unity of being; the discovery of the 'gold' of
self-knowledge. This, for Ficino personally, was to be pursued through the
trials and tribulations of his Saturnine temperament - "Do not doubt that
Saturn has quite a bit to do with gold" he says.(44) He believed that the
art and craft of astrology in practice was meaningless unless applied to
the task of self-understanding; for, like all religious systems, the outer
framework functioned as a container for the highly 'irrational' and
subjective nature of the personal experience. We can see that Ficino's
condemnation in the Dlsputatlo was chiefly aimed at those astrologers who
identified solely with the container, blind to the possibility of
alchemlcal transformation through fully embracing their own participation
in a process which could never be 'rational' and 'objective'.

It is hardly surprising that he did not consciously embrace the role of
'alchemist' - his search for the lapis phllosophorum could never be
confined to chemical experiment.(45) In a letter to the ducal secretary
Jacobus Antiquarius, Ficino shows us that his view of the common alchemist
paralleled that of the 'petty ogre' astrologer. Both were oblivious to the
psychological quest implicit in their work and rarely achieved true or
lasting results - whereas, in agreement with Jung, Ficino saw 'real'
-263-

alchemy as being the transformation of being wrought through intentional
purification of the instinctual nature:
"Indeed, as greatly as those very vain men, who are comeonly
called Alchemists, are false in their opinions, and deceived
by fortune whenever they strive to forge inferior metals
into gold, so for (the Platonists 1, who subdue
concupiscence, anger and action in conteaplat ion to the best
of their ability, the matter daily turns out according to
their desire, in as far as they obtain gold in place of the
other metals - that is, the most most precious things for
the most vile, and eternal things for the transitory."(46)
In psychological terme, we could say that the introspective philosopher

is able to witbdraw his projections from matter to his own psyche.
Alchemists and astrologers are mistaken when they believe they are dealing
'obiectively' with either material fora or another person's psychic
processes - for they are inevitably projecting their own unconscious. (47)
Ficino undoubtedly realised that the struggle towards self-consciousness,
or knowing 'God', involved a rigorous attempt to 'take back' such
projections and work with the highly irrational yet profoundly meaningful
stirrings of the imagination. Astrology provided a perfect framework of
symbols for the process of what would now be called 'active imaging', ath
this is precisely how Ficino instructs the reader to use it in his Liber de
vita. The 'natural magic' of this treatise, ostensibly firmly allied with
medical practice, nevertheless betrays an underlying familiarity with
aichemical precepts, and we also find in the correspondence with Pico della
Hirandola thinly-veiled evidence of a mutual understanding that the

'hermetic secret' of aichemical transformation lay at the heart of their
philosophical and religious pursuits.(48) It is highly significant that in
the Liber de vita Ficino, after a life-long coitment to a vocation of
uniting Hind and Soul, finally incorporates the physical realm into the
alchemical coniunctio, thus redeeming the lost 'feminine' element of earth.
This practical handbook was written in homage to his physical father, the

doctor Diotifeci, who Ficino felt impelled to redeem after thirty years of
platonic speculation under the spiritual guidance of his 'other father',
Cosimo de' Medici:
"I, the least of priests, had two fathers - Ficino the
doctor and Cosimo de' Medici. From the former I was born,
from the latter reborn. The former conended me to Clen as
both a doctor and a Platonist; the latter consecrated me to
the divine Plato. And both the one and the other alike
dedicated Mars ilio to a doctor - Galen, doctor of the body,
-264-

Plato, doctor of the soul. Therefore, for a long time now I
have practiced the medicine salutary to souls under Plato:
after translating all his books, I straightway composed
eighteen books concerning the immortality of souls and
eternal happiness, so to the best of my ability repaying by
Medici father. Thinking I ought next to repay my medical
father, I have composed a book On Caring for the Health of

Learned People."(49)
Unlike the ineffectual alchemist who believes he is only dealing with

material properties, it is the 'natural philosopher' who knows the true
secret of the lapis phllosophorurn, which means procuring the marriage of
'above' and 'below' - firmly weaving spiritual threads into the very warp
and weft of earthly existence in pursuit of the unus mundus or marriage of
eternity and temporality. In a homely simile Ficino likens this process to
that of agriculture, which prepares a field and seed to receive heavenly
gifts and prolongs the life of a shoot by grafting. He adds:
"The doctor, the natural philosopher, and the surgeon
achieve similar effects in our bodies in order both to
strengthen our own nature and to obtain more productively
the nature of the universe. The philosopher who knows about
natural objects and stars, whom we rightly are accustomed to
call a Magus, does the very same things: he seasonably
introduces the celestial into the earthly by particular
lures just as the farmer interested in grafting brings the
fresh graft into the old stock."(50)

In De vita coelitus comparanda, Ficino appeals to the imagination of the
reader as a vessel within which the symbolism of astrology, properties of
talismans, images, foods, colours, meanings of words and particular sounds
of music may be savoured and directed towards a balancing and enhancement
of everyday life. Such magic depends on the sympathetic correspondences
between chains of being (deriving from Proclus' De sacrlflcio) whose
members may all signs or lures which amplify understanding and enhance
meaningful experience. As already mentioned, through the function of
astrological symbolism as a mediating frame of reference for the
imagination, a union of the two opposing polarities of heaven and earth, or
eternal and temporal, may be facilitated. This aim, conveyed through the
metaphor of revelatory religious experience by Hermes Trismegistus, was
given the image of the marriage of King and Queen, or Sun and Moon (the
coniunctio oppositorum) by the alchemists,(51) and can be seen to represent
the striving of Renaissance man to fully realise his own potential
-265-

'divinity' in the sense of uncovering, and uniting with, the latent power
of what Jung has defined as the 'unconscious' mind:
"science began with the stars, and mankind discovered in
them the dominants of the unconscious, the 'gods', as well
as the curious psychological qualities of the zodiac: a
complete projected theory of human character. Astrology is
a primordial experience similar to alchemy. Such
projections repeat themselves whenever man tries to explore
an empty darkness and involuntarily fills it with living
form. ( 52)

One cannot of course expect Ficino to share Jung's psychological
insight; he lived and worked firmly within a Platonic/christian tradition
of an ensouled and hierarchical universe. But he certainly went a long way
towards overcoming the determinist 'sciertific' assumptions of the
traditional Ptolemaic astrological system through championing the cause of
irrational experience in the Llber de vita. Although this practical
handbook was written in honour of his father, the doctor Diotifeci, Ficino
already suggests in his Proem that the 'medicine' he will be advocating
would far exceed his father's traditional expectations. Learned people,
says Ficino, distrust the efficacy of purely terrestrial medicines,(53) and
this led him to formulate a programme for spiritual and bodily health with
an approach which can be seen to be homeopathic, not allopathic, in its
methods. Ficino says he added De vita coelitus comparanda to the first two
books "so that from the very living body of the world, a more vigorous life
might be propagated as if from a vine into our own body, which is in a way
a part of the world's body."(54) Certainly it is extraordinary to read
Ficino's opinion that
! the intention of the imagination does not have its power in
fashioning images or medicines as it does in applying and
swallowing them. And so if anyone .. wears an image which
has been properly fashioned, or certainly if anyone uses a
rightly made medicine, and yearns vehemently to get help
from it and believes with all his heart and hopes with all
his strength, he will surely get a great deal more help from
it."(55)
Although Ficino was familiar with the standard astrological authorities
from whom he had a thorough grounding in rules and techniques, we have seen
In the previous chapter that he considered such a framework in itself to
provide an incomplete, albeit necessary, basis for judgements of character
or events. Those who assume 'objective truth', who ignore or reject the
-266-

significance of subjectivity, of desire and intent, cannot be diviners.
Behind the 'frozen' categorisations of the literally-minded astrologers
there are fluid archetypal principles at work which mold and form the
deepest layers of the soul and can be apprehended, as we have seen, only
through an experience of introspective contemplation, not of applied
thought-processes. The purely intellectual representation of an experience
cannot bring about an inner change since it denies the coincidence of
subject and object (the adaequatio, or similitude of what is known to the
faculty of knowing) so necessary for true insight.(56) The meaning of your
life, says Ficino, will only become clear when a capacity for symbolic
imaging is developed as a mediating ground between the temporal and eternal
(or one might say conscious and unconscious) dimensions of life.(57) In
Jungian terms, a symbol is only effective, when it is 'alive' in the sense
of forming a conjunction with subjective experience and thus initiating a
flow of unconscious contents into conscious a'wareness.(58) In the Platonic
animated cosmos we find a supreme example of psychic projection onto
matter, creating powerful living symbols in the form of gods and daemoris.
The material and spiritual realms are linked by a middle ground of these
subtle bodies, which appear to be 'living' precisely because, resonating
within the microcosm of the human psyche, they reflect back archetypal
human qualities and thus facilitate the arduous task of self-knowledge:
"The place of realisation is neither mind nor matter, but
that intermediate realm of subtle reality which can be
adequately expressed only by the symbol. The symbol is
neither abstract nor concrete, neither rational nor
irrational, neither real nor unreal. It is always
both. "(59)
The use of the half-corporeal imaginatio (or idolum) to effect physical
changes was, in Jung's view, the key to understanding the alchemical opus and Ficino in the Liber de vita encourages the reader constantly to pay
attention to the processing of images, to establish a flow and
correspondence between soul and matter. This is perhaps what Jung would
term the actualisation of unconscious contents in the realm of subtle
reality.(60) For example, Ficino advises the reader to construct an
"archetypal form of the whole world" (formam mundi totius archetypaxn) in
bronze, at the moment of the Sun's entry into Aries (the spring equinox),
and to constantly contemplate its motions (he suggests it might be a
mechanical model).(61) Or to paint a "figure of the universe" on one's
-267-

bedroom ceiling in blue, green and gold (the colours of Jupiter, Venus/Moon
and the Sun) so that the image of its harmonious proportion may be held,
like a mandala or symbol of unity, in the mind and may tune and temper the
soul into conformity with its order through the meditative process of
active visualisation.(62) After contemplation of such an image the
Individual "will not note with so much attention the spectacle of
individual things as the figure of the universe and its colours"(63) and
will be led to "fashion a better image" of the harmonious order of the
heavens in his own imagination. Concentrating on the temperateness of
Jupiter, for example, and consciously cultivating an ordered and moderate
life-style, will naturally attract his gifts and regulate tendencies to
excess. All this would appear to conform with the aichemical notion that
the chaotic prima mater Ia may be transforied by a wheel-like, rotating
substance:
"The transforming substance is an analogy of the revolving
universe, of the macrocosm, or a reflection of it imprinted
in the heart of matter. Psychologically, it is a question
of the revolving heavens being reflected in the unconscious,
an Imago mundi that was projected by the alchemist into his
own prima materia."(64)

Ficino instructs us to imitate the "revolving heavens" in the physical
movements of dance,(65) in a painted or fashioned reproduction of the
cosmos, or in the imitation of musica mundana in words and song.(66) The
latter was undoubtedly the most powerful way of facilitating psychological
tempering.

4.4. Sympathetic ma g ic in De vita coelitus comparanãa

For the Platonist, the attunement of the human soul with its divine
'pattern' as reflected in the heavens is none other than an act of love.
For Ficino, erotic love is essentially a sublimated, imaginative process of
inner connection through which the significance of the reflection of cosmic
harmony and the intuition of its source is made accessible, whether
initally stirred by a part of the natural world, a work of art or a human
being. In his elaboration on Plato's Symposium, the De amore, Ficino
anticipates the practical advice of his later work by setting a context for

-268-

his natural magic firmly rooted in the Platonic notion of love as an active
force of affinity in nature:
"But why do we think that Love is a magician? Because the
whole power of magic consists in love. The work of magic is
the attraction of one thing by another because of a certain
affinity of nature. But the parts of this world, like the
parts of a single animal, all deriving from a single author,
are joined to each other by the communion of a single nature
the parts of this great animal, that is all the bodies
of the world ... borrow and lend natures to and from each
other. From this common relationship is born a common love;
from love, a common attraction. And this is the true
magic."(67)

Ficino goes on to describe how the function of art is to be "handmaiden"
to this natural process, to enhance and hitensify it: "For where anything
is lacking in a natural relationship, art supplies it through vapours,
numbers, figures and qualities at the proper tlmes."(68) In this
Commentary, Ficino as Platonist puts forward the view of the "ancients"
that it is the daemons who inspire wise men with knowledge of the
appropriate arts, for they have a clearer knowledge than man of the interrelation between natural things. In the Apology to his Liber de vita, a
book of practical advice, Ficino as a christian priest treads carefully,
assuring the reader that he does not approve of magic which relies on
daemonic intervention, but only that "which, by natural things, seeks to
obtain the services of the celestials for the prosperous health of our
bodies".(69) Man himself can be a Magus, a "cultivator of the world", (70)
tempering the lower parts of the world to the higher in direct imitation of
God's own work and his love for man. Ficino ends his exposition on magic
In the De amore by calling on the power of words and song to attract
beneficial influences and people:
"Men charm and win men over to themselves through the
powers of eloquence and the measures of songs, as if by
certain incantations. Moreover, they drug and capture
them with worship and gifts exactly as though with
enchantments. Therefore no one can doubt that love is a
magician, since the whole power of magic consists in
love, and the work of love is fulfilled by bewitchinents,
incantations, and enchantinents."(71)

This process of attraction is the theme of De vita coelitus cornparanda.
At the beginning of the work, Ficino sets forth a context within which we
are to understand the working of 'natural magic'. The working of this
-269-

magic fundamentally depends on the recognition and clarification, on the
part of the magician/philosopher, of the channels of ascent and descent
throughout the hierarchy of creation. Both Frances Yates and Eugenio Grin
have discussed Ficino's debt to the Latin Picatrix in terms of the role of
man as 'magus'(722) - there is no doubt that Ficino too was convinced that
man is only half man unless he combines scholarship with practical
operations(73) and that ultimately it is the self-knowledge of the
individual which leads to an awareness of the Inextricable connection
between the movements of the heavens and those of the human soul. But for
his theory of magic Ficino relies heavily on Plotinus, Ennead IV.3-5,(74)
arid I shall now briefly consider the premisses he sets forth at the
beginning of De vita coelitus comparanda to provide a context for the
function of music arid song as magical opeizations.

For both Plotinus and Ficino sympathetic magic is made possible by the
mediating function of the World Soul, which permeates the realms of both
unmoving intellect and changing matter. It is the World Soul which
transmits to each individual species its seminal reasons, by which their
essential form is fashioned. Through the seminal reason, each species on
earth corresponds to Its Idea in the divine mind - it is the 'divine seed'
within all forms of manifest creation, the underlying factor of unique,
generic differentiation between species. The reason provides the
connective principle with the Ideas, opening a channel for the gifts of
higher worlds to flow into lower creation. The World Soul moves and acts
with the lunar qualities of receptivity, fluctuation and connection, aided
by the particular entities called daemons. Because their nature is in part
corporeal, they can be attracted by earthly materials - but as already
stressed, Ficino is very careful to deny any direct attraction of daemons
Into matter during his magical or theurgic operations. Whatever his
theoretical justification for 'licit' magic, however, what occurred in
practice during Ficino's 'spiritual' operations such as contemplative hymnsinging undoubtedly effected subtle changes in the deepest 'layers' of the
soul, and was Intended to. Ficino had his own reasons for appearing to
keep well within the boundaries set by ecclesiastical authorities: "In all
the things which I discuss here or elsewhere, I intend to assert only so
much as is approved by the church"; (75) he says, and "Let us by no means
ever attempt anything forbidden by holy religion .. ."(76) even though his
appreciation of the individual's responsibility In imaginatively creating
-270-

his own Meaning in life led him to some very unorthodox rites and
practices. We can safely assume that Ficino knew very well the potential
of ritual magic to transcend all attempts to classify or differentiate its
effects. Reading between the lines, we find a tacet approval of the kind
of magic which involves drawing benefits from a realm beyond that of

the heavenly spheres. (77)
In chapter I of De vita coelitus coapazanda Ficino describes the earthly
material forms within which the World Soul has sown her seminal reasons as
'baits' or 'divine lures'(78) - for they attract and entice the World Soul
back into themselves through the very kernel of divinity that she has
planted within them. The drawing-down of the Soul qualities into earthly
forms will be dependent not only on their essential affinity, but also on
the careful alignment of particular quality and specific time, (79) the
right moment when like is drawn into like by virtue of natural coincidence
or by artificial h.mian intervention. Electional astrology is an effective
method of determining such a moment arid forms an essential part of Ficinian
magic - for it enables man to participate in the divine cosmic ordering
through the application of his free-will, as confirmed by Albertus
Magnus. (80) In choosing a specific time to Intervene, for example in the
performance of an Orpiiic hymn to the Sun at a time when the Sun is rising
in order to foster one's 'solar' qualities, man is demonstrating his
control over natural forces for his own psychological benefit. Such a
technique may also be applied to help others, when carried out In
conjunction with a careful consideration of their horoscope.

The World Soul also sowed her particular seminal reasons in the
stars, (81) arid constructed the configurations arid images of the zodiac and
its manifold divisions, together with the fixed star constellations, and
she determined the proportional arrangement of the stars within and without
the zodiac belt. The material forms of all lower things depend on these
"well-ordered forms"(82) in a dependence of mutual interplay arid resonance,
or reciprocal synchronous signification, not one of linear development
through cause arid effect. The various changeable celestial formations all
proceed from the stable seminal reasons implanted in the heavenly bodies,
which in turn derive from the transcendent Intellectual Forms, and the
Forms themselves are eventually reducible to the . The seminal reasons,
when in their pristine condition contained within the Soul, are united;
-271-

when distributed arid sowed in stars, daemons or earthly substances, they
are necessarily separated out. This idea provides a philosophical
explanation for the contemplative perception of the fundamental unity of
all things In the world, which lies beyond a discursive, logical analysis
of their inmediate, peculiar concrete reality and separateness. Ficino
5tresses that the particular attributes and endowments of individuals are
produced by the World Soul
"not so much with the aid of celestial forms arid figures as
by the location of the individual stars and the relation of
the motions and aspects of the planets both among themselves
arid with respect to the stars which are above the
planets.183) (my italics)
In other words, the planets play no active, willful part in the
Installation of particular human attributes; rather, their various
configurations and aspects both amongst themselves and In relation to the
fixed stars automatically correspond, at any given moment, to a similar
pattern mirrored in the soul of the human being. As Copenhaver puts it,
"men wise enough to recognise the gifts simply took advantage of their
presence, through magic or through prayer".(84) In this elaborate system
of correspondences Ficino places particular emphasis on the Sun which is
reflected in the human microcosm through the physical organ of the heart.
The heart, as the seat of the divine seed in man, conveys qualities of soul
throughout the body, in the same way as the Sun generates the World Soul in
the visible universe:
"Now our own soul beyond the particular forces of our
members puts forth a general force of life everywhere within
us - especially through the heart as the source of the Lire
which is the nearest thing to the soul. In the same way the
World-soul, which is active everywhere, unfolds in every
place its power of universal life principally through the
Sun. Accordingly, some thinkers say the entire Soul, both
In us arid in the universe, dwells in any member but most of
all In the heart and in the Sun."(85)
The heart, as we saw in chapter one, represents a form of knowing from
the depths of the soul rather than the rational analysis of the mind. It
is the meeting place, the place of synthesis and fertile communion, of
Apolline consciousness and Dionysian irrational instinct, and its power may
be increased by the intentional cultivation of solar properties, to be
achieved through the assimilation of substances and activities which
-272-

contain them and particularly on the day and hour of the Sun. Ficino
agrees with the "Arab astrologers" that the fundamental nature of man is
solar,(86) with the additional properties of Mercury and Jupiter
(intelligence and temperance). Saturn is not to be found as a "common
quality" of all men but "he signifies an individual set apart from others,
divine or brutish, blessed or bowed down with the extreme of misery".(87)
The Moon, Venus and Mars signify "affects and actions conunon equally to man

and to the other animals."(88) Ficino stresses that the cultivation of a
particular planet's gifts involves the active participation of the
individual. One encourages the properties to flow by preparing oneself to
receive them in an act of purification - through eating particular foods,
cultivating particular friendships, contemplating images and talismen
composed of particular stones and metals, absorbing particular fragrances
or playing and listening to particular texts set to specifically-chosen
musical harmonies. In this form of magic there is no manipulation of
'occult' forces, but a subjective process of adaptation in order to receive
more powerfully the powers already present in the sensual world:
"For the more powerful the cause, the more ready it is to
act and therefore the more inclined to give. A little
additional preparation, therefore, on our part suffices
to capture the gifts of the celestials, provided each
accomodates himself to that gift in particular to which
he is particularly subiect."(89)
We attract Saturn, for example, through indulging in the Saturnine
pursuits of philosophy, solitude and magic; the Moon, through a "vegetable
existence".(90) In this context, Ficino gives the general rule that
"solemn music belongs to Jupiter and the Sun, merry music to Venus, the
middle sort to Mercury"(91) and specifies that, in considering an
individual's particular needs, one would have to know the ruling planet of
his natal chart, "beg grace from that star rather than from another", and
await its gift.(92) Ficino stresses, giving the 'Arabes' as his
authorities, that this magic works through the coincidence of outer and
inner - the application of the human spirit to the world spirit achieved
both through "physical science and our affect"(93) - a combination of
'objective' knowledge of correspondences and astrological methodology, and
the 'subjective' emotional response of intent and desire.

-273-

Ficino considers the power of music arid words in his magic in chapters
XXI and XXII of De vita coelltus comparanda. But in the preceding chapters
he prepares the reader by discussing the probable means by which images and
inscribed figures effect physical arid psychological changes - and since
audible music can be compared to "figures in motion", the same theories
apply. "You are not unaware that harmonious music through its numbers and
proportions has a wonderful power to calm, move, and influence our spirit,
mind and body994) says Ficino, explaining that music acts in the same way
as astrological figures (that is, the varying aspects made by the planets
and stars between themselves at any given monent in their perpetual
cycles), affecting our bodily temperament arid inner harmony: "by their
harmonious rays arid motions penetrating everything, they daily influence
our spirit secretly just as overpowering music does openly."(95) Ficino
again hints here at the two most important conditions for the efficacy of
natural magic: knowledge of the very particular quality of a particular
moment, and intuition of the occult properties of the stars arid planets.
The coincidence of planetary configuration with earthly event (such as the
playing of music, making of an image, use of a medicine) is crucial, arid
man has the responsibility to put his free-will to use in electing such
times to obtain maximum benefit:
"just as a given thing is fortunately born and coalesces and
is preserved not elsewhere than here nor at any other time
but just then, so also such or such a material action,
motion, or event does not obtain full or perfect efficacy
except when the celestial harmony conduces to it from all
sides. " (96)
The notion of the occult or secret properties of matter, that is, those
Influential qualities beyond sense perception but nevertheless profoundly
affecting our own psychological balance through their effect on the
splrltus is central to Ficino's magic. These qualities may be hidden, but
they are natural, arid as such the Magus who perceives them is a natural
philosopher and not a conjuror.(97) In his late work De Sole, Ficino talks
of the "two lights" of the Sun and stars, one visible arid obvious, the
other innate but beyond the scope of our senses: "Clearly all heavenly
things have brought with them their own light at their birth, but it
escapes our notice, being either Infinitesimal, or hidden from us, or with
a certain fineness and brilliance, or for another reason."(98) It Is this
occult ray which, he believes, can implant hidden powers in images. It
-274-

carries gifts from the imaginations and minds of the stars and planets as
ensouled beings, comprising a force which gains its intensity from both
their mental dispositions and the rapid motions of their bodies. This ray
acts on the spirit which is most similar to it In nature according to the
particular property of the star or planet from which it emanates - in an
Instant a particular colDbination of rays will fall and connect with a
material which is either especially prepared to receive it, or attracted by
natural affinity. This is made possible, Ficino says, because air (and to
a lesser extent, sound) "passes right away through solid things and
Influences them with a quality of its own."(99)
The art of understanding the planetary and stellar significations in
order to attract the occult benefits of thIr rays at the most propitious
times Is acknowledged by Ficino to be very difficult: "It is truly a
discipline of special importance to grasp correctly which spirit, which
force, which thing these planets especially signify."(100) Ficino's use of
the word significant here is crucial - it is Important not to Imagine that
he is referring to any direct, causal action when he adopts Al-Kindi's ray
theory to explain the co-Incidence and Inter-penetration of cosmic and
human spirit.(1O].) Rather, the 'ray' theory would appear to be a
metaphorical way of explaining the Instantaneous, synchronous connection of
above and below which results in an overwhelming sense of meaningfulness
and participation in a 'play of forces' beyond one's control. We have seen
that Ficino hinelf experienced such a meaningful coincidence .after singing
a hymn to the Cosmos (see page 191), where he refers to a "certain inspired
heavenly instigation" (celesti quodam afflatus Instinctu) at work, bringing
him the benefit of Cosimo's patronage.
Certainly the reader of De vita coeiltus co.paranda would have to be an
expert astrologer to put Ficino's magic into practice. His detailed
instructions on the observation of planetary qualities and aspects implies

a continual awareness of the movement of the heavens, in particular the
phases and aspects of the Moon. She acts as a transmitter of the benefits
of the three most benefic planets, the Sun, Jupiter and Venus, (which
Ficino names "the three Graces") (102) to things below, and her movements
must be closely observed when choosing the right time to sculpt an image,
take a medicine, pick a herb, or perform an incantation. One should also
ensure that the planet whose Influence one wishes to cultivate is In its
-275-

dignity and term, (103) and take note of rulerships for particular parts of
the body. This was of course standard medical practice - but Ficino
extends the notion of 'health' to all mental and bodily activity. Above
all, he reconds cultivating the power of Jupiter, which contains all the
properties of the Sun, Venus and Mercury and through its temperateness will
regulate the met ions of the heart, natural procreative force and vital
spirit. (104) If one thoroughly grasps the symbolic significance of
planetary characteristics, it is possible to order life-experiences,
surroundings and even friends consciously, to achieve maximum correlation
with both one's innate nature as symbolized by a natal horoscope, and with
the current disposition of the heavens.(105) This, suggests Ficino, cannot
be done unless one keeps mind and body in active imitation or counterimitation of planetary movements. Stagnation of mind or body would prevent
any point of contact arising, for it must be a two-way process of
interaction between above and below:
"When you fear Mars, set Venus opposite. When you fear
Saturn, use Jupiter. And see to it that you engage in some
continual motion, just so you avoid weariness; and make sure
that your own motion is the opposite of the external motions
which are secretly going to harm you, and that you imitate
so far as possible the action of the heavens. But if you
can pass through larger spaces in your motion, you will
thereby imitate the heavens all the more and will, get in
contact with more of the strengths of the celestials which
are diffused everywhere."(106)
The aim is to render oneself more receptive, to refine perception and
sensibility and, most importantly, to bring the physical dimension of
existence into harmony with the purified mind, as the 'music of the body'
is expressed in ritual dance:
"While experiencing ... the motion of shining water, of
clear air, of a fire that is not too close, and of the sky,
you will receive the motion of the life of the world; if you
yourself also move lightly, and in almost the same way executing as many gyrations as you can without dizziness,
traversing the celestial bodies with your eyes, and
revolving them in your mind."(107)

Later in the work Ficino describes the feeding of the 'spiritual body'
with the subtle counterparts to the gross elements, wine for earth, odour
of wine for water, sound and song for air and light for fire.(108) The two
'higher' elements of air and fire are ascribed to Apollo, and the two lower
-276-

of earth and water to his "brother and inseparable companion" (109) - thus
the Apollonine and Dionysian aspects of existence are married in the
intermingling of the elements and the absorption of their fine qualities -

abundant taking of vine (as long as drunkenness was avoided) was highly
recommended by Ficino, who apparently carried a flask around with him for
(one assumes) spiritual nouristmient.(110) Purification of the spirit
should lead to the transcendence of earthly materiality through
transforming and refining it, which vii]. liberate the man from domination

by his instinctual desires and the strengthen his conscious will. In an
earlier letter to the Cardinal of Aragon Ficino uses the ray metaphor to
illustrate this process of cleansing and polishing, which he sees to be
accomplished through the complementary experiences of philosophical
reasoning and religious faith:
"Hen's minds are the eternal and everlasting rays of (the
sun enveloped by the black cloud of the body, but through
reasoning and desire they may choose to reflect themselves
back into their sun. Rays certainly bounce back just as
from their beginning they sprang forth. Therefore, since
ninds at any time can flow back into their sun by any
uplifting method they choose, be it pious contemplation or
right loving, they must have flowed out naturally from
there, that is from eternity itself ."(111)
All astrological techniques lead, for Ficino, to this end. The
splrltus, being Jovial, Solar, Venereal and Mercurial in nature is
naturally inclined to attract similar properties from the splrltus mundi
and convey them to the organs of the body - "a healthy spirit does not have
much in co'imon with Saturn, Mars or the Hoon"(112) says Ficino, for these
planets are heavy with melancholy, irascibility and natural instinct.
However, he departs from tradition in recommending the potential beneficial
effects of Mars and Saturn when used homeopathically as antidotes ("just as
doctors sometimes use poisons")(113), and especially in his radical
understanding of the power of Saturn as a significator of philosophical
speculation. The steady pursuit of Saturnine occupations may recall the
spirit from the outer to the inner faculties and aid contemplation of "the
more secret and the higher subjects." (114) In conformity with the
spirltus, light, colour, odours, "motions of the mind" and musical sound
may, as carriers of 'occult' gifts, directly affect the mind and thence the
body - and music in particular may induce vivid emotional 'affects' when
combined with a text:
-277-

"Sounds and songs which are pleasing and agreeable pertain
to all the aces and to Mercury; sounds which are quite
threatening and fearful, however, represent Saturn and
Mars . "(115)
This is the general principle behind Ficino's astrological music-making,
which he will elaborate in some detail. But to consider why and how such
music may affect both performer and listener we must consider his attitude
towards the therapeutic use of images as tools for aligning psyche with
cosmos.

4.5. Images
Ficino is extremely careful when discussing the possible power of
engraved or sculpted images. (116). He continually einphasises that
medicines taken internally will prove more efficacious(U7) and insists
that if images do appear to affect the wearer or observer, it is due rather
to the latent occult power of the material from which the image is made, or
which is released when the material is pounded and heated. (118) He
reassures the reader that his detailed consideration of images is merely a
reporting of what "others" think about them in the course of his
Interpreting Plotinus - these "others" being either quoted as 'magicians
and astrologers', Arabs or Egyptlans.(119) As a priest, Ficino could not
appear to approve of what could be seen as idolatrous image-worshipping,
roundly condemned by St. Augustine, (120) although as a natural magician
prepared to experiment with anything which might prove conducive to
spiritual or bodily health one suspects an attraction to the ancients'
convictions on this matter which he is continually at pains to conceal.
"Many justly doubt whether [engraved I images ... have any celestial power.
I also often doubt it, and, were it not that all antiquity and all
astrologers think they have a wonderful power, I would deny It"CL21) he
protests, adding "I ... have warned you here at the outset that you must
not think I approve the use of images, only recount it."(122)
Brian Copenhaver has pointed out that Ficino had some difficulty In
reconciling the theurgic practices of Iaablichus and the thaldaean Oracles
(whose ultimate aim was pore gnosls or union with the e) with Plotinus'
magic of natural correspondence, and with his thristian convictions : "If
-278-

the Platonist in Ficino was perhaps tempted to follow this sublime path in
his magic, the thristian in him must have trembled to aim so high except
through rituals sanctioned by the thurch"(123) suggests Copenhaver, nicely
encapsulating

Ficino's dileiia in reconciling his unbounded intuitions

and "fundamental P].atonist yearning" with the limitations imposed on their
written expression by ecclesiastical authority. However, Ficino's life and
work stand as testimony to the unshakeable unity of being he pursued
through the coeçleaentary paths of philosophy and religion: Ficino the
Platonic iagus and Ficino the thristian were not divided except, we may
ass, in the minds of the "petty philosophers". In his Apology to the
Llber de vita Ficino anticipates such opposition:
"The title IDe vital will act as a pleasant bait, then, and
viii attract as many as possible to tate of it; bit in such
a great number, a good many will be ignorant ... and not a
few malicious to boot. Someone therefore will say: Marsilio
is a priest, isn't he? Indeed he is. What business then do
priests have with medicine or, again, with astrology?
Another will say: What does a thristian have to do with
magic or images? And someone else, unworthy of life, will
begrudge life to the heavens."( 124)

Copenhaver sees a "tension between Ficino 's learning and his faith" (125)
revealed in the De vita - rather, I feel, the tension is to be found
between Ficino and the traditional views of the thurch authorities to which
he was subject.(126) The fact that the Liber

de vita is intended to be of

practical use, and that seven out of twenty-six chapters of part three are
concerned with artificial images would in itself suggest more than mere
curiosity on Ficino's part. However, he professes to adhere to the
constraints stipulated by Thomas Aquinas(127) - that inscriptions and
characters on talismans are to be condemned as they have no natural power
in themeelves and may be wilfully directed towards daemons, bit that a
representation of an astrological figure, a reflection of the "celestial
countenance", may catch the force of that celestial figure through natural
attraction and sympathetic resonance, (128) and Ficino conf Irma this opinion
"Insofar as (the engraved figures) are made at the right
time when the celestial ones are dominant and are made to
conform exactly to them ... when one lute sounds, does not
another echo it? It only does so If it has a similar shape
(figuraml and Is placed opposite, and the strings on it are
similarly placed and tuned."(129)

-279-

The archetypal forms of a sphere or a cross will be particularly
powerful receivers and dispositors of occult influence, (130) but any
inscribed or engraved imitative images will be of the sa iter1al
property as light, odours and sound - they prepare the matter on which they
are depicted to receive the most potent concentration of celestial
influence which is then transmitted to the wearer, onlooker or listener:
"You should not doubt, they say, that the material for
making an image, if it is in other respects entirely
consonant with the heavens, once it has received by art a
figure similar to the heavens, both conceives in itself the
celestial gift and gives it again to someone who is in the
vicinity or wearing it."(131)
It is the physical act of carving, or we might say of striking the
strings of the lyre, at the astrologically propitious moment, which opens
the channel for effective interchange and correspondence, which can be
greatly intensified by additional rituals:
"(the Arabs and Egyptians think that] through rays caught at
the right tine and through fumigations, lights and lot
tones (tonosque vehe.entesl, the spirits of the stars can be
introduced into the compatible materials of images and can
work wonders on the wearer or bystander."(132)
Unless one 'enters into the play of forces' in the Plotinian sense, by
putting oneself into a participatory role and wholeheartedly desiring a
benefit, astrological sympathetic 'magic' can only remain a quaint and
ineffective theory. Ficino says the gifts from the celestial souls will
overflow to the human soul exposed to them "not so much by some natural
ans as by the election of free will or by affection". (133) When the will
and feeling are both fully engaged in the operation, when the human spirit
Is "intent upon the work and upon the stars through Imagination and
emotion", then it may join the cosmic spirit and "a certain vital power"
(vlvlda quaedai vlrtus]

is poured into the image (or song), "especially a

power which is consistent with the spirit of the operator."(134) A spirit
thus purified will naturally be attracted by another similar to It in
nature, and may transfer the "vital power" to the other. (135) It cannot be
emphasised too strongly that the efficacy of Ficino's use of visible or
audible images relies on the fervent emotional participation of the
operator - "yearning vehemently" (veheaenter affectet)(136) for an effect,
having unremitting faith in the celestial influence and above all in love
-280--

as the agent of spiritual transformation viii lure a particular gift. The
procedure is reciprocal - love attracts the benefit and the benefit
provokes the love, in a dynamic interplay of microcosmic and macrocosmic
forces:
"Now ... love and faith toward a celestial gift are often
the cause of celestial aid; and love and faith in their turn
perhaps sometimes originate from this fact - that the
kindness of the heavens is already befriending us for this
very gift."(137)
Ficino would appear to have realised the notion elaborated by Jung that
an archetype cannot be adequately represented unless emotion is added to
its image, as Jung explains in Man and his Symbols:
"(Archetypes I are at the same time, both Images and
emotions. C*ie can speak of an archetype only when these two
aspects are simultaneous. When there is merely the image,
then there is simply a word-picture of little consequence.
But by being charged with emotion, the image gains
numinosity (or psychic energy); it becomes dynamic, and
consequences of some kind must flow from it. . . [Archetypes I
are Images that are integrally connected to the living
individual by the bridge of the emotions."(138)
The "secret mutual connivance"(139) between observer and observed, or

between the stuff of the cosmos and the psychic state of the
'aagician'/astrologer, provides the very key to the effectiveness of
Ficino 's music-therapy.

4.5. The power of words and song
thapter XXI of De vita coelitus coaparanda is devoted to 'The power of
words and song for capturing celestial benefits', and it is here that
Ficino gives us his rules for composing, or improvising, astrological
music. He begins by suggesting that the power of emotionally-charged
spoken words may intensify the effect of an image - again attributing the
idea to, we may infer, Arabs and Egyptians: (140) "they hold that certain
words pronounced with a quite strong emotion have great force to aim the
effect of Images precisely where the emotions and words are directed. "1141)
The argument of Thomas Aquinas, that Inscribed words are 'unnatural' and
must therefore Inevitably be addressed to daemonIc intelligences, is not
-281-

understood by Ficino to apply to spoken or sung words in the Pythagorean
tradition of musical healing. In fact he makes a point of disapproving of
'incantations' which were aimed at any manipulation of intervening daemons,
emphasising "we are not teaching philtres bit medicine". (142) The
implication is that we are to .inderstand Ficino's own use of music in
ritual to be of another order, and he is able to gain all the more credence
through the writings of his neo-platonic authorities on the power of words
- Origen, Synesius, Al-Kindi, Zoroaster and Iambi ichus. (143) He also had
evidence of the morally therapeutic use of words and music in the practices
of his supreme master Pythagoras and the neo-platonist Proclus , who also
sang Orphic Hymns. He would have read in Tamblichus' Life of Pythagoras
that Pythagoras derived his musical practices from the disciples of Orpheus
hielf - and it was Orpheus, as both ancieril theologian and inspired
musician, who provided Ficino with a perfect model for his speculative and
active music-making.
It is undoubtedly the underlying philosophical assumptions which lend
such weight and authority to Ficino's natural magic. In his Coiientary on
Plato's CharIdes we find the following rationale for the use of verbal
prayers or orations in the process of tempering the soul and body:
"The Hag! promise iuiaortality to bodies with their religious
songs (caralnlbus). In his Alciblades Plato says that the
magic of Zoroaster is none other than divine worship;
moreover he adds that both the soul and body are tempered
either for ever or at least preserved from death for a long
time not so much by magical songs/incantations, but also by
philosophical reasoning. Indeed that utterance I ora t I o]
which may be directed towards the complete temperance of the
listener, and attain it, requires two things most powerfully
- both the power infused by God, and the knowledge furnished
by philosophy. Plato called an utterance composed from
these two things a magical incantation; with which first
Phoebus, then the Pythagorearis miraculously dispelled
diseases from soul and body ."(144)
Ficino agrees with Socrates that it is extremely difficult to achieve a
"harmonic tempering" of both the parts of the body and the parts of the
soul, and that the work of attuning the whole being with the heavens is
infused with both celestial and supra-celestial powers, through
corresponding affinities of mind, knowledge and words (tun anlio, tum
ratlonlbus, et verbls).(145)
-282-

In a letter to Bartolomeo della Fonte Ficino gives the astrological

association of Mercury with the Sun and Venus as poetic justification for
the inextricable relationship of the nrical and rhythmic properties of

music with fine speech:
"Were we ever allowed to hear [Mercuryl speak, we should
frequently hear him mingling the melodies of his lyre vith
his words, particularly since he is always totally united,
or at least closely linked, with Phoebus, the father of
serious music, and with Venus, the mother of lighter music
"(146)

But for Ficino the supreme precedent for the power of verse cc*thined
with rhythm and harmony to move both performer and listener is given by
Plato's notion of poetic frenzy in Ion and Phaedrus.(147) In the letter
quoted earlier to Peregrino Agli (page 256) Ficlno echoes the Platonic
conviction that the inspired performers are not those who merely use voices
and instruments to create pleasant harmonies, but those who know how to
imitate the "inner reason and knowledge" of the heavens in their
declamation of lyric poetry:
"It is these, who, inspired by the divine spirit, give
forth with full voice the most solemn and glorious song
For the more superficial kind which I have just
mentioned does no more than soothe with the sweetness of
the voice, but poetry does what is also proper to divine
harmony. It expresses with fire the most profound, and
as a poet would say, prophetic meanings, in the numbers
of voice and movement. Thus not only does it delight the
ear, but brings to the mind the finest nourishment, most
like the food of the gods; and so seen to come very
close to God."(148)

Ficino's discrimination between 'magic' incantations intended for
manipulative, self-seeking purposes, and those which arise from the humility of
the devout poet who becomes a channel for a divine power thus justifies his
emphasis on musical and verbal ritual in De vita coel I tus coiparanda. In the
movement downwards through the neo-platonic chain of being from spirit to
matter, reflected in the hierarchical rank of the planets from Saturn to the
Noon, Ficino describes seven corresponding steps or stages of manifestation.
Words, sounds and song, all dedicated to Apollo or the Sun, are found in the
fourth, central position, midway between the material concerns of the Moon,
Mercury and Venus and the imaterial, emotional and spiritual domains of ttars,
Jupiter and Saturn. Ficino tells us that he is giving this 'octave' of
-283--

correspondences in order to show the similitode of medical compounds, concocted
with astrological knowledge, to music specially composed according to planetary
significations:
"tones (ton is I first chosen by the rule of the stars and
then combined according to the congruity of these stars with
each other make a sort of cc*on form, and in it a celestial
power arises. It is indeed very difficult to Jodge exactly
what kinds of tones are suitable for what sort of stars,
what combinations of tones especially accord with what sorts
of constellations and aspects. But we can attain this,
partly through our own efforts, partly by some divine chance
[divina guadam sortel.(149)
Htman diligence and divine intervention, the latter being dependent on
the former, combine in a performer thoroughly grounded in musical and
rhetorical technique and theory who then allows himself to became seized by
the furor poet icus. The astrological music, Ficino suggests here, is
improvised or composed according to the practiner 's knowledge of

mis ical/astrological theory (perhaps involving traditional analogies
between modes, intervals and planets) and his intuitive, unreflected
inspiration. The astrologer/musician would intensify the effect of his
music by taking into account the 'pattern' or 'model' (norma] of the
heavens, choosing tones or intervals which correspond to this pattern, then
composing them into an order and harmony which in some way imitates this
musica aundana, in the re-creation of the harmonious Intervals which
underlie the very structure of the cosmos. Before giving us his rules for
composition, Ficino again stresses that this procedure in no way involves
wilful action on the part of the stars, but is a method for the vise man to
adapt himself to "the occult and wonderful gifts" of the stars' natural
influence. (150) Ficino's three rules for "accomnodating our songs to the
stars" are somewhat musically unspecific but demand expert understanding of
astrological symbol isa:
"1 first (rule] is to inquire diligently what powers in
itself or what effects from itself a given star (stella],
constellation (sydus] or aspect has - what do they remove,
what do they bring? - and to insert these into the meaning
of our words, so as to detest what they remove and approve
what they bring. The second rule is to take note of what
special star rules what place or person and then to observe
what sorts of tones and songs these regions and persons
generally use, so that you may supply similar ones, together
with the meanings I have just mentioned, to the words which
you are trying to expose to the same stars. Thirdly,
observe the daily positions and aspects of the stars and
-284-

discover to what principal speeches, songs, motions, dances,
moral behaviour, and actions most people are usually incited
by these, so that you may imitate such things as far as

possible in your song, which aime to please the particular
part of heaven that resembles them and to catch a similar
influx. "(151)

The power of such a song, says Fictho, will provoke both singer and
aflence to imitate the qualities it itself is imitating through Its action
on the airy spiritus, which is akin to it by nature.(152) This music-

spirit is conceived by Ficino to be like a living animal, composed of warm
air, "still breathing and somehow living". (153) It carries both emotion
and meaning, and its influence will depend in part on its congruence with
the heavens and in part with the "disposition of the imagination"
(1.aginationis at fectua) of the singer the meaningfulness of the

experience being dependent on the synchroniclty of 'outer' and 'inner',
objective and subjective dimensions. The singer must be a finely-tuned
instrument whose quality of spirit has been rendered strong and solar, for
such "vital and animal power" (vitaii5 anlialisque virtus) will readily
attract the music-spirit - particularly if, in addition to the rules
already mentioned, the ritual is also conducted at a suitably elected
astrological hour. The three essential requirements for the conception of
such a music-spirit are therefore the vital, solar power of the singer's
own spirit, the propitious moment and the singer's intention, which
involves and unites the desire of his heart and the focussing of his

imagination. Then, Ficino suggests, both mental and physical diseases may
be dispelled or induced "since a musical spirit of this kind properly
touches and acts on the spirit which is the mean between body and soul, and
inmediately affects both the one and the other with its influence."(154)
We are given some idea of the various musical characteristics of each
planet. Ficino stresses that all music proceeds from Apollo, but that
Jupiter, Venus and Mercury are also musical to the extent that they
naturally partake of solar qualities. However, Saturn, Mars and the Moon
"have voices Evoces] but no song [cantus]". To understand this distinction
one must go back to Aristotle, (155) where he distinguishes between sonus
and vox. Vox refers to "a particular sound made by something with a soul
and has a certain significance";(156) that is, a sound with meaning. It
can also mean a named pitch.(157) Ficino is here equating vox with the
-285-

Aristotelian sonus, and cantus with his vox. He describes the voices of
Saturn as "slow, deep, harsh and plaintive", those of Mars "quick, sharp,
fierce and menacing, and the lunar ones of an intermediate quality. (158)
As for the music of the other planets,
"The music of Jupiter is deep, earnest, sweet and joyful
with stability. To Venus, on the contrary, we ascribe songs
voluptuous with wantonness and softness. The songs between
these two extremes we ascribe to the Sun and )rcury: if
with their grace and smoothness they are reverential,
simple, and earnest, the songs are judged to be Apollo's; if
they are somewhat more relaxed, along with their gaiety, but
vigorous and complex, they are Hercury's. "(159)
Ficino instructs us to use "their songs", with appropriate musical
sounds, at the right hour (when the petitioned planet is 'dlgnified')(160)
to so purify the human spirit that it will naturally attract the response
of the planetary spirit:
"When at the right astrological hour you declaim aloud by
singing and playing in the manners we have specified for the
four gods, they seem to be just about to answer you like an
echo or like a string in a lute trembling to the vibration
of another which has been simflarly tuned."(161)
Ficino mentions that a prayer, like a song, achieves its effects through
a similar natural power "when it has been suitably and seasonably composed

arid is full of emotion and forceful".(162) Certainly his own practice of
reciting the hymns of Orpheus to the lyra combined musical skill with
invocation to particular deities - and these texts would appear to be the
most appropriate candidates for the kind of astrological singing specified
in de vita coelltus coaparanda. As Pico della Mirandola - Ficino's frater
•ysticus in his spiritual alchemy(163) - stated in his Concluslones,
"Nothing is more effective in natural magic than the hymns of Orpheus, if
the correct music, Intent of the soul and other circumstances known to the
vise were to be applied."(164) However, although Ficino himself
undoubtedly used the hymns for such religious, ritual purposes, his 'rules
for composition' do not exclude the possibility of specially-composed words
to suit a particular individual - indeed he would hardly expect his
Intended readership to to have access to the Orphic texts or necessarily
find them meaningful.

-286-

The gifts which are attracted through the 'occult' powers of the stars
when the spirit is exposed in this way may, as we have seen, also be
enticed through the use of images, medicines and odours. But they may
equally be harnessed through affinity of soul, rather than of matter,
vapour or air. So beyond the Solar domain of music and dancing we find
"well-accorded concepts and motions of the imagination" (Mars), "fitting
discourses of reason" (Jupiter) and "tranquil contemplations of the mind"
(Saturn), all of which may reap the benefits of these three higher planets
all the more powerfully than "inferior things" due to their greater
affinity of nature.(165). We may imagine, for example, that unguents might
accoITmodate one to receive the harmonising influence of Venus, but would
not be so useful in attracting the intellectual actmn of Jupiter. For
this reason, Saturn is greatly propitious to intellectual contemplation,
but experienced as hostile to those still caught up in worldly affairs or
emotional concerns (the spheres of Jupiter and Mars). The imagination,
reason and understanding are all located in the soul, and Ficino suggests
here that when these three planets are invoked it is the soul, rather than
the body, which is directly affected. There follows, in chapter XXII, a
eulogy to Saturn as the true philosopher's gold, the planet signifying the
extremes of misery or the capacity to transcend fate. For the average
human being, Saturn signifies worldly frustration, struggle and melancholy,
and needs to be tempered by good doses of Jupiter, in an allopathic cure of
the compensation of opposites. However, for the true contemplative Saturn
of fers an incomparable gift of intellectual union with the divine mind
itself.(166) That Ficino was preoccupied with the trials and tribulations
of Saturn, and with the compensatory temperance of Jupiter, reflects the
astrological symbolism of his own natal horoscope which is dominated by a
Saturn-Jupiter opposition across the horizon (the ascendant-descendant
axis) . (167) His advice to those of overly Saturnine temperament to seek
out Jovial friends is based on personal experience, as he writes to the
Archbishop of Maif 1:
"You have divined, I think, how much I have long wanted to
live my life with someone of a Jovial nature, so that
something of a bitter, and as I might say, Saturnine
element, which either my natal star has bestowed on me or
which philosophy has added, might eventually be alleviated
by the sweet fellowship of someone born under Jove."(168)

-287-

coelitus coaparanda Ficino is essentially concerned with
finding Jupiter, that is, the fire and water of the imagination and the
In Be vita

soul (astrologically Jupiter rules the fiery sign Sagittarius and the
watery sign Pisces) as a healthy counterbalance to the heaviness of an
overindulged duty-bound Saturn (the ruling planet of the earth-sign
Capricorn). This approach to maintaining the health of mind and body
requires an active imagination, willingness to suspend rational Judgements
and preconceived ideas, and above all a sbolic attitude towards every
aspect of life. Too much Sathrn dries and hardens - Jupiter irrigates and
tempers. Ficino has much to say about the conflicts and complements of
these two planets, but this is material for another study. Suffice it to
say here, in the context of Ficino's music-making, that he quotes Orpheus
in the Hyin to Eros as saying that the higher cosmic divinities possess
keys to free us from fate, (169) understood as the blows of fortune which
appear to inevitably correlate with adverse aspects in the heavens. It is
Love-in the Platonic sense of the desire for self-knowledge - which
unlocks the door to free-will arid choice. To achieve this Is to freely
enter the domain of Saturn, where he no longer becomes a threat but a
friend. Ficino knew from his own experience that this freedom, evoked by
Orpheus, could be encouraged by the imitation of the heavens in words and
music. What could be more appropriate to marry to the echo of ausica
aundana than the poetry supposedly steimting from the pen of Orpheus
hiielf?

PAR'!' Tx): Musica Instruientalis
4.7. Orpheus redivlvus

In a letter to Paulus Middelburgensis, written when he was nearly sixty,
Ficino looks back at the astonishing cultural developments he has witnessed
during his lifetime and considers the singing of lyric poetry ad lyraa to
be amongst the greatest achievements of the Florentine Renaissance:
"This age, like a golden age, has brought back to light
those liberal disciplines that were practically
extinguished; granmiar, poetry, oratory, painting,
sculpture, architecture, music, and the ancient singing of
songs to the Orphic lyre. And all this in Florence".(l)
-288 -

But it was not only Ficino who held this revival of classical ideals in
such high esteem - for many of his friends arid contemporaries Ficino's own
musical skill recalled that of the legendary poet-musician Orpheus himself,
whilst his re-discovery of the hymns attributed to Orpheus added a theurgic
dimsnsion to his singing which excited the humanists in their enthusiasm to
re-create the ancient rhetorical practices of the Greeks, with their
ethical and therapeutic aims. Ficino's friend Johannes Pannonius wrote to
him that some astrologers had foretold that he would revive the study of
ancient philosophy, arid that
"they added to confirm their judgement, that at a certain
destined tims you would restore to the light the ancient
sound of the cithara, arid the singing, arid the Orphic hymns
which had previously been consigned to oblivion."(2)
Ficino's close friend and fellow Academician, the poet Poliziano (whose
own semi-opera, or tavola 'Orfeo' was produced in Mantua in 1480) wrote:
"His lyre ... far more blessed with good fortune than the
lyre of Thracian Orpheus, has brought back from the
underworld what is, if I am not mistaken, the true
Eurdice, that is Platonic wisdom with its broadest
understanding. "(3)
Another friend sent a gift of a shirt from Poland with the words: "This
foreign costume will make you a true Orpheus, since you already have his
singing and his lyre"(4) arid in a poetic conceit, Naldo Naldi wrote of how
the soul of Orpheus passed by transmlgrat ion through the bodies of Homer,
Pythagoras and Ennius before being reincarnated in Ficino. (5) He also
wrote an epigram to the figure of Orpheus painted on Ficino's cythara which was possibly a lira da bracclo, but more likely some sort of harp
(see pages 318-9) - praising the power of Orpheus to move trees arid wild
beasts(6). Ficino's patron, friend and fellow Platonic enthusiast, Lorenzo
de' Medici, wrote that Marsillo's lyre was none other than the one placed
amongst the constellations by the gods,(7) iimnortalising him in his poem
L'Altercazlone: when wandering in the countryside musing on the conflicts
of court arid country life, Lorenzo is stilled by the sound of Marsllio's
lyre:
"... una nuova voce a Se gli trasse
Da pii harmonia legati e presi,
Pensal che Qrfeo al morido ritornasse
-289 -

o quel che chiuse Tebe col suon degno,
SI dolce lira ml parea sonasse."(8)
"I thought that Orpheus had returned to the world."
And from his friend, the poet and scholar Bishop Campano who was
passing through Florence in 1471, we have an eye-witness account of Ficino
jn performance, seized by divine frenzy:
"If curly-haired Apollo plays upon Marsilio's cithara,
Apollo falls defeated In both dexterity of hand and his
singing. And there is frenzy; when he sings, as a lover to
the singing of his beloved, he plucks his lyre in harmony
with the melody and rhythm of the song. Then his eyes
burn, he leaps to his feet and he discovers music which he
never learnt by rote."(9)
Ficino himself confirms this ability to arouse a sympathetic reaction in
his audience when he writes to Alessandro Braccio that he had been
performing some of his verses, which were truly the work of an inspired
poet, "filled with the music and frenzy of the Muses" since his performance
of them ad cltharai roused both himself and his listeners to frenzy. (10)
But Ficino was no self -aggrandising artist. He accepted others' praise
with an attitude of humble deference: "You praise my lyre", he writes to
Giovanni Aurelio, "with songs worthy of praise. I, in turn, will praise
your songs with the lyre. Would that my lyre were worthy of praise so that
what you say were true."(11) Not only was Ficino so gifted - he mentions
to Bernardo Rucellai that he heard Lorenzo de' Medici, "moved by divine
frenzy", sing prayers to the lyre, (12) and we know that Pico della
Mirandola and Baccio Ugolini, both members of the Academy, were skilled
performers. (13) But such music-making was not for mere entertainment - as
we have seen, it formed an integral part of Ficino's prograim of
psychological balancing arid tempering. To Sebastiano Pores I, a poet arid
musician who both made and played the lira he writes "we play the lyre
precisely to avoid becoming unstrung ... may the well-tempered lyre always
be our salvation when we apply ourselves to it rightly" (14) and gives us
several examples of his own resorting to music to ease the stresses of his
study-prone Saturnine temperament. To Pores I again:
"after I wrote 'farewell' to you, dear Foresi, I got up arid
hurriedly picked up my lyre. I began a long song from the
Orphic liturgy. You also, in your turn, when you have read
this 'farewell' again, if you are vise, will get up without
-290 -

delay, and pick up your lyre willingly, the sweet solace
for labour."(15)
The friendship of Foresi and Ficino was consolidated by their making
music together - "for I speak to others with tongue or pen, but often to
you with plectrum and lyre" (16):
"What are you doing today, my Forest? Are you playing the
lyre? Take heed that you do not play it without 1rsilioI
Otherwise, if you break faith with me, the strings of your
lyre will sound completely out of tune to you. As often as
I sing with my lyre, I sing in harmony with you."(17)
To Giovanni Cavalcanti, who accused him of complaining too much about
the trials of Saturn, he wrote
"You comiand me, my Giovanni, to sing a hymn of recantation
to Saturn, about whom I have recently complained a great
deal ... I accuse a certain melancholy disposition, a thing
which seen to be very bitter unless, having been softened,
it may in a measure be made sweet for us by frequent use of
the lyre."(18)
We can see from these examples and anecdotes that music-making played an
important part in Ficino's every-day life - but it must not be forgotten
that it was the ritual aspect of the performance, the role of music and
words as elements of an intentional 'magical' operation where 'diligence
and divine chance' combined to effect psychological transformation, which
stirred the magus in him. The power of appropriate music at an appropriate
time could lead the soul to 're-member' itself in an act of iimnense
spiritual significance, as Ficino reminds Forest with the words "may the
well-tempered lyre always be our salvation when we apply ourselves to it
rightly".(19) We have seen, in the example of his early letter to Cosimo
(page 190), that Ficino was alert and sensitive to the synchronous and
meaningful correlations between his ritual hymn-singing and outer events.
We find another, somewhat humorous, example of this playful symbolic
attitude in a letter to his great friend Giovanni Cavalcanti, whom he would
like to visit him at careggi.(20) Ficino says that he often whilst walking
at sunrise through the woods, prayed to Apollo with his lyre, for as
Orpheus moved oaks and stones with his playing, so he, Ficino, should be
able to move the wooden and stony Giovanni to Careggi. But Apollo replies
that his prayers will not work, for Giovanni is not made of stone and wood
-291 -

but of iron. He says Ficino had better use the magical art of Zoroaster to
transform the stone of the hills into a magnet, and draw his friend there
by force. So, says Ficino, that is what he is trying to do, but it seems
to be in vain. It would be so much better and easier than trying to change
stones by this work if Giovanni vould just change his mind and decide to
visit - for as long as he wants to remain iron-like, Ficino's magical
efforts are in vain. On receiving such a letter, how could his friend not
comply with his request? The letter itself achieves the magical effect
which was initiated in the ritual singing, we may imagine, of an Orphic
hymn to Apollo at dawn.

4.8. The Orphic hymns
In Constantinople in 1423 a manuscript of Homeric hymns was found
containing hymns attributed to Callimachus, Orpheus and Proclus. (21) The
Orphic hymns, consisting of epithets in honour of Greek gods, were
evidently used in rituals as they incloded the names of appropriate
fumigations. To the men of the Renaissance they would seem to have stenmed
from the pen of Orpheus himself, revered as both legendary musician and
theologian.(22) I do not intend to consider in detail here the origins of
Orphic cults and practices, or the various historical and mythological
references to Orpheus in antiquity, as this material has been well covered
elsewhere.(23) Suffice it to say that Ficino and his circle had no doubt
about the authenticity of Orpheus' venerable reputation, which embraced two
complementary aspects; the role of a priscus theologus - the founder of an
esoteric mystery religion from whose disciples Pythagoras himself was
believed to have learned his theory of musical proportion underlying all
creation(24) - and that of a magical singer who descended to the underworld
to bring back his wife Euriice.
Religious Orphic rituals were themselves inextricably associated with
Orpheus' skill as a poet and musician. On the famous expedition of the
Argo, Orpheus was the effect-producing singer who stilled the music of the
sirens; (25) in the legend of Orpheus and Eurice he charms tharon with his
song to row him over the river Styx to the underworld. This magical power
inherent in his music which moved stones, animals and men underlines the
-292 -

hamanic aspect of Orpheus' role as a religious leader, a role which for
Ficino was essential as a model for the frenzy-possessed poet who was
inspired directly by God. In his De amore Ficino sees Orpheus' writings as
testimonies to his being seized by all four forms of Platonic frenzy - as a
priest and prophet through his hymns and authority as an ancient
theologian, as a lover through his passion for Eurydice which led him to
the underworld, arid as a musician through his inspired lyre-playing. In
all these guises, Ficino stresses, it is the power of love Which Orpheus
brings into the world. 'Orphic' magic can only be effective by virtue of
the all-pervading force of love, connecting arid co-ordinating all elements
of the cosmos in an aichemical process of four successive stages leading to
ultimate unity with the unus iundus:
The first madness (poetic] tempers the unharmonious and
dissonant things. The second (religious] makes the
tempered things into a single whole from parts. The third
[prophetic] makes It a single whole above parts. The
fourth [amatory] leads it to the One which is above being
and above the whole... That Orpheus was seized by all of
these madnesses, his books can testify."(26)
As an ancient theologian, next in line to Hermes and embodying the first
Greek source of esoteric wisdom, Orpheus' Importance for Ficino as a true
religious arid spiritual authority can hardly be overestimated. Ficino had
the authority for Orpheus' position In this genealogy from tamblichus,
Proclus(27) arid St. Augustine, for whom Orpheus predicted C2rIstIan
truths. (28) His cult in the ancient world appears to be associated with
personal religious need arid purification of the soul rather than with
public cults arid exoteric religious practices - but so many cults and
mysteries were connected with his name that It Is Impossible to identify
specific 'orphic' rituals or find a unity of practice or belief. In
general Orpheus was considered to be the founder of the 'mysteries', and In
the words of Linforth:
"not only the poetry, but the music, the mimetic
representation, the symbolism, the whole action of the
ritual, which, based on significant myth, leads to ecstacy
and religious transport, thus profoundly moving the soul of
man, strenghening It and renewing it, were looked upon as
the 'arts of Orpheus'.(29)

-293 -

We can urxertand how Orpheus as priscus theologus lent such stature to
Ficino's authentic identification with him as a musician and poet.
Fictho's musical relationship with the Orphic hymns, which cannot be
separated from his intellectual excitement at their significance, must date
from very early in his Platonic career • We do not know much about his
early education, bot Della Torre suggests that Ficino had acquired his
musical skills when a boy, perhaps at the hands of Luca da S.
Gemignano. (30) Certainly by the time he received his benefice from Cosimo
he was a skilled improvisor and accompanist, and we have his own words as
evidence that he was interested in natural magic when "still a youth".(31)
As we have seen in the letter to Cosimo, these two interests of music and
magic were united in his singing of Orphic hymns to magical/religious ends
before he embarked on his translations of . Hermes and Plato. Indeed it
would appear that the Orphic hymns, together with the Orphic
Argonautica(32) were among Ficino's first translations from Greek in the
early 1460s. His biographer Giovanni Corsi confirms his hymn-singing as
one of the first results of his excursion into the Greek authors:
"in a short time, when he was thoroughly versed in Greek
literature ... he expounded the hymns of Orpheus, and it is
said that he sang them to the lyre In the ancient style
with remarkable sweetness."(33)
In a letter to Hartinus Uranius over thirty years later,(34) F'Icino
relates how he was reluctant to publish these Orphic translations at the
time lest he be accused of polytheism and demon-worship, arid also because
he had a strong belief in the importance of preserving their 'divine'
content from misunderstanding:
"I have always been reluctant to publish the literal
translations I made In my youth, for my private use, of the
Argonautica and Hymns of Orpheus, Homer and Proclus •.. I
didn't want readers to think I was trying to bring back the
ancient worship of the gods and daemons, now for so long
rightly condemned. For just as the Pythagoreans of old
were careful not to reveal divine things to the vulgar, so
I have always been careful not to make profane things
coon property."(35)
That Cosimo, for one, enjoyed the young Ficino's 'orphic' singing to the
lyre and found it morally uplifting is testified by an affectionate
anecdote. We find Cosimo at Careggi - "not so much for the purpose of
-294 -

improving my fields as myself" - inviting Ficino to come to his villa with
the newly-translated Plato, "for there Is no employment to which 1 50
ardently devote myself as to discover the true road to happiness," He
adds, "Come then, and fail not to bring with you the Orphic lyre. "(36) At
the Platonic Academy, which was flourishing In the 1470s, evenings would
often end with verses sung to the .lira. We read in Della Torre(37) of a
rhetorical exercise (probably taking place in 1473) when Ficino asked five
promising young Academicians to prepare orations to Italian princes, as
encouragement to wage war with the Turks. Five others, including
Poliziano, took the places of the princes. Colucci tells us that everyone
present was so overcome by emotion at the power of Giovanni Cavalcantl 'S
oration that Ficino took up his lyre and sang some verses from the Aeneld
to restore the lost tranquillity.

Why did Ficino consider the texts

of the Orphic hymns to be such

appropriate vehicles for therapeutic ritual invocation? We have already
seen that Pico found them to be most effective for the practices of natural
magic (page 286), and indeed his thirty-one 'Orphic Conclusions' tell us
much about the rarefied mysticism surrounding the use of the hymns in
occult ritual in the Academy. Their meaning could only be intuited by the
initiate, it could not and should not be revealed openly, as the first
conclusion stipulates ("the secret magic first elicited by us from the
hymns of Orpheus must not be expounded in public") (38) and its efficacy
depended on a positive, subjective resolution on the part of the
practitioner:
"Whoever denies that it Is possible to understand
intellectually and perfectly, sensible properties by the
way of secret or occult analogy, will not understand the
essence of the Orphic Hymns .939)
In other words, the hymns became the very means by which sense
perception could be transmuted into intelligible knowledge, and this
process demanded a symbolic attitude towards the world, the Plotinian
capacity to turn round and see with other eyes, to read past the evidence
of the senses and find the deeper significance accessible only to the
intellect. The ability to be led towards greater self-understanding
through using the power of analogy was a prerequisite for finding meaning
in these ritual, incantatory prayers to the Greek gods. Ficino would have
-295 -

been convinced that a supplication to a divinity, carried out with
heartfelt intent and desire, would bring about a psychological
transformation not through a reciprocal action by an externalised deity but
through the Internal workings of the imagination - 'active imaging'
techniques. In this he followed the example of the Platonist Gemisthus
Pletho, who as a visitor to the Council of Florence in 1438-9 was
responsible for Cosimo's determination to revive Plato and thus indirectly
for the Academy itself.
D.P. Walker suggests that Ficino's Orphic singing derived from Pletho's
own ritual hymn-singing.(40) Pletho certainly copied the hymns and
composed his own, with elaborate instructions for singing them, taking into
account the appropriate musical modes, physical postures, days and times of
day. (41) Many of his hymns were addressed to planetary and stellar
deities, in particular the Sun, although as a polytheist and fervent antithristian Pletho also invoked higher, abstract metaphysical principles, a
practice which would have been anathema to Ficino. However, the Intent of
Pletho's religious ritual was the subjective transformation of the
worshipper, and In that he certainly foreshadowed Ficino. In singing such
hymns, he wrote:
"We are moulding and stamping our own imagination and that
part of us which is most akin to the divine ... making our
imagination tractable and obedient to that which is divine
in us."(42)
Ficino knew of the crucial role Pletho played in the revival of
Platonism in Florence,(43) but it is unlikely he had access to any of his
w'ritings.(44) The direct historical link between the two men's hymnsinging is thus tenuous - Pletho's polytheistic paganism and strict
determinist philosophy would not have endeared him to Ficino as a
monotheistic upholder of free-will. But the spiritual link, the intent!o
anial with which they both approached the very use of incantation arid
invocation cannot be denied. For Ficino, the spirit in which one
worshipped must be more important than the external appearance or
peculiarity of the rIte.(45) However, Walker plausibly suggests(46) that a
possible reason for Ficino's reluctance to publish his Orphic translations
might have been a desire not to be seen to be following in the footsteps of
one so antagonistic towards the thristian faith. As far as Pico and
-296 -

Ficino were concerned, the 'gods' of which Orpheus sang were "not ...
deceiving devils .. but they are the names of natural and divine
virtues. "(47) They could find no contradiction between upholding the
ultimate divine principle of unity and recognising the many manifestations
of this divinity as archetypal powers diffused throughout the hierarchy of
creation.

4.9. Haracrnia

In the Pythagorean tradition, the study of number, or harmonic science,
holds the key to both the ordering of the cosmos in its perfect equilibrium
and to its audible representation in musical sound - so it is via harmonia
that we move from the the exalted intellectual intentions behind Orphic
incantations to Ficino's actual performance of them and the stylistic and
musical conventions within which he worked as an iaprovvlsatore.

Ficino's sole excursion into the practical application of musical
harLonla is contained In a letter to his fellow philosopher-musician

Domenico Benjvieni(48) entitled De rationibus ausicae;(49) this letter is
highly significant In that it represents a departure from the rigours of
traditional Pythagorean principles in favour of accomodating the practices
of contemporary performers. Ficino also attempts here to unite the
experience of astrological aspects with the nature of musical intervals providing, perhaps, a key to the 'rules for composition' of his
astrological music set forth in De vita coelitus coaparanda (see page 284).
But before considering this letter in some detail, we must look briefly at
the concept of harmonla as it manifested in the medieval and early
Renaissance theorists' systems of musica mundana, humana and instruentalis
analogies and in their understanding of the inherent expressive properties
of modes; for in formulating his astrological music theory, it is highly
probable that Ficino paid particular attention to the subtle variety of
ethical effects traditionally associated with the differing arrangement of
tones and seinitones within a musical scale. In the De amore he wrote:
"Musicians make acute and grave tones, which are different
by nature, more friendly to each other, by means of certain
intervals and modes. From this derive the composition and
-297 -

sweetness of harmony. They also temper slower and faster
motions to each other in such a way that they become very
goad friends, and produce rhythm and harmony. "(50)
As we saw in chapter one, harronf a in the Pythagorean tradition
encompassed the harmonious relation of the individual or microcosmic part
of the cosmos to the whole, in such a way that each individual became a
reflection of the whole through its attunement to cosmic harmony. (51) The
human soul, consisting of a tripartite divine, human and animal nature, was
considered to be a harmony in itself, the fine tempering of which - the
"tuning of the soul into consonance with the celestial harmony"(52) - would
result in virtue. Similar tempering of the body would result in physical
health, and the tuning of a musical instrument into the exact and simple
numerical proportions underlying the cosmos (1:2, 3:2, 4:3) would reproduce
its underlying nature in sound and thus produce music which could unite
soul and body both with the cosmos and with each other. Thus, the
maintathence of 'perfect' intervals in a tuning system, for the Platonists,
was crucial and formed the basis for music's ethical properties. But
within the limitation which the boundaries of octave, fourth and fifth
imposed on sound, differing combinations of lesser intervals gave rise to
the varying genera of tetrachords (diatonic, chromatic and enharmonic) and
their combination into modes, as Ficino describes while commenting on the
Philebus: (53)

"For if you cross from semitone to tones, you have the
diatonic scale, serious and steady. If you go through
several semitones, you have the soft chromatic scale. But
if you go in a way through lesser tones, you have the
difficult harmonic scale. And this is what Plato tells us
to notice about music ... the Pythagoreans and Orphics
called harmony the measured arrangement which results in
one voice being adjusted to another when all is
observed."(54)
Orpheus even assumes the role of prime music-theorist for Ficino, as the
originator of the concept of the tetrachord as the four-stringed lyre of
Apollo which regulates the order of the seasons:
"Orpheus introduced the tetrachord: for in the Hyin to
Phoebus he gives Phoebus a lyre with four strings and he
says summer comes when Phoebus touches the top string,
winter when he touches the bottom ome, autumn and spring
when he touches the two middle ones."(55)
-298 -

In the transformation of musical thought brought about by the pursuit of
classical ideals in the fifteenth century, the Greek modal theory was
perhaps the most fascinating element for the Renaissance musician as it
corresponded to their growing concern with the personal, emotional response
of the listener, in contrast to the complex theory of the medieval modal
system based on plainchant. (56) The various qualities of the modes and
their effects on the human being were ccinonly tabulated amongst medieval
theorists in their discussions on the power of music; (57) for example, the
twelfth-century Joharines Afflighemensis in his De ausica devoted a chapter
to "How different people are affected by different modes", noting that "The
modes have individual qualities of sound, differing from each other, so
that they prompt spontaneous recognition by an attentive musician or even
by a practised singer."(58) Both tgolino of Orvieto (1380-1457) and
Jacques de Liege (1260-1330) were concerned with muslca huiana as a *rpose
of practical music; in his Specuiui ausicae, the largest surviving medieval
music treatise on musica humana, Jacques de Liege compares the spiritual
and physical condition of man to musical pitch: "the body serves as an
image of the low notes and the soul of the high ones" and envisions ausica
huana not only as the union of body and soul, but also as the union of the
soul with its inherent virtue, or potentla.(59)
The interdependence between the three kinds of music gave rise to an
elaborate system of correspondences between modes and planetary motions
amongst the medieval music theorists, who were inspired on the one hand by
the pagan vision of Martianus Capella, on the other by the

thristian

Dionysius Areopagitus. (60) The mid ninth-century Aurelian of Reôme was the
fitst writer of a music treatise to compare modes to the motions of planets
and to consider the musical and emotional experience of hearing the song of
the angelic choirs, (610 and it became standard practice amongst theorists
of a Platonic bent to speculate on the correspondences between angelic
hierarchies, planetary distances, parts of the soul and musical pitches.
In the words of J. Dauphiné, "les trois musigues ... deviennent, come dans
la polyphonie, trois voix gui chantent respectivement leur propre chant et
la mélodie cogune."(62)
In the fifteenth century two key figures emerge before ffurius as
representatives of a new approach to musical cosmology which emphasised the
-299 -

participation of man in the cosmic hierarchy, and both have either indirect
or direct influence on Ficino's own synthesis of astrology and music. They
are Giorgio Anselmi and Bartolomé Ramos de Pareia, and their work deserves
closer investigation. Ciorgio Anselal of Parma, like Ficino, combined
activities as musician, astrologer, doctor and magician, producing six
treatises, of which three (De musica, .Astronomia and Opus de magla
dlsciplina) are of interest to us. Only the De ausica of 1434 has received
the attention of modern scholars.(63) Whereas the Astronoala deals with
objective, 'scientific' astrology in the Ptoleaaic tradition, Anselmi 's
treatise on magic demonstrates a participatory use of astrological ritual
involving images and orations to planetary daemons which links it directly
with Ficino's Liber de vita, although it is doubtful whether Ficino would
have read it. (64) Discussing the role of ceremonial, Anselmi has this to
say on the purpose of incantation: "Indeed an incantation is a religious
bringing forth of words necessary for the execution of the intention whose
parts are: invitation, invocation, conjuration, oration and
imprecation."(65) In the Oratlo Saturnl Anselmi calls on Saturn not only
as the bringer of sadness and hardship but of wisdom, intellect and memory
and the understanding of hidden things, (66) which testifies to the fact
that Ficino was not the first to discover the planet's hidden treasures.
This treatise certainly requires a modern translation and edition to enable
us to place Anselmi more clearly in context as an early Renaissance aagus.
Whatever Anselmi 's occult practices, his music treatise is more
conventional; in the words of Handschin, "a monument to the revival of
Platonism in the first half of the 15th century" and a prized possession of
(ffurius (who links Anselmi and Ficino by drawing on both men's work) . (67)
The treatise is based on Boethius' De lnstitutlone muslcae, in three
sections dealing with ausica mundana, the tonal system and choral singing.
In the first section, Anselmi 's einphas is is on correspondences, with an
amplification of the medieval systems of chains of being - he combines the
thristian model of angels singing their endless Sanctus with pitches of
planets in their individual movements and the harmonies made by the
relationship of the planets' epicycles to the fixed stars.(68) Each planet
is assigned to an angelic order, and the pitch of each planetary sphere
varies according to its relative position - it is not fixed.(69) The whole
produces harmony in accordance with the laws controlling the World Soul.
-300 -

Anselmi's interest in astrology is illustrated in his comparison of
planetary epicycles and astrological aspects with musical intervals: he
relates the diatonic genus to the planets' cycles, the chromatic to the
slowly-revolving fixed stars.(70) However, despite the customary section
on iusica huaana and the ethical power of music, (7].) An5ellni's treatise
remains essentially speculative, not practical in scope. For a radical
departure from traditional Pythagorean theory in the service of the
practising musician, we must look to Ramos de Pare j a in his Musica practica
of 1482, written only two years before Ficino's De ratlonlbus rusicae, in
the neighboring town of Bologna. (72)

By the early fifteenth century, more emphasis was being placed on the
Importance of practical, as well as speculative, dimens Ions of the
musician's art; we read, for example in Ugolino of Orvieto's Declaratio
iuslcae dlsclpllnae that the true musician must have command of both
through mind and senses.(73) With the discovery of more classical texts,
the importance of ethos for humanist musicians grew and with it the need to
find a way of uniting contemporary musical practice with classical ideals.
For the Platonic musician, the aim of music must be liberation from the
realm of the senses to a vision of true reality, yet paradoxically this may
only be achieved through sense-perception of the image or echo of this
reality. Those who place empirical experimentation before intellectual
speculation ("prefering to use their ears instead of their minds")(74) in
their pursuit of harmonic analysis are prone to error, as Socrates points
out in the Philebus:
"Music-making ... produces harmony by trained guesswork
rather than by measurement: for example, consider the
playing of stringed Instruments, which uses guesswork to
pinpoint the correct length of each string as it moves.
Consequently, there is little in it that Is reliable, much
that is uncertain."(75)

However, the practising musician of the Renaissance, however devout a
Platonist, was required to accoxdate both the fast-developing emancipation
of the consonant third and the compromise demanded by technique and aural
perception into his speculative philosophy. He could no longer be content
with auslca speculativa as the sole concern of the true musician - the gap
was closing between the theoreticians and the performers. Ramos' Mis ica
-301 -

practica is revolutionary in that in it he revises the standard Pythagorean
tuning system, cointhg perfect fourths and fifths with consonant thirds
arid sixths, achieving the just intonation ratios of 4:5 arid 5:6 for major
arid minor thirds arid laying the foundation for a system of equal
temperament. (76) In suggesting that performers should judge intervals by
their ears, advocating the slight tempering of fifths if necessary, he was
the first theorist to deny the authority of such giants as Boethius and
(iido d 'Arezzo and incurred much opposition from his contemporary
traditionalists, particularly (ffurius who still regarded thirds as
irrational intervals (the Pythagorean major third of 81:64 arid minor of
32:27). Ramos advocated an 'easier' division of the monochord for the
benefit of those musicians who want to sing, not speculate:
"The regular monochord has been subtiy divided by Boethius
with nuxers arid measure. But although this division is
useful arid pleasant to theorists, to singers it is
laborious and difficult to understand. Arid since we have
promised to satisfy both, we shall give a most easy
division of the regular monochord."(77)
Despite their rivalry, Caffurius borrowed (but did not acknowledge)
Ranios' diagram representing the interrelation of Muses, planets and modes
for the frontispiece of his Practica us1cae of 1496 and for insertion in
Book IV of his De hariorila auslcorui lnstruientorum opus of 1518(78) (see
Appendix 1.1, page 368); both men, in including the Muses in their
analogies, were most likely to have been directly influenced by Ficino, for
whom, following Plato, the Muses represented personifications of musical
pitch; one was assigned to each orbiting sphere, arid one to the overall
concord supposedly produced by the whole harmonious movement of the
heavens. (79)
It would also seem that Ficino was aware of Ramos' innovations, as we
shall see. Ramos, in his correspondences between the three musics, goes
further than any of his predecessors or contemporaries (including Ficino)
by specifying the type of ausica lnstruaentalls which could induce a state
of being in the individual corresponding to planetary influences. He
aligns, for the first time, Muses, planets, musical pitches and the
emotional affects of the eight modes, comparing each mode to a humour and
thus making the connection between auslca huaana and lnstruaentalls.
-302 -

Although Ramos uses the standard sources of Mart ianus Cape ha, Macroblus,
Ptolemy and Boethius, his synthesis of cosmic and human music through the
connection of modal ethos with planets goes beyond Boethian

auslca

speculativa. Ramos illustrates his analogies in a complex diagram of
spirals which recall the planets In their spheres and which is cur bushy
reminiscent of Ficino's desciption of sound as a series of spiralling ovals
in his comentary on the Tiaeus. (80) This Oroboros image (demonstrated
even more graphically in Gaffurius' version) is of course a powerful
alchemical one (see page 48), and suggests a hidden dimension of spiritual
unity beyond the apparent intellectual game of analogy (see Appendix 1.2,
page 369). We see Ramos attempting to connect musica mundana with actual
atxiitive experience, and It is not such a great step from here to Ficino's
astrological 'music therapy' technique.
Both Nicolaus Burtlus in 1487(81) and his supporter Gaffurlus
concentrate on the emotional effects of modes - GaffurIus links the
qualities of modes with emotional states, planets, signs of the zodiac and
Muses (see pages 324-5), and intervals with parts of the soul(82) following
the precedent of Ptolemy in Book three of his Harmonics.(83) Ficino never
mentions specific modes in relation to ethical effects, but we can perhaps
infer from his rules for composition in the De vita coelitus comparanda
that he was aware of the subtle preferences In different regions for
particular pitches or sound-qualities (toni) which may also imply their
relationship within a melodic pattern in the sense of a mode.(84)
Ptolemy's speculations on the correspondences between the interrelationships between the zodiacal signs and musical intervals may also
have inspired Ficino's formulation of the rules, and undoubtedly formed the
basis of his letter written five years earlier, to which we now return.
Ficino begins De rationibus auslcae by suninoning the authority of Hermes
Trismegistus, who tells us that both the 'true music' of the mind and the
its reflection or echo in audible music were given us by God so that we may

both imitate and honour hizn.(85) He reveres Pythagoras precisely because
he gave equal Importance to both the theoretical and the practical aspects
of such worship - for Ficino, intellectual speculation demands to be
balanced by activity in the world, and this is reflected in his attitude
towards music. As William Bowen has discussed in reference to this
-303 -

letter, (86) the study of harmonic science, being based on number as the
intermediary between the incorporeal and corporeal realms, should involve
both philosophical inquiry and musical practice, and no musician worthy of
the name would pursue one aspect at the expense of the other. Ficino
devotes the rest of his letter to a study of consonance and dissonance, not
as a dry theoretical exposition, but, as we would expect, in the vivid,
imaginative and qualitative language of metaphor.
In his Coninentary on the Tlaaeus, when dealing purely theoretically with
the Pythagorean tetraktys as a model for the structure of the cosmos,
Ficino had necessarily established the perfect intervals of fourth, fifth
and octave as the primary musical ratios. (87) However, to the ear of the
practising musician, the consonance of the third and sixth is evident, and
in both his De amore and in De rationibus ausicae Ficino confirms this
opinion. In the De aiore he wrote:
"In Music ... artists investigate what numbers love what
numbers either more or less. They find the least love
between one and two and between one and seven. Between one
and three, four, five or six, they find a stronger
love."(88)
In his letter Ficino postulates a 'syntonic' scale where the third with
the ratio of 5:4 is included amongst the elementary concords yet without
jeopardising the supremacy of the tetraktys; for such a ratio may be
expressed as 1+l/4:l.(89) Indeed, the third is singled out as the first
interval "to delight the ear" since it is the first interval whose
tempering, by an extra fourth part, falls within the tetraktys and
therefore allows an easy return to a state of unity:
"now three parts are easily added to one to achieve unity,
for the number three is considered by many to be
indivisible, all embracing and the most perfect of all, in
which particulars it corresponds most closely to
unity." (90)
It is the ear, says Ficino, which must judge when two notes are
dissonant with each other, when they most clearly sound as two notes. The
more clearly they are perceived to blend into a single note, the more
consonant the interval, for this is in accord with the nature of hearing
which "itself is one and arises from one". The hearing is "soothed by
-304 -

unity arid offended by duality", and it is Ficino's priority as one
performer writing to another to concentrate on audible sound production and
aural discrimination.(91) In this respect he is not Interested in setting
out theoretical minutiae; although the resulting scale involves two
different sized tones (9:8 and 10:9), Ficino only specifies the former,
adding vaguely that "a smaller ratio produces a semitone".(92) In keeping
with musical practice, the third is even considered more consonant than the
fourth - he talks of the "gentle harmony of the third" as "recalling Cupid
and Adonis" arid of the perfect triad of third, fifth and octave, "more
pleasing than the rest", reminding us of the nature of the three
Craces.(93) William Bowen has pointed out that the conflict between
Ficino's desire to accomodate the requirements of contemporary practice
with traditional principles "signals a characteristic problem of
Renaissance harmonic science which was eventually resolved by abandoning
traditional theory all together."(94)
Using the analogy of the Hermetic procession of the soul, or the neoplatonic eianatlo-converslo-reaeatio from its original state of unity
through incarnation and return to God, Ficino describes the qualities of
concords arid discords within a musical scale, giving clear precedence to
the pleasing quality of thirds and sixths:
"The lowest note, because of the very slowness of the
niotLon in which it is engaged, seeu to stand still. The
second note, however quite falls away from the first and Is
thus dissonant deep within. But the third, regaining a
measure of life, seen to rise and recover consonance. The
fourth note falls away from the third, and for that reason
is somewhat dissonant; yet it is not so dissonant as the
second, for it is tempered by the harming approach of the
subsequent fifth, arid simultaneously softened by the
gentleness of the preceding third. Then, after the fall of
the fourth, the fifth now arises; it rises ... in greater
perfection than the third, for it is the culmination of the
rising movement; while the notes that follow the fifth are
held by the followers of Pythagoras not so much to rise as
to to return to the earlier ones. Thus the sixth, being
composed of the double third, seen to return to it, and
accords very well with its yielding gentleness. Next the
seventh note unhappily returns, or rather slips back to the
second arid follows its dissonance. Finally the eighth is
happily restored to the first, and by this restoration, it
completes the octave, together with the repetition of the
first, arid it also completes the chorus of the Nine Muses,

-305 -

pleasingly ordered in four stages, as it were: the still
state, the fall, the arising and the return."(95)
The final two sections of the letter concern the physical and
astronomical causes of harmony, relating the fundamental Pythagorean
intervallic ratios to the realms of the senses, elements and planets.
Ficino gives the standard Platonic theory(96) concerning the proportional
relationship of elements, both in respect to each other and to human
senses: sight with fire, hearing with air, smell with a vapour blended from
air and water, taste with water and touch with earth. He considers how the
varying elemental proportions present in the sense of hearing correspond to
the ratios of the perfect consonances - hearing contains one degree of
earth, one and a third of water, one and half of fire and two of air, which
is why these consonances resonate most powerfully.(97) In following Plato,
Ficino does not attempt to be consistent with his previous statement
concerning consonant third5 and sixths. He somewhat cursorily sumnarises
the views of the Platonlcl then moves onto a subject which holds more
personal fascination and scope for exploration - the relationship between
astrological aspects and musical intervals.

In this section, Ficino draws heavily on Book three of Ptolemy's
Harinonlcs.(98) Ptolemy, as we have seen in chapter three, was concerned
with the 'scientific' exposition of astrology as as a logical system. As a
mathematician, he sought to show that the principles underlying us1ca
•undana, huiana and Instruientails formed a rationally coherent structure
from which perceived beauty of sound, virtue of soul and cosmic order
naturally result. Although basically adhering to Pythagorean principles,
Ptolemy diverges from the orthodox Platonic strand in taking as his
foremost criteria the world of appearance and sense-perception; in the
words of Andrew Barker, for Ptolemy "the task of harmonics is to explicate
the mathematical foundations of systems whose beauty and excellence is
evident to the ear, not those of some other, purely theoretical
constructions."(99) It is these underlying mathematical patterns of
organisation which reveal to us the unity of the human soul with the cosmos
and which are represented audibly in musical structures - they can be known
through scientific investigation and constitute an unshakeable reference
point in relation to the instability of material manifestation.
-306 -

Ptolemy specifies analogies between concords and distinctions of
soul, (100) modulations of tonos (mode) and life-crises, (101) between the
twelve tones of the two-octave Greek scale and the signs of the zodiac(102)
and between planets and pitches, based on the relative distances of the
bodies from the earth.(103) In the correspondences between the
interrelationships of zodiacal signs - whether harmonious or discordant with musical concords and discords, Ptolemy maintains a rigorously
objective perspective. His purpose is to show that astrology is a science,
dependent on number. As we would expect, Ficino is more concerned with a
qualitative appraisal of the human experience of astrological aspects as a
determinant for musical consonance; thus the third, which corresponds to
the sextile aspect (a division of sixty degrees between the first and third
signs, Aries to Gemini) must be harmonious, as the aspect is indisputably
'friendly'; the fourth will inevitably sound dissonant as the square aspect
(a division of ninety degrees) is traditionally a meeting of discordant,
unbiending natures (such as fiery Aries to watery Cancer). However, Ficino
is never limited by the bounds of an earthly perspective; all seemingly
adverse phenomena must be blessings in disguise. This attitude does not
allow him to take the fatalistic line of determinist astrology, where the
square aspect is considered irreparably malefic.(104) He therefore
compromisingly calls the fourth a "middling dissonance".(105)

In his Commentary on Plotinus of five years later, Ficino goes even
further. In upholding the Plotinian vision of cosmic unity he insists on
the incompatibility of the concept of dissonance with the divinely-ordered
harmony of the heavens, in which all tends towards the good of the All.
Certain musical intervals are only considered dissonant due to the
imperfection of the earthly condition - in their archetypal model they all
contribute to the perfection of the whole:
"Indeed not only is Cancer not dissonant from Aries, but it
is consonant, for those parts are both of one greatly
uniform body and of the same nature (which are discordant
amongst us by harmonic tempering) and no less in heaven
than in musical song are all things consonant amongst
themselves. And so perhaps it is permitted for us to
devise human music from the heavenly harmony, for the
Pythagoreans called the heavens the lyre of God. Therefore
the union of the Planets represents for us the consonance
of the octave, for this seems to blend with the first tone;
indeed the heavenly opposition, which takes place in the
seventh [house], also for us represents the most dissonant
-307 -

of all, the seventh tone; the aextile aspect, which is in
the third sign, (corresponds to] the third tone, the square
to the fourth, the trine which is in the fifth house, to
the fifth. Thus when in our musical consonance the fourth
or seventh tones occur, which are dissonant in themselves,
nevertheless together with the others they bring about

agreeable harmony, and so all the aspects are judged to be
necessary for absolute concord much more greatly in the
harmony of the heavens. Hence it is that the wiser
astronomers, having observed a square aspect, or a sextile,
or a trine, not only do not shudder, bet eagerly desire it;
it also means that through time units of seven, whether of
days of illness, or years of life, in which the Moon or
Saturn reach square aspects, the changes in us are not
always for the worst, but often for the better."( 106)
In Dc rationlbus auslcae Ficino gives a more detailed comparison of the
qualities of aspects with intervals, emphasising the philosophical
perspective which transcends the conventional interpretations of the
astrologers. After comparing the 'harmonious arid friendly' trifle to the
perfect fifth, he continues:
What shall we say of the sixth sign, by vhich is signified
the soft arid so to speak weak consonance of the sixth note?
Although astrologers in judging a natal chart consider this
weakness to be bad, nevertheless the ancient theologians
think it is useful, since man himself is in truth mind
itself, and the body is the prison of both man arid mind,
and the frailty of the prison will be useful in the future
to he who is enclosed in it. After this, the seventh sign,
which they call angular, is very vigorous in its discord,
opposing the first, arid seems in its clear hostility to
prefigure the seventh tone in ic, which with its
vigorous arid vehement quality is now most clearly dissonant
from the first (tone]. There follows the eighth sign,
which because death is assigned to it by the astrologers,
is considered unfavourable by the coon people; however in
the opinion of the ancient theologians it is most fortunate
for the celestial mind, since it finally dissolves its
earthly prison arid frees it from the dissonance of the
elemental world, restoring it to its heavenly harmony. It
is not without good reason therefore that it signifies the
absolute consonance of the eighth tone which returns to the
beginning .." (107)
In an adaptation of the Ptolemaic twelve-tone system, Ficino completes
his journey around the zodiac by relating the ninth to twelfth signs back
to the first with the corresponding intervals of fifth to second, again
likening the fourth to the "human, middling discord" signified by the tenth
-308 -

sign of worldly ambition, and the third to the eleventh sign of human
friendship. The twelfth sign, "allotted to hidden enemies and prison",
recapitulates the extreme dissonance of the second. (108)
When Ficino instructs us to find tones or modes which correspond to the
pattern of the heavens in De vita coelitus coparanda, we may imagine that
he would have these analogies in mind. The fact that he is more interested
in the psychological implications of audible intervals than Ptolemy is
reflected in a significant divergence in his system. Ptolemy does quite
clearly state that our souls' movements correspond to the motions of
musical intervals within a melody, and that they can be thus moulded by the
specific idiosyncracies of its intervallic steps ("(the melody draws our
souls towards the conditions constituted from the likenesses of the
ratios"; (109)) but his concern for perfect mathematical syninetry does not
allow the metaphysical or philosophical dimension to intrude. He compares
the opposition aspect to an octave,(110) whereas for Ficino the dissonance
of the seventh most clearly corresponds to the experienced tension of the
opposition aspect in practice. What is more, the resolution of the seventh
into the perfect concord of the octave musically embodies a metaphysical
potential which for Ficino would provide its ultimate justification.
Psychologicalily it could be seen to represent the resolution of the
tension of opposites within the individual, the final aichemical coniunctio
of mind 'with soul. Spiritually it embodies in sound the final release of
the dissonance and tension of earthly existence into the perfect harmony of
the divine realm through the transcendence of death, symbolised by the
eighth sign of Scorpio.(ll1) Ficinian harmonia is far from a rational
study of harmonic ratio for its own sake - as in all his writings, we are
continually drawn into the dimension of irrational experience and led to
reflect on the nature of the human condition.

4.10. Ficino as improvvisatore
It remains to look at the exoteric tradition within which Ficirio, as a
performing artist, developed his particular style of declamatory song as a
vehicle for his esoteric quest. I shall therefore end this thesis with an
attempt to place him in the context of the indigenous Italian musical
-309 -

activity of the late quattrocento, with a consideration of his performence
practice together with speculations on the type of instrument he may have
used and on his choice of musical form for his hymn-singing and
astrological improvisations.
During the late fifteenth century the most popular form of secular
music in aristocratic circles (especially in vogue at the courts of Lorenzo
and Piero de' tdici) was the French chanson, and indeed during the entire
century Italian musical culture was dominated by French and Flemish
composers. The Flemish polyphonists - the oltremontani - brought an
elaborate contrapuntal style to the most popular form of sacred vocal
music, the ceremonial Latin motet. Such a polyphonist was Heinrich Isaac
(known as Arrigo Tedesco), resident in Flocence from 1484 to 1494, who was
music tutor to Lorenzo's sons, and who composed a setting for Poliziano's
lament on Lorenzo's death.(112) It is inconceivable that Ficino would not
have had some contact with Isaac as an intimate of the Medici circle, but
the two men would have had little in common. Ficino's music was in
service to his philosophy and of an intensely personal significance - he
would find little of interest in the concerns of the professionally-trained
court conposer.(l13)

Of indigenous Italian vocal music, two main genres can be distinguished
towards the end of the century. Firstly the popular carnival songs - cant 1
carnasclaleschi(114) - which celebrated their golden age under Lorenzo who,

strongly influenced by Platonic ideals of artistic and musical
representation, infused mythological and Platonic themes into the lavish
processions and trionfi. The sacred counterpart to these festivities were

the sacre rappresentazioni(fl5) whose musical content consisted of laude,
the religious form of the frottola using the same poetic metres.(116)
However, in tracing the roots of Ficino's performance practice we must look
to the other major trend in native Italian vocal music, that of the selfaccompanied singer or irprovvlsatore who improvised on the lute, lira da
bracclo or viola, either to sung verse in the standard poetic forn of
strambottl, terze rime, sonnetti, ode and capltoll, or in an unmeasured,
quasi-declamatory manner recited epic poetry, chivalric cycles, biblical
extracts or Greek and Latin verses to a spontaneous chordal
accompaniment. (117)
-310 -

The encouragement of both these styles by the humanists, who believed
they were imitating the practice of the ancients, was directly opposed to
the "convoluted scholastic thought"(118) of the polyphonic school. I tend
to agree with James Haar that "When Marsilio Ficino took up his lyre ... to
sing the Orphic Hymns he would not have concerned himself with mensural
rhythms and contrapuntal rules, whether he knew anything about them or not,
because the ancients knew nothing of all this."(119) The new Renaissance
ideal centred on the importance of the individual and his subjective
response to a work of art. The new genre of humanist-musician was
concerned with the effective transmission of the 'eaning of the text, in
collaboration with appropriate musical harmony and mode, and he arrived at
his representation from the innate musicality of poetic verse structure.
He was more interested in the immediate effects produced on the listener
than in the technical aspects of composition - which inevitably gave rise
to a re-evaluation of the accepted theories of consonance and
dissonance. (120) However towards the end of the century "a better
understanding between humanists and polyphonic composers" (121) emerged, due
to the activity and writing of a new breed of humanist-theorist such as
Tinctoris and Gaffurius.
For the Platonist, poetry is the first music and as such must command
iusica instrumentalls as its servant - "the humanist poets ... regarded the
musical performance of their verses as a natural extension of the process
by which language becomes poetry". (122) It is the importance of the text
which determines the aesthetic value of the music, which in turn acts to
'spiritualise' the words. As we saw earlier in this chapter, the addition
of music to a text enabled its content to be transmitted more effectively
to the human soul. The aria or 'spirit' of a piece of music (such as dance
music, popular melodies or simple frottole) was to be found in its
particular intangible quality - if this was married to the meaning of a
text its power to move the listener would be intensified. Paolo Cortese,
who in his De cardinalatu of 1510 gives us a vital insight into performance

practice around the turn of the century (although, as Pirrotta points out,
his literary interest was "more faithful to the letter than the spirit of
classicism")(123) describes different ways of singing according to the
Phrygian, Ldlan and Dorlan modes,(124) and he emphasises the ethical
effect of poetry enhanced by a musical setting:
-311 -

"When the rhythms of the words and sentences are combined
with the sweetness of the melodic modes, nothing can
prevent the audience from being exceedingly moved because
of the power of the ear and of its similarity to the soul.
And this happens quite often when either vehement motions
are represented in the singing by the verses, or the
spirits are exhorted to the learning of morals and
knowledge, on which human happiness is dependent."(125)

Such a marriage of words and music was not to be found in the scholastic
polyphonic tradition, where the skilled invention of intricate contrapuntal
imitation reigned supreme.

The distinction between the two trends within this genre of accompanied
song tends to blur, particularly towards the end of the century. Latin
verses were both set to pre-composed, measured music and declaimed in a
freer, recitative style with a discreet accompaniment. The art of setting
poetry to music from which the genre of the frottola flowered, paying close
attention to word-stress and homophonic chordal accompaniment, could be
seen to fall half-way between the French chanson and the art of the
lmprovvlsatorl.(126) Of this repertoire we have many surviving examples in
the ten publications of the Venetian printer Petrucci, from 1504-14.(127)
It is much more difficult to speculate on the type of music used by the
true lmprovvisatorl, such as Ficino himself, for nothing remains written
down - indeed it was unnecessary and inappropriate to commit the
inspiration of the moment to paper. However we do know that the most
praised performers were those whose accompaniment was the most simple and
tasteful, so as not to obscure the clear presentation of the text.
Ficino's contemporary Vincenzo Calmeta praises two celebrated
.iaprovvisatori of the day for their art of musical understatement:

Car iteo and Seraf mo ... have been foremost in our day, and
have striven to accompany their rhymes with easy and simple
music, that the excellence of their witty and sententious
words might be better understood: for they have the
judgement of a discerning jeweller, who, wanting to display
the finest and whitest pearl, viii not wrap it in a golden
cloth, but in some black silk, that it might show up
better."(128)

-312 -

id1. Performance practice The most essential and highly-regarded ingredient of the
Liprovvisatore's art, from the Platonic point of view, was his possession
by furor dlvinus which enabled him to coninunicate divine truth through his
direct visionary or intuitive channel to the intelligible realm (see
chapter two, part five). The creation of the 'inspired madman'(129)
utterly eclipses those who think that technique alone will make them good
artists, and this inspiration, springing from the Muses, will flow from
poet to performer to andience like the power of a magnet. (130) So highly
does Ficino regard the frenzy of the musician, that he goes further than
Plato in stipulating that "any madness, whether the prophetic, hieratic or
amatory, justly seems to be released as poetic madness when it proceeds to
songs and poems".(131) This concept is elaborated in his letter to Agli
mentioned on page 255, where Ficino distinguishes between two forms of
music-making: that which attempts to Imitate auslca mundana merely through
beauty of sound and harmonious interplay of voices, and that far superior
form which takes as its priority the communication of the meaning of a
poetic text:
"Some (men] imitate the celestial music by harmony of voice
and the sounds of various instruments, and these we call
superficial and vulgar musicians. But some, who imitate
the divine and heavenly harmony with deeper and sounder
judgement, render a sense of its inner reason and knowledge
into verse, feet and numbers. It is these, who, inspired
by the divine spirit, give forth with full voices the most
solemn and glorious song. Plato calls this solemn music
and poetry the most effective imitation of the celestial
harmony ... it expresses with fire the most profound and
prophetic meanings... In Plato's view, this poetic
frenzy springs from the Muses; hut he considers both the
man and his poetry worthless who approaches the doors of
poetry without the call of the Muses, in the hope that he
will become a good poet by technique."(132)

The poets are the interpreters of the gods, and in their condition of
spiritual possession appear to become entirely removed from the constraints
and norms of accepted human behaviour: "Whoever experiences any kind of
spiritual possession is indeed overflowing on account of the vehemence of
the divine impulse and the fullness of its power: he raves, exults, and
exceeds the bounds of human behaviour" says Ficino in his Commentary on the
-313 -

Pljaedrus.(133) When music is in service to such a condition, the
possibility of the psychological transformation of the listener is
intensified. In the De aore Ficino describes the therapeutic function of
such divinely-inspired music in the process of tempering the discordant
soul, ill at ease in its 'fallen' condition:
"Therefore first there is need for the poetic madness,
which, through musical sounds, arouses those parts of the
soul which are asleep, through harmonious sweetness cal
those which are perturbed, and finally, through the
consonance of diverse things, drives away dissonant discord
and tempers the various parts of the soul."(134)
But in addition to the submission to such a highly-charged state of
rapture, the musician must cultivate a manner of performance which allows
effective transmission of the power from the creative source to his
audience. The tensile equilibrium sustained by a combination of freeflowing, divine inspiration with a disciplined, consciously cultivated
quality of total technical ease and mastery - Ficino's "diligence and
divine chance"(135) - allows a merging of the eternal and temporal
dimensions in a moment of great transformative power. At such moments, the
magical element of grazia can be manifest, the spiritual 'grace' (till dono
della natura e de' clelI(136)) by means of which the listener may be
reminded of the ideal music beyond the audible. This subtle, restraining
quality is defined by Baldassare Castiglione in his famous book on the
nature of the ideal courtier, U Corteglano, as sprezzatura.(137)
Literally meaning 'disdain', sprezzatura refers to the consciouslycultivated nonchalance, the artificial decorum through which the inner
tension of furor is channelled. In his admiration for this arte che non
appare esser arte(138) Castiglione anticipates by almost a century the
enthusiasm of Guilio caccini and the Florentine Camerata for the style and

technique of the solo singer as a virtuoso with his effortless execution of
intricate vocal ornamentation.

Castiglione's Ii Corteglano is an entertaining and lively discussion
between a group of aristocrats at the Palace of Urbino, between 1508 and
1516, which provides us with a picture of the most highly-regarded
attributes and accomplishments of the ideal Renaissance man. The qualities
to be prized are appropriate action, moderation in all things, the creation
-314 -

of a refined persona, perfect integrity and cultivated tastes. Intrinsic
to the cultivation of the persona, or faculty of mediation between the
inner man and the world, is sprezzatura, the notion of superb execution of
a skill with consumate ease, mastery and nonchalance. There must be no
hint of self-importance, rather, it demonstrates a literal 'selfconsciousness' implying self-knowledge, not false humility or
egocentricity. In the words of Ludovico di Canossa:
"I have discovered a universal rule which seems to apply
more than any other in all human actions or words: namely,
to steer away from affectation at all costs ... and to
practise in all things a certain nonchalance which conceals
all artistry and makes whatever one says or does seem
uncontrived and effortless. I am sure that grace springs
especially from this."(139)
In a musical performance, sprezzatura involves a combination of
concealed technical accomplishment and personal charisma, or aria.
Castiglione presents a view of the new Renaissance musical artist, valuing
the highly-charged, erotic quality of live performance over theoretical
speculation.(140) Appropriate gesture and movement (imitating the motions
of the spheres, Ficino would say) aids the effective delivery of a text, a
practice which was evidently abused by some contemporary performers - the
theorist Gaffurius in 1496 even went so far as to say "an extravagant and
indecorous movement of the head or hands reveals an unsound mind in a
singer".(141) The image created by the performer should seem totally
effortless and spontaneous, no matter how much work has been expended
behind the scenes on technical and musical preparation: "for to reveal
intense application and skill robe everything of grace".(142) A
performance was no less than an attempt to reflect the order and harmony of
the cosmos on an earthly plane, with the maximum concealment of human
effort. If the musician was inspired by a divinity, then the quality of
his performance must appear to transcend the imperfections of earthly sweat
and toil. Such a conviction would lead to the heights of ingenuity in the
following century, when the extravagant musical rituals of the Italian
court entertainments and 1nteredii employed complex machinery to produce
seemingly miraculous effects. For Ficino, the sprezzatura of a performance
would involve all the ingredients of natural magic which he sets forth in
De vita coelitus coparanda - appropriate colours, fumigations,

astrologically elected times, consideration of current planetary aspects

-315 -

and movements, all in service to the skill and inspiration of the
performer. Thus the magician/musician consciously composes his art of
performance, yet avoids affectation, since every element is exactly
appropriate for his task. He knows that he is merely an instrument, but
only an instrument of the finest quality and clearest material would be
worthy of conveying a message from the gods.

We may speculate that it is the charisma of a well-cultivated
sprezzatura, when combined with and fertilised by the performer's inner

condition of rapture or frenzy, which incites the meraviglia or marvel of
the audience.(143) They are astounded by the unaffected expertise and
moved by the inspired coiimunication of the musician, and in the Platonic
sense, the wings of their souls may begin to grow.(].44) The very word
ieravlglla conjures up a suprise at new aspects of reality, a departure
from normal experience, a startling flash of wonder at the combination of
the human and divine, perfectly suiting the Renaissance love of paradox.
In a woodcut from the poet Luigi Pulci's Horgante Magglore(145) we see an
lmprovvisatore with his llra da braccio, performing before an enraptured

audience, profoundly moving at least one listener who is overcome by his
emotion:

-316-

Castiglione also uses the concept of sprezzatura to refer to the element
of spice produced in a a musical piece by the appropriate insertion of a
perfectly-iudged discord:
"This is because to continue in perfect consonances
produces satiety and offers a harmony which is too
affected; but this disappears when imperfect consonances
are introduced to establish the contrast which keeps the
listener in a state of expectancy, waiting for and enjoying
the perfect consonances more eagerly and delighting in the
discord of the second or seventh, as in a display of
nonchalance . "(146)

He also anticipated Caccini in his admiration for carefully-studied yet
seemingly improvised vocal ornamentation, provided it was used in
moderation; the singer must seem to be capable of more than he
reveals.(147) Castiglione desribes specific ornamentation which would not
become crystallised in print until Caccini's Le Nuove Husiche at the end of
the century, and he confirms the popularity of solo-singing both alla viola
and to the accompaniment of viols (viole da arco), whose sound he describes
as soavlssima e artiflciosa - "extremely sweet and skilfully
cultivated".(148) He regards monodic singing alla viola to be the most
effective for communicating 11 bel modo e l'aria of the voice, which is not
then obscured by the effects of many voices singing together; in this way
"the instrument gives the words a really marvellous charm and
effectiveness". (149)

In considering the question of the instrument Ficino himself is most
likely to have played, we enter a rather bewildering forest of terminology
which has received varying interpretations by modern scholars. Of the
instrument Castiglione refers to as viola, Haraszti points out that this is
most likely to mean a plucked Instrument (the viola da mano) such as the
guitar-shaped, softer equivalent to the lute, the vihuela.(150) Kemp
agrees, but suggests that viola always refers to the vihuela, when in fact
it clearly often means lira da braccio.(151) Becherini avoids definitions
altogether. (152) We can however assume that viola at this time tends to
refer to any bowed, stringed instrument, and also to a plucked equivalent,
but distinct from the lute family.

-317 -

Castiglione firmly distinguishes between solo singing to a viola and to
a viol consort - the vlole da arco. Contrary to the assumption of at
least one modern translation, (153) singing to a solo viol (that is, a
member of the viola da gaxnba family) was not common practice. Distinctions
are further confused by the increasingly popular use of the lira da braccia
in humanist circles; a bowed, chordal instrument often depicted In the
hands of Orpheus)(154), and known as viola and cetra as well as lira.
Becherini quotes a description of the iiprovvisatore L'Unico Aretino which
testifies to the use of cetra for the lira, the only instrument held under
the chin: "zi disponeva con Ia cetra In colic a dire all'improvviso".(155)

Such an instrument was undoubtedly played by the well-known Ferrarese
composer-performers Francesco and Alfonso della Viola and the Florentine
Baccio Ugolini, who played the title role In Poliziano's Orfeo (see page
below).
Contemporary distinctions between plucked and bowed instruments are
given in Tinctoris' treatise De lnventlone et usu muzicae of c.1484.(156)
Tinctoris tells us that the lyra is commonly called lute (leuturn) and is an
umbrella term for all similar instruments: viola, rebec, guitar, cetula and
taiibura.(157) He gives the origin of the lyra as Spanish, from which
evolved the instrument which the Italians call viola and the French 'halflute' (diaidu leutum). The lute, he says, is much larger and shaped like
a tortoise-shell. He specifies that the Italian viola is the lira da
braccio which plays simple chords and has sympathetic strings untouched by
the player's bow.(158) Tinctoris emphasises that in Italy and Spain the
viola is often played without a bow, and in Spain given the name vihuela,

which suggests that the lira da braccio was sometimes plucked. (157)
Cortese (in De cardinalatu) evidently means vlhuela when he refers to the
'Spanish lyre' (hlsçana lyra) as being generally softer and more uniform in
sound than the lute (as well as more tedious to the earl).(159) The
vlhuela, as originated in Spain, had both plucked and bowed versions.(161)
However, Tinctoris specifically mentions that the viola with a little how
(arculo) is particularly used ad hlstoriarum recitationem.(162) Tinctoris

provides us with evidence that lyra refers to all varieties of chordal
instrument used as accompaniment in the late fifteenth century. We have no
evidence of self-accompanied singers using a bowed viol, which with its
curved bridge would not easily lend itself to chordal accompaniment and
-318 -

which in any case only evolved, through a modification of the vihuela da
arco, at the end of the century.(l63) Pirrotta somewhat confusingly

assumes viola to mean viol, but then says it was shaped like the vlhuela
and plucked. (164) The most sensible conclusions would appear to be that
the viola da mano refers to any plucked, guitar-shaped instrument commonly
known as vihueia, while the viola da arco refers to a bowed version of the
same or to the lira da bracclo. This is in accord with Tinctoris'
definitions.

For the humanists, singing to the lyra or cithara (Ficino uses the two
terms interchangeably) conjured up an ancient performance practice of
rhetorical declamation of lyric poetry, not necessarily a particular
instrument(165) When Ficino speaks of his 'Orphic lyre' we cannot be sure
whether he means lute, vlhuela, lira da bracclo, or even a harp-like
Imitation of an ancient lyre. In support of the latter, we have three
possible pieces of evidence. The memorial bust by Andrea Ferrucci (see
frontispiece) in Florence Cathedral shows him holding a volume of Plato in
the manner of a harp, which may however be purely an artistic conceit since
It was created twenty-three years after Ficino's death; Ficino's letter to
Foresi (see pages 290-1) suggest5 that he played an Instrument that
required a plectrum; and Bishop Campano in his eye-witness account of
Ficino's performance (see pages 289-90) uses the verb percutere, to strike,
beat or hit (percutit ille lyram). Since in the late fifteenth century the
lute was still being played with a plectrum (although the custom was dying
out), it is by no means unlikely that Ficino played it. He himself used
the verb pulsare (see reference 17 to this part) which means to strike,
hit, touch or knock an instrument. Unless Ficino is using this term
figuratively, it is unlikely to refer to the action of a bow (which might
be expressed simply by sonare).

However, the bowed lira was undoubtedly the instrument most clearly
associated with Orpheus in contemporary iconography, (166) and that most
favoured by lyric and narrative poets for their self-accompaniment as it
was thought to have been invented by the ancient Greeks. But we must also
take into consideration the question of the circumstances in which Ficino
played his lyra; neither lute nor lira would be as easily portable as a
harp, and Ficino certainly took his instrument out into the woods of
-319 -

Careggi. I would also speculate, and this is pure speculation, that Ficino
would have been more likely to prefer the relatively simple immediacy of a
plucked harp/lyre to the extreme technical intricacies of a lute or lira.
His performance style was highly idiosyncratic and entirely in service to
his philosophy. He would have used his instrument to enhance the direct
communication of the text by providing appropriate harmonic support which
must never be obtrusive or over-elaborate - the aim was not to display
technical prowess. That much we can safely assume; however, in the end we
must concede that its exact nature remains ambiguous.

What of Ficino's contemporary improvisatory performers? That
improvvisatori existed in mid-lSth century Italian courts who were

exemplars of Orpheus, ravishing the audience with their arie and technical
expertise, is well attested. Castiglionerefers to the ability of the
singers Bidone and Marco Cara: (167)
Bidon's style of singing is so skilful, quick, vehement and
passionate, and of such melodious variety, that the spirits
of those listening are excited and aroused, and feel so
exalted that they seem to be drawn up to heaven. Then the
singing of our own Marchetto Cara is just as moving, but
its harmonies are softer; his voice is so serene and so
full of plaintive sweetness that he gently touches and
penetrates our souls, and they respond with great delight
and emotion."(168)

The singer-lutenist Pietrobono of Ferrara, active from the 1440s to
1480s, received the most widespread adulation amongst his
contemporaries,(169) famed by poets, writers and theorists for his
improvised singing of narrative verse to the lute.(170) In the words of
Lockwood, "of Pietrobono not a note of written music is preserved, yet he
Is beyond doubt one of the most important figures in all of 15th century
music, certainly in Italy."(171) In the poem La Sforziade by Antonio
Cornazano completed in 1459,(172) recreating in Homeric vein a wedding
banquet for Francesco Sforza of three years earlier, a musician is called
on to play after a stirring speech about war. This Is Pletrobono, "whom
the stars have endowed with soothing and pacifying" (che In muslca le
stelle havean dotato/pascer l'orecchia dl dolce armonla) who proceeded to
sing of contemporary love-affairs, accompanying himself on the cetra probably Cornazario's classical synonym for a lute. (173) "He sang to the
-320 -

cetra in well-ordered verses" (cantava In cetra ad ordinata frotta), "and
he guided the whole in semitones, always adjusting and syncopating, and the
tenor followed his cantoni" (Ia guldava tucta In semitoni,/proportlonando e
slncoppando sempre,/e fuglva el tenore a I suoi cantonl).(174) To this
music, he added "the most vivid words" (Dando col suon vlvissime parole).
Cornazano compares him to both Apollo and Orpheus, and although, as
Pirrotta points out(175) one cannot rely too much on Cornazzano's exact use
of technical terms to describe Pietrobono's 'syncopated' style, it was
evidently idiosyncratic and spontaneous. Frotta probably refers to any
traditional narrative poetic metre, in which his verses were composed.

We have several indications that mid-century lutenists played
monodically, accompanied by either another lute or a viola da arco - the

tenorlsta, sustaining an established melodic pattern or 'tenor' as a basis
for the other's improvisation.(176) Paolo Cortese implies that Pietrobono
played monodically in a high register, (177) noting that his contemporary
lutenists (c.1510) played polyphonically. Whereas the "simple repetition
In the high region" was considered to be the style "used by the ancients",
in modern-day practice this would be "joined by a connection of all single
sounds from the lower region" (quo simplex antlquorum per hyperboleon

lteratlo ab hypate slngulorum coagmentatione iungeretur). Cortese
describes this polyphonic style of lute-playing as having "the most
delightful impact on the ear; for those sure-fingered proceedings, now
repetition, now stopping, now lessening and almost interlacing of sounds,
are in the habit of creeping easily into the minds of men with their
exquisite sweetness."(178) Despite Cortese's evidence, however, we find
Tinctoris describing Pietrobono's playing not only in two parts, but also
in three and four.(179) Tinctoris mey well have heard Pietrobono play in
Naples or Ferrara in the 1470s(180) and was speaking from experience. But
whatever Pietrobono's style (and over his long career it inevitably chan9ed
and adapted to new techniques), it was the cantus-tenor feature of the
unwritten music genre which gave rise, at the end of the century, to the
four-part frottola repertoire, and improvised singing became more closely
intermingled with 'composed' music. (181)

The Milanese Serafino Aquilano was called the "star of secular
muslc".(182) Cortese tells us that Aquilano renewed the genre of singing
-321 -

poems to the lute, and was followed by "a multitude of imitative court
singers".(183) Aquilano's biographer Vincenzo Calmeta describes his
activity as a cltharedo, singing Petarchan sonnets to the lute at the house
of Paolo Cortese in Rome.(184) calmeta stresses the popularity of
composing verse which was then sung by the citharedi, and implies that
Aquilano's style was to set verses to measured musical metres, particularly
the strambotto.(185) Other famous

citharedi included Bernardo Gareth ('I].

Chariteo') at the court of Ferdinand of Aragon at Naples, who sang both
classical verse and his own strarnbotti,(186) Antonio di Guido in Florence
(a favourite of the Medici), Leonardo da Vinci(187) and, of most interest
to us, Baccio Ugolini, a close friend of Ficino who took the title role in
the production of Poliziano's Orfeo in Mantua in 1480. (188)

Ugolini was a priest and envoy of the Medi'ci to the cardinal legate of
Bologna and to the Gonzaga court, but he was also renowned as a poet and
musician and displayed a considerable literary talent. Again we find
Cortese singing his praises for "singing ex tempore on the lyre in the
vernacular tongue",(189) echoed by Rafaello Brandolini: turn maxirne
vernaculls ac pervenendls canendls ex ternpore ad lyrarn versibus.(190) In

his extensive study of Poliziano's work, Pirrotta considers the
significance of the choice of Ugolini for the part of Orpheus and of the
poetic form of strambotto in which Orpheus sings his lament Dunque piangerno
to the lyre.(191) He points out that, for the humanist Poliziano, Orpheus
represents the personification of "poetry as song",(192) but that "(Orfeol
contains no trace of the reflections of Ficino's Orphic mysticism which
some have desired to see in it."(193) But Ugolini. was a priest, not a
professional singer, and he would have brought to the role far more than
technical expertise or musical professionalism. As a member of Ficino's
Platonic Academy, (194) Ugolin). would have had frequent discussion with his
fellow priest and musician Ficino about both religious and musical matters.
We have proof of the men's friendship in two letters from Ficino to
Ugolini,(195) and of Ugolini's interest in Ficino's teachings from a letter
of 1492, where Ficino gives Ugolini as among the audience at his lectures
on Plato in the late 1460s.(196) Tomlinson plausibly speculates that here
Ugolini would have been introduced to the concept of poetic frenzy in
relation to Orpheus and also to Ficino's early formulation of his ideas
concerning natural magic, as he expounded on his recently completed De
-322 -

aaore.(197) Ugolini would have heard Ficino speak of Orpheus' prestige as
an ancient theologIan, (198) and would no doubt have been impressed by
Ficino's admiration for and performance of the Orphic hymns.
In 1474 Ficino wrote to Ugolini specifically about poetic frenzy, (199)
praising some of the latter's verses and clearly indicating the common
ground from which both men's musical activity took root. For Tomlinson
this proves that Ugolini. "was an initiate of Ficino's Platonic musical
thought"(200) - it certainly suggests that Ugolini would have considered
his role as Orpheus six years later to carry a responsibility of a nature
more fitting to his religious calling than merely to his musical skill.
With a second letter of 1493,(201) Ficino sent Ugolini a copy of his Liber
de Sole, suggesting a continued respect and mutual understanding between
the two men on a philosophical level. By this time, Ficino's Interest in
magic, astrology and the occult had become fully incorporated Into his
Platonism, and his views on music were related to an astrological therapy
formulated, as we have seen, in De vita coelitus coinparanda. From his
early ardour for philosophical speculation, Ficino was now concerned with
psychological transformation, and the Orphic hymns became vehicles for an
alchemica]. conlunctlo of man and cosmos. The symbol of the Sun,
representing psychic wholeness and unity, became a central focus for
Ficinian musical magic(202) and Ugolini, we can assume, would evidently
have shared Ficino's esoteric ideas about the exalted function of
performing a hymn to the Sun-god Apollo, the father of Orpheus.
Considering the close friendship of Ficino and Poliziano, I rather agree
with Tomlinson that we can postulate that there was more to the purpose of
staging Orfeo than artistic extravagance for the purpose of a court
entertainment. For those who had ears to hear and eyes to see, a realm of
significance far beyond the elegance of Poliziano's text would be revealed,
deriving from Ugolini's personal attitute and Intention towards the
meaningful symbolism of his role. The musical forms, specific instruments
and playing styles of the improvvlsatori are undoubtedly important aspects
of research, but in considering Ficino as a musician one must never forget
that such external features were in service to a fervent ideology and
religiosity. In Ugolini we find a representative of what Tomlinson has
called "an elite Florentine cult of Orphic musical magic"(201) - in a

-323 -

sense, he stood in for Ficino himself as he embodied the divine singermagician at the Mantuan court.

4.12. Musical form

We can distinguish four main types of musical 'container' f or sung verse
at the end of the 15th century, or mus ice per poesia: the standard measured
verse-setting, or frottola; a freer, more improvisatory and melismatic
setting of verse to a simple accompaniment; improvisation of a melody to a
pre-existing aria or harmonic framework; and spontaneous, chordal,
Improvised accompaniment to declaimed verse, whether spoken, half-spoken,
or sung. It was also popular practice to improvise poetic stanzas to set
musical frameworks, or poesla per muslca. The genre of which we have most
surviving examples is that which is identified by the collective name
frottola,(204} which includes all measured musical settings of vernacular
verse set to the standard poetic forms of ballata, strambotto, capitolo
amongst others, as well as laude and freer, more improvisatory forms. This
distinctly Italian form of secular vocal composition, simple, direct and
homophonic In reaction to the intricacies of the northern polyphonists, is
at once courtly and popular, artful and uncontrived, and paved the way for
the freer and more elaborate madrigal. The frottole were the first secular
music ever printed (by Petrucci in Venice between 1504 and 1514), and
provide us with a rich and varied sample of the many kinds of accompanied
song in vogue around the turn of the century. Since the roots of the
frottola lie in popular performance practice, some of these compositions
are examples of an older, more improvisatory style, and it is amongst this
repertoire than we can perhaps glimpse something akin to Ficino's own style
of recitation.

The greatest number of frottola settings are basically four-part in
texture (to be performed by a voice and three viols, lute or keyboard, or
purely instrumentally) to provide a simple, homophonic accompaniment for
verse, which could be varied in mood and expression according to the
sentiment required. Pirrotta has pointed out that it was the strambotto
form which found most favour with the vernacular poets: "from the time of
Leonardo Ciustinian (1383-1446] until the end of the century, the
-324 -

5trambotto was the form of poetry for music most assiduously cultivated by

Italian men of letters as a vehicle for the most passionately lyrical
sentiment&'.(205) Also known as ottava rima, each stanza consisted of
eight lines of eleven syllables with a rhyme scheme of abababcc, and this
was the form to which Orpheus sang his lament Dunque plangeirio. Its use by
Orpheus to charm the god of Hades "puts the strarnbotto on a part with the
Latin verses as the representatives of the noblest form of sung poetry", in
the words of Pirrotta,(206) and he gives three musical examples of
strabott1, including settings of texts by both Baccio Ugolini himself and
Serafino Aquilano (see Appendices 2.1, 2.2 page 370), € illustrate the
kind of musical setting we might expect Poliziano's Orpheus to have
employed. (207)

The keyword for such us1ca per poesia is simplicity. The settings of
Latin verses generally reveal a greater restraint and plainer declamatory
style than the Italian, which often employ melismatic flourishes and subtle
syncopations as a contrast to plain recitation. In Petrucci's fourth book
of 1505 entitled Strambotti, ode, frottole, sonetti et modo de cantar versi
latinI et capltull he provides musical settings for the amateur
poet/musician to add his own verse - he called such a framework the modo or
aer of the poetry. In his first book (1504) we find a Horace Ode set by
Pesenti (Appendix 2.3, p.371) which Illustrates such a simple style.(208)
This manner of setting lyric poetry according to syllable length and
stress, and according to mode, Is Illustrated by the music theorist
Gaffurius in his De harmonla musicoruxn instruentorum opus of 1518. An
avid Platonist, Gaffurius was directly influenced by Ficino's translations
of Plato; In particular his Timaeus.(209) This is reflected in Gaffurius'
treatment of cosmic harmony; in the frontispiece woodcut Gaffurius shows
the analogies between Muses, musical pitches, modes, planets and signs of
the zodiac (see Appendix 1.1 page 368). In Book IV, chapter ten Gaffurius
gives a setting of a Sapphic poem about the origin of the Muses and their
relation to planets and modes, and the characteristics of modes
corresponding to planets. Set in two voices, the upper in Dorian mode and
the lower in Hypodorian, the simple rhythmic structure of breves and
semibreves fits the text strictly syllablcally.(210) In his example,
Gaffurius sets the seventh stanza which deals with the relation of planets,
modes and pitches in connection with Orpheus' lyre-playing (see Appendix
-325 -

2.4, page 371). However, this form of uniting text and music is still
essentially a composition, arid not an improvisation.
We find more dramatically expressive examples in Latin religious texts
(iaude), such as Passlo sacra and Ave panis angelorum (Appendices 2.5 and
2.6, pp.372-4)(211) which use pauses arid frequent changes of pulse to
highlight the declamation of the text - in a mariner, one may assume, not
unlike those who improvised their own accompaniments. One could imagine
Ficino had such a heartfelt, noble quality in mind, in service to religiou.
contemplation, when he resorted "to the solemn sound of the lyre"

to

still the "vexations of mind and body".(2l2) However it is unlikely that
he would have set the Orphic texts to any measured, pre-composed scheme.
He was not first and foremost a theorist or composer, but a performer for
whom the grip of furor divinus and the immediate communication of the inner
meaning of the text demanded spontaneity arid attention to the needs of the
moment. It is therefore probable that his musical declamations were much
more akin to the practices of the improvvisa tori who accompanied their
cantari (poetry designed for improvised music) with a simple chordal
support from lute, llra da braccio or vihuela. The essence of such
performances was the aria or personal style of the musician - his immediate
presence and impact on the audience, his charisma and rhetorical gift.

amongst the frottola repertoire we find a few pieces which perhaps
Illustrate something a little closer in spirit to Ficino's style, although
it remains a general characteristic of this genre that little attempt is
made to express the inner meaning of the text musically, and this would
have been Ficino's prime consideration. Perhaps the most unique song
amongst the published frottola repertoire is Se Lal per iiaraveglla
(Appendix 2.7, page 375)(213) which must be the nearest written example we

have of the improvised monody of the time - certainly the text allows for a
more 'affecting interpretation than the majority of surviving examples.
It is an anonymous setting of text dramatically portraying the passion of
Christ, arid the only example of a freely-improvised capltolo form of verse,
where the last line of the last quatrain was normally set to different
music. In this case, there is no Indication of how to sing it, arid one
assumption is that it was recited. The vocal line Is stark and
declamatory, over free lute interjections, giving ample scope for
-326 -

characterisation of the meaning of each verse and for the singer to display
his art of moving the emotions with true sprezzatura. In a more Mercurial
spirit, we find Chul dlcese from Petrucci's sixth book of 1505. This
anonymous setting (Appendix 2.8, page 376) is in the improvisatory style of
Leonardo Giustiani (1383-1446), a poet-singer renowned for his
improvisations to the lira(214) - Petrucci evidently giving an example of
what was by now an archaic form. The melismatic solo vocal line uses the
insubstantial text as a vehicle for its mercurial meanderings and
syncopations over a simple two-part accompanyment. Illustrating an art of
highly skilled vocal invention and technical expertise at the expense of
the text, such a piece provides a glimpse of an Improvisatory style which
pre-dates the mid-century humanist revival of 'ancient' practices and
serves to contrast with the radical new emphasis on textual cotmuunication
and clarity of declamation.

Thirdly, we must mention the style of Improvising poetic verse over a
standard harmonic pattern or aria. These 'set melodies' originated in the
recitation of epic poetry to ottava rlma stanzas, which gained popularity
in the fifteenth century. A variety of standard melodies evolved, the most
popular being settings to Ariosto's Orlando furloso such as the
Ruggiero.(215) It is possible that Ficino would have used a similar method
of simple harmonic frameworks within which spontaneous declamation would be
contained arid regulated, perhaps related to the varying characteristics of
planets and deities - he certainly must have had access to a rich source of
melodic and harmonic formulae to be drawn on when appropriate. However, I
would suspect that his own style was too intentionally eccentric and
Idiosyncratic to be solely reliant on traditional poetic or musical forms.

Finally, in search of Ficinian performance practice, we must consider
the thriving yet unwritten tradition of improvisers who declaimed their
verses over an unmeasured, spontaneous chordal accompaniment inspired by
the moment, who were not limited by the written note, and who used a
variety of vocal effects involving both speech and song to achieve maximum
'affect'. Intoned recitation was an integral part of the Florentine sacre
rappresentazioni,(216) arid Poliziano's Orfeo contained spoken recitative in
alternation with measured song. Indeed the poet held half-sung recitation
in the highest esteem, as we find in a letter in which he describes hearing
-327 -

the eleven-year-old Fabio Orsini in Rome, "almost transported out of my
senses" by Fabio's consort singing, and most impressed by the sprezzatura
of his solo declamation of verses in honour of Piero de' Medici:
"His voice was not entirely that of someone reading, nor
entirely that of someone singing: both could be heard, and
yet neither separated one from the other: it was, in any
case, even or modulated, and changed as required by the
passage. Now it was varied, now sustained, now exalted and
now restrained, now calm and now vehement, now slowing down
and now quickening its pace, but always it was precise,
always clear and always pleasant: and his gestures were not
indifferent or sluggish, but not posturing or affected
either. You might have thought that an adolescent Roscius
was acting on the stage."(217)

Is this the kind of delivery Poliziano wou1ld also have admired in the
music-making of his friend Ficino? We can be sure that Ficino's personal
manner of singing both Orphic hymns and astrological songs was
Idiosyncratic and intensely attuned to the requirements and quality of the
moment. We saw in his instructions for astrological singing that of utmost
importance was the relevance of both music and text to the individual and
to the current astrological aspects - to microcosm and macrocosm. Much is
left to the imagination, but the intention is clear; to mirror both the
performer's and listener's psyche in music which on one level sought to
imitate the harmony of the cosmos as reflected first and foremost in the
human soul, and on another to arouse the meraviglia of the listener through
sensual intoxication. It was an intensely personal experience and secondhand vehicles, in the form of other people's compositions, could not by
definition fulfil this function.

I hope to have shown, over the course of this thesis, how both astrology
and music were, In the hands of Ficino, powerful, practical means of
engaging the soul of man and regulating his psychic life. Ficirio as
philosopher cannot be separated from Ficino as magician, for such a
distinction perpetuates the very gulf he strove to overcome between
intellect and intuition, mind and soul, reason and faith. His vocation was
to communicate the eternal within the temporal, to 'heal souls' suffering
In their earthly discord, using a language of symbol and musical sound
which spoke directly to the imagination. His work of 'natural magic' sowed
the seed for a tremendous surge in occult activity in the following century
-328 -

- Cornelius Agrippa, Paracelsus, Francesco Giorgi, John Dee, Glordano Bruno
and Robert Fludd all owed their Hermetic and Cabalistic systems and
experiments - albeit more ambitious (and often more hubristic) in their
aims - to the rediscoveries of the humble Florentine and his disciple Pico
della Mirandola. Ficino's genius lay in his ability to penetrate to the
core of human nature, reveal it to his fellow man, and with compassion and
humour to teach him that happiness lies in a unified life. I can do no
better than to end with a quotation from a letter to Lotterio Neroni, which
demonstrates concisely this fervent intention and direction which lay
behind all Ficino's external activity, and to which his musicianship and
astrological skills were in service:
"With every power I have I always endeavour to set in
motion whatever the counsel of the wise, and careful
reasoning, persuade me is good. I am not relating this
good to some external benefit, which would be in the
future, short-lived, and dependent on the choice of men or
fortune; but first and foremost to that true joy which is
experienced in the very action of the good. Even if this
good and this joy can be described as temporal, since the
good is not followed, nor the joy experienced continuously
in the same way, yet they lie deep within ourselves and in
our will. Indeed, good of this kind gives satisfaction
both in the present and in eternity. I say this not
because I now enjoy eternity directly but for no reason
other than that I understand that this good accords with the form of
the good, that is with the eternal knowledge and art of
almighty God. Therefore, just as I have related that good
back to inner joy, so I relate joy back to the form of the
good; so that clearly by this reasoning the good may please
me, and thence I myself may best please Cod, the good of
all good, without whom nothing can please me."(218)

-329 -

REFERE24CES to iapter Four
PART ONE: Natural Maciic
1.

Boethius, De Institutione musica 1.2, quoted in 0. Strunk, Source
Readings In music history vol.1 p.85. Full translation in C.M.
Bower, Boethius: Fundamentals of Music. Boethius (born c.480 A.D.)
was a Roman statesman, philosopher and mathematician and the chief
author through whom knowledge of ancient Greek music was transmitted
to the Middle Ages.

2.

See chapter three part one, ref .76

3.

Quoted in Garin, Astrology in the Renaissance p.49

4.

See Kaske, Three Books on Life, pp.24-31, 45-55

5.

For a discussion of the connection between music and medicine in
Islamic tradition, see J.C. Bürgel, The Feather of Slmurgh ch.4:
'Music, Nourishment of the soul' pp.89-118. Pp. 94-5 Bürgel
illustrates Arabic 'therapeutic' systems involving elaborate systems
of correspondences between musica humana and instrumentalls; firstly
between lute-string, rhythm, zodiacal quarter, element, wind, season,
quarter of month, quarter of day, humour, quarter of life, faculties
of soul and body and external actions, and secondly betweenween
musical modes, zodiacal signs, elements, qualities, humours, gender
and time of day or night. Ficino would have learned first from
Aristotle and Galen that astrology was essential for the practice of
medicine. See Aristotle, Metaphysics 12.6-8, L. Thorndike A History
of Magic and Experimental Science vol.1, pp.178-80; Galen's treatises
on astrological medicine. More source material available in Kaske,
Three Books on Life p.81 note 1. On the tradition which Ficino
inherited, see C. Burnett, 'Astrology and Medicine in the Middle
Ages'.

7. Joscelyn Godwin (Harmonies of Heaven and Earth pp.l25-3O)
distinguishes two main types of planet-scales favoured by ancient and
medieval writers. Firstly, the 'Pythagorean' system, where the
planetary spheres are placed at intervals "comparable to those
stoppings of a string that produce a scale." This system is
essentially based on the nine-stringed Greek lyre with different
tuning variants. Examples in Pliny, Natural History II, 19-20;
Kartianus pella, The Marriage of Mercury and Philosophy II, 169-99;
Censorinus, De die natall XIII, 3-4; Nicomachus, Enchlrldion III;
Quintilianus, De musica 111.22; Theon of Smyrna, Mathematics 111.15.
The second variety are not associated with astronomical distances but
their tones are caused by the motions of the planets, differences in
pitch being due to different rates of revolution (Godwin p.130). This
was upheld by (amongst others) Cicero, Dream of Scipio in Macrobius,
Commentary pp.73f.; Boethius, De Institutlone musica 1.17; Giorgio
Anselmi, De musica I 148-55; Ramos de Pare ja, Musica practica III.
Since the planets' revolutionary periods do not fit a diatonic scale,
Godwin points out that this system is purely symbolic and may be
considered in two ways; from a geocentric position, where the fixed
-330-

stars move the fastest and the Moon the slowest, or relative to the
Zodiac where the Moon is the fastest planet and the fixed stars are
Immobile. Both types of planet-scale give the central note of the
Greek tuning system to the Sun, and may be seen as complementary
'natural-scientific' and 'symbolic' perspectives.
8.

Letters vol.1 pp.42-48, Op.om. pp.612-5

9.

Ibid. p.45, Op.oa. p.614:
per aures vero concentus quosdam munerosque suavissimos
animus haunt, hisgue imaginibus admonetur, atque
excitatur ad divinam musicaxu, acniori quodaiu mentis et
intimo sensu considerandam. Est autem apud Platonicos
interpretes divina musica duplex: alteram profecto in
aeterna Del mente consistere arbitrantur: alteram vero
in coelorurn ordine, ac motibus, qua mirabilem guendam
coelestes globi orbesquc concentum efficlunt: utrisgue
vero animum nostrum, antequem corponibus clauderetur
participem extitisse, verum us 'In tenebris auribus
velut rimulis quibusdam, ac cunctis utitur, hisque
Imagines, ut saepe lam diximus, muslcae Illius
incomparabilis accipit. Qulbus In elus qua antea
fruebatur narmonlae, intimam quandam, ac tacitam
recordationem reducitur, totusgue deslderio servet,
cupitque ut vera musica rursus fruatur, ac sedes
proprias revo]are, quumque Id se quam dlu tenebroso
corporis habitaculo clrcumsepta est, adipisci nullo modo
Intelligat, eain cuius hic possesione frul nequit,
nititur saltem pro viribus imitari.

10. Ibid. p.46, Op.om. p.G14
Alil namque vocum numeris variorumque sonis
instruinentorum coelestem Musicen imitantur, quos certe
leves, ac pene vulgares musicos appellainus: nonnulli
vero graviori quodam firmiorique iudicio divinam ac
coelestem harmonlam Imitantes, intemae rationis sensum
notionesque inversum, pedes ac numeros digerunt: hi vero
sunt, gui divino afflati spiritu gravissima quaedam, ac
praeclarisslma carmina ore, ut aiunt, rotundo prorsus
effundunt. Hanc Plato graviorem musicam poesimque
nominat, efficacissimam harmoniae coelestis imitatricem:
nam levior Illa, de qua paulo ante mentionem fecimus,
vocum est, vocum atque motuum numeris gravissimos
quosdam, et ut Poeta diceret, deiphicos senus ardentius
exprimit, quo fit, ut non solun aunibus blandiatur,
verum etlani suavissimum, et axnbrosiae coelestis
similimum menti pabulum afferat, Ideoque ad divthitatem
proplus accedere videatur.
11.

Letters vol. 1 pp.141-4, Op.oa. pp.651-2

12. ibid. p.142, Op.Om. pp.651-2:
Astronomi canisiane, forsitan duo haec ad concursuni
lovis et Mercuril, Venerisgue referent. Opinantes ab
love medicinam, a Mercunlo et Venere musicam proficisci.
Platonici autem nostri ad unum Deum, scilicet Apollinem,
-331-

referunt. Quem prisci Theologi Medicinae inventorem, ac
citharae pulsandae regem exist imaverunt.
13. ibid. Op.oa. p.652:
Quum ergo idem fit Musicae dux, medicinaeque repertor,
quid minim utramque artem saepe ab iisdem hominibus
exerceri.
14. ibid.:
nam quum cantus sonusque ex cogitatione mentis, et
impetu phantasiae, cordisque affectu proficiscatur,
atque una cum aere facto et temperato, aereum audientis
spirit.um puliet, gui animae corporisque nodus est,
facile phantasiam movet, afficitque cor et intima mentis
penetralia penetrat. Corporis quoque humores, et membra
sistit, et movet.
15. Fnpedoc1es, the formulator of the idea of the four elements, was not
only a Pythagorean philosopher but also a practising shaman, combining
natural-scientific exploration with magical ability, such as the power
to stay winds, cause or prevent rain and even revive the dead. For
source references and speculations on Greek shamanism see Dodds, The
Greeks and the Irrational pp.135-56. On Enpedocles in particular,
Dodds suggests:
"Enpedocles represents not a new but a very old type of
personality, the shaman who combines the still
undifferentiated functions of magician and naturalist,
poet and philosopher preacher, healer, and public
counsellor. After him these functions fell apart;
philosophers henceforth were to be neither poets nor
magicians ... It was not a question of 'synthesising'
these wide domains of practical and theoretical
knowledge; in their qulaity as Men of God (the shamans]
practised with confidence all of them; the 'synthesis'
was personal, not logical." (p.146)
Ficino would have known of Enpedocles from Iamblichus' Life of
Pythagoras 113 (trans. T. Taylor ch.25 section 113 pp.60-i) where
lamblichus relates an incident of Enpedocles preventing a man from
coimnitting murder by playing to him on the lyre (further information
on this Incident Is given in Bürgel, Feather of Slmurgh p.99, who
attributes the story to Ibn 'Au al-Katib). Ficino found inspiration
for his own synthesis of speculative philosophy and practical magic in
the figures of Pythagoras, iipedocles and Orpheus, all of whom
embodied the combination of knowledge and religious faith which
characterised the line of priscl theologl. For Ficino, these men
represented the essential unity of mind and soul, objective and
subjective knowledge which he took upon himself to emulate, teach and
leave for posterity in his writings.
16.

Letters vol. 1 p.143, Op.om. p.652:

prima Musica in ratione consistit, secunda in phatasla,
tertia in sermone, hanc sequitur cantus, cantum
digitorum motus in sono, sonum totths motus corpoxs rt
gymnastica, el trlpudio. Videmus ig.tur ant.mae mu&i.cam
gradatim ad omnia corporis membra deduci. Quam eUaiu
Oratores, Poetae, Pictores, Scuiptores, Architecti in
-332-

siiis operibus imitantur. Quum ergo tanta inter anlmae
corporisque isicam conunlo sit, quid mirum ab eodem
hcine tarn corp., quae animam teiçeravi?
17.

ibid.:
vero gravea eligit, et constantem tar* saluberrinam
spiritus, anirnae corporisque ndlclnam. Ego autern, ut
de Marsillo tuo aliquid dicam, eo consillo post
Theo].ogiae, vel rnedicthae studia gravioribus fidibus
cant ilxque frequenter irumbo, ut caetera senuum
ablectamenta penitus negligaw, olestlas animae,
corporisque expellam, ntern ad subi irnia Deuue pro
viribus erigam...

18. Op.oa. pp.1438-84 Coimentarium In Platonls Tlmaeua. I am grateful to
(rlo Lo Presti, tklversity of Turin, for the loan of his thesis
Corporeità e immaglnazlorie come lrsdicl dell'eapressione musicale tra
Nedioevo e Rinasclmento. Of particular interest are (pitoli II, 'La
teoria
ica1e di Ficino' and IV, 'Ii De vita e I]. Commentarium In
Tlmaeum'.
19.

Op.om. p.1417, in Walker, 'Ficino's spiritus and Music' p.l37:

Husicam consonantiam in elemento flert cuanlum medio,
perque motum, et humc quidem orbicuplarea ad aures
pervenire: ut non mirum sit earn animae convenire, t
diae rerum, ti.0 motionis principlo in circuitu
revolubili. Adde quod concentus potissimurn inter lila
quae sent luntur, quasi animatus, affectum &ensutmue
cogitatiorieia animae, 5 lye canentis, s ive sonant is
perfert in animos audientes: Ideoque In primis curn animo
congruit... Concentus autem per aerearn naturam in motu
positam movet cor*is: per purificatum aerem concitat
spiritum aereum anirnae corporisque notum: per affectum,
afficit serum siil et aniftnm: per significatlonem agit
In mentern: denique per ipsum, subtilis aeris rnottrni
penetrat vehementer: per contelatlonem lambit
suaviter: per conformern qualitatem mira quadam voluptate
perfundit: per naturarn, tarn spit italem, guam mater lalem,
toti.m slaul rapipt et sibi vend Icat hominem.
20. See Plato, Ion 533d f.
21. Letters vol.1 pp.162-4, Op.oa. p.658:
maxime movet alios gui ipee movet maxime, oino
autern offendit aures gui a]iter canit ore, aliter pulsat
lyram. Divina Hue ica est rectus cogitatlonurn verborum
act lonuague concentus.
22.

.bid. p.104, Op.om. p.637:
t enirn Inter corpus et anlmaai, sensum et ratlonem
pugna perpetua ... edi ficlorum partes ex amues Ia
disponunt, I ides in lyra ad unguern temperant, ut autern
anirni partes motusgue concinant, nuaquam tenant.

23. Letters vol.2 pp.64-7, Op.oa. pp.744-5:
Mue.tcl, In sono gratiam, cantus In caritu sermonis
-333-

elegantiam initari: meminisse etiam, motus animi, multo
magis oportere consonantes esse, quam voces.
Inconcinnus enim alienusgue a musis est musicus, cul dum
consonat vox lyraque mens dissonat.
24. See Walker, 'Ficino's splritus and Music' pp.134-7
25. The main text being Aristotle, De anima 11.8
26. See arles Burnett, 'Sound and its perception in the Middle Ages'
pp. 52-5
27. Aristotle, De anima 423b-424a
28. Ficino, Liber de vita 3.XXVI.7:
in universo esca quaedam sive fomes ad animam corpori
copulandam est ille ipse quem spiritum appellamus.
29.

Letters vol.2 pp.49-50, Op.om. p.609:

cum primum tertiano notha medicinis nostris expulsa, una
cum loanne Aurelio Academiani nostram tanquam med icuni
tuum salutavisses, citharae sonum cantumque hymnoruni
postulati a nobis, et impetrasti... naturam in nobis
corpus et spiritum cum anima coniuxisse. Corpus quidem
remedils medicinae curatur. Spiritus autem gui aerreus
sanguinis vaporem, et quasi quidem animae corporisque
nodus, aereis quoque odor thus sonisque et cantibus
temperatur, et aliter ... Apud naturam unum quiddam est
ex anima et corpore, spirituque compositum. Apud
Aegyptios sacerdotes una eademque facultas erat,
pharmacis fidibus, mysteriis occupata. Utinam hanc
naturalem et Aegyptiam facultatem tam foeliciter
assequamur, guam obnlxe libenterque sectamur.

30. See Walker, 'Ficino's spirltus and Music' p.146, note 6
31.

ibid., also Walker, Spiritual and Demonic Magic from Ficlno to
Cam panel la

32. See chapter one part one, ref.89
33. Ficino, Liber de vita 3.1.85
34. ibid. 3.11.89
35. ibid. 3.111.20:
Qualem spiritum physici diligentes sublimatione quadam
ad ignetn ex auro secernentes, cuivis metallorum
adhibebunt aurumgue efficient.
36. Walker, 'Ficino's spiritus arid Music' pp.145-6
37.

Op.om. p.1364; see M. Allen, Marsillo FlcIno and the Phaedran
Charioteer p.76

-334-

38. Fictho, De amore VI.6, Op.oi. p.1343 (in Jayne, Plato on Love
pp.113-4):
Quicunque animus sub lovis inperlo in terrenurn corpus
delabitur, certan quandam in ipso descensu sibi concipit
hominis fabricandi figurarn lovis astro convenientem.
Hanc in aethereo sul corpore tanquam optime affecto
exprimit exactissimam. Si nactus in terris semen fuerit
similiter temperaturn in eo quoque tertiam figuram
pingit, primae secundaeque similllmani.
39. ibid. Op.om. p.1344:
Anima et corpus natura longe inter se diversa spiritu
medio copulantur, gui vapor quidam est tenuissimus et
perludicus, per cordis calorem ex subtilissima parte
sanguinis genitus.
40.

Op.oa. p.1747:

similiter spiritus noster radius illius tarn
occultis, guam manifestis omnia penetrantibus. Evadit
etiarn longe cognatior, quando erga vita 111am vehementer
afficimur consentaneurn illi beneficiuin exoptantes, atque
ita spiriturn nostrum in illius radios transferentes
amore praesertim si cantum et lumen adhibemus, odoremque
numimi consentaneum quales Orpheus hymnos mundanis
nuininibus consecravit.
41. Ficino, Liber de vita, Apologia 1.80:
Alterum vero eorum gui naturales mater ias opportune
causis subiciunt naturalibus mira quadarn ratione
formandas.
42. Liber de vita 3.IV23:
Atque ita exhoc spiritu tanquam in nobis medio coelestia
bona imprirnis ins ita sibi In nostrum turn corpus, turn
animum exundabunt
43.

G. Pico, Conclusiones nuwero XV secundum propriam opinlonem de
intelligentia dIctoru Zoroastris et expositorum elus Chaldaeaoruai
no.13 (Omnia quae extant opera p.159)

44. ibid. 3.11.54:
Neque diff idas Saturnum habere nonnihil in auto...
See also Letters vol.1 p.161, Op.o. p.658:
ir Plato placed the higher part of the soul under the
authority of Saturn, that is in the realm of mind and
divine providence, and the lower part under Jupiter, in
the realm of life and fate. Because of this the soul
seems to have a double aspect, one of gold and one of
silver. The former looks towards the Saturnine and the
latter to the Jovial.
(Pattern guidem anlmae superiorein Plato noster in regno
Saturni, Id est, in mentis et providentiae, inferiorem
autem in regno lovis, Id est, vitae, vitae fatigue
locavit. Quapropter anima iam bifrontis Instar vultum
-.335.-

geminum habere videtur, aureum, scilicet et argenteum, illo Saturnia,
hoc lovalia respicit.)
45. Nevertheless, there does exist a spurious treatise, attributed to
Ficino, on alchemy: Marsilil Picino Florentini, Llber de arte chimica
in 3.J. Nangeti, Bibliotheca chemica curiosa artis aurlferae (1702).
A note on the title page states: "HUnC librum saepius citat Evraldus
Vogetlus tanquam Marsllii Ficini, ut et etiain Theob. de Hogelande in
Proemlo etc. itaque 1.111 Authori non male a nobis tribultur." Despite
a mention of the murder of Pico della Mirandola (p.176 and it is
curiously ambiguous whether this refers to Giovanni Pico's death in
1494 or his nephew Gianfrancesco's in 1533) this treatise is almost
certainly a forgery, but its existence demonstrates both the desire to
lend alchemy a philosophical authority and the belief that Ficino did
practise the art. See J. Clark, 'MrsI1io Ficino among the
Alchemists' pp.50-4; Jung, Psychology and Alchemy p.424 n.192. Jung
himself refers to Ficino as "physician and alchemist" (The Archetypes
and the Collective Unconscious p.314 n.76). The direct influence of
the Corpus Hermeticui, made available by Ficino's translation,
certainly seemed to inaugurate a new form of 'spiritual' alchemy in
the Renaissance associated with magic and the cabbala. Frances Yates
(Giordano Bruno p.150) suggests that the alchemical practices of
Paracelsus were based on both the Corpus Hermeticum and Ficino's new
natural magic of the imagination (p.151). In terms of the
psychological implications of alchemy, it hardly matters whether one
gives the name 'alchemist' to Ficino - that he Intentionally set out
to achieve a spiritual and psychological purification and
transformation which would lead to unity and harmony of mind, soul and
body is beyond question.
46. Op.om. p.861:
Quantum vero vanissimos illos, quos vulgo Alchimistas
appellant, totiens et fallit opinio, et fortuna
frustratur, quotiens inferiora metalla conflare In aururn
molluntur, tantum his gui concupiscentiam, iracundlam,
actionem contemplationi pro vlribus subigunt, res Ipsa
quotidie uccedit ad votum, adeo ut pro caeteris metallis
aurum, id est, pro vilissImis pretlosissima et pro
caducis aeterna reportent.
47. See M. Hyde, 'Jung and Astrology: A Critique'. This ref., Astrology
Quarterly vol. 58 no.3 p.151
48. See chapter one, p.47
49.

Ficino, Liber de vita, prooemium ad Magnanimam Laurentium Medicem

patrlae servatorea 1.17:
Ego sacerdos minimus patres habui duos: Ficinum medicum,
Cosmum Medicem. Ex Illo natus sum, ex isto renatus.
ille quidem me Galieno turn medico turn Platonico
commendavit; hic autem divino consecravit me Platoni.
Et hic similiter atque Ille Marsilium medico destinavit:
Galienus quidem corporum, Plato vero medicus animorum.
iandiu igitur sub Platone salutarem animorum exercul
medicinam, quando post librorum omnium elus
interpretationem, mox decem atque octo De animorum
-336-

iortalite lihros et aeterna felicitate composul, ita
pro viribus pat.ri meo Nedici satisfaciens. Medico veto
patti satis deinceps faciendum putans, librum De
litteratorui valetudlne curanda composul.
50.

ibid. 3.XXVI.51:
Slailia quaedam efficit aedicus et pliysicus et
chirurgicus in corpore nostro tum ad nostram fovendam,
turn ad universi naturam uberius coinparandam. Idern
quoque philosophus naturalium rer.mk astrorumque per itus,
quern proprie Magum appellare solemus, certis quibusdam
Illecebris coelestla terrenis opportune quldem nec
aliter inserens guam insitionis studiosus agricola
veteri recentem stipiti surculum.

51. See for example Jung, Mysterium Conlunctionis part IV, 'Rex and
Regina' paras.349-543, with nunrous references in Psychology arid
Alchemy and Aicheilcal Studies.
52 Jung, P8ycholoqy and &lcheay para.346
53. Prooeaiva to the Liber de vita 1.29
54. ibid. 1.30:
ut ex ipso mundi corpore vivo vita quaedarn vegetior In
corpus nostrum, quasi quoddam aundi membrum, velut ex
vite propagaretur.
55.

ibid. 3.XX.57:
Proinde imaginationis intentionem non tarn In fabricandis
imaginibus vel medicinis vim habere, guam in applicandis
et assumeridis existimo, ut si guts imaginem Cut alunt)
gestans rite factam, vel certe medicina similiter utens,
opea ab ea vehennter affectet, et proculdubio credat
speretque firmissime, hinc certe guam plurimus sit
adiumento cumulus accessurus.

56. See Jung, Mysteriva Conlunctlonls para.777
57. Liber de vita 3.XIX
58.

'Symbol' see Jung, Psychological Types XI paras.814-29; G.
Cornelius, 'The Moment of Mtrology' pt.VI

59. Jung, Psychology and Alchemy para.394, this quotation para.399
60. See e.g. Jung 'The Concept of the Collective Unconscious' in The
Archetypes and the Collective Unconscious, especially paras.100-103
61. Llber de vita 3.XIX.3
62.

ibid. 3.XIX.30,45. An example of such an 'image of the world' that
Ficino advocates would perhaps be the astrological frescoes in the
Schifanola palace in Ferrara, paInted 1469-70. See Bertozzi, La
Tirannia degli Astri
-337-

63.

ibid. 3.XIX.52:
Et egressus domo non tanta attentione singularum rerum
spectacula, quanta univers I f iguram coloresque
perspiciet... Tu vero praestantiorem in te finges
imaginem.

64. Jung, Psychology and Alchemy para.172
65. Liber de vita 3.VI.170, 3.XI.16
66. ibid. 3.111.21-2
67. Ficino, De amore VI.10, Op.om. p.1348 (Jayne, Plato on Love p.127):
Sed cur magnum putamus amorem? Quia tota vis magicae in
emote consistit. Magicae opus est, attractio rei unius
ab ella, ex guadam cognatlone naturae. Mundi autem
huius partes, ceu animalis unius membra, omnes ab uno
autore pendentes, unlus natdrae communione invicem
copulantur. Ideo sicut in nobis cerebrum, pulmones, ita
In gentis huius animalis membra, Id est, omnia mundi
corpora, connexa similiter mutant Invidem naturas et
mutuantur: ex communi cognatione communis innascitur
amor, ex emote communis attractio. Haec autem vera
magica est.
68.

ibid.:
Ars enim ubi naturall cognationi deest aliquid, per
vapores, numeros, figuras, qualitates opportunis supplet
tempor ibus.

69. Liber de vita, Apologia 1.59:
Neque de magia hic prophana, quae cultu deemonum
nititur, verbum quldem ullum asseverari, sed de magla
naturali, quae rebus naturalibus ad prosperam corporum
valeti.inem coelestium beneficia captat, effici
menti onem.
70.

ibid. 1.68:
certe quldam niundicola est.

71.

De amore VI.10, Op.om. p.1348 (Jayne, Plato on Love pp.127-8):

Virl eos eloquentlee viribus, et carminum modulis, quasi
quibusdam in cantationibus deliniunt, sibique
concillant: cultu praeterea, et muneribus non aliter
quani veneficlis placant et capiunt. Quapropter nemini
dublum est, quin emote sit magus, cum et tote vis
magicae in amore consistat, et amoris opus
fascinationibus, Incantationibus, veneficiis expleatur.
72. See this chapter part one, ref.2 above
73. See Germ, Astrology In the Renaissance p.51
74. See B. Copenhaver, 'Renaissance Magic and Neoplatonic philosophy:
Ennepd 4.3-5 in Ficino's De vita coelitus comiDaranda'
-338-

75. Liber de vita 3, 'Ad lectorem' 1.35:
In omnibus quae hic aut alibi a me tractantur, tantum
assertum esse volo, quantum ab ecciesia comprobatur.
76.

ibid. 3.VIII.79:
Nihil omnino tentemus a sancta religione prohibiturn.

77.

ibId. 3.XV.85:
Per haec irisuper confirmant nonnulli etiarn illud
magicum: per inferiora videlicet superloribus
consentanea posse ad homthes temporibus opportunis
coelestia quodammodo trahi, atque etiam per coelestia
supercoelestia nobis conciliari vel forsan prorsus
Insirivari. Sed postremum hoc illi viderint.

78. ibid. 3.1.26,30-1
79. ibid. 3.1.32
80. See chapter three, p.2l9. R. Marcel (Marsile Ficin, p.491), gives an
example of Ficino's practical application of elections: he elected the
time for laying the foundation stone of the Strozzi palace in Florence
at sunrise on 16th August 1489, together with four others. See
SuppFic.II p.307:
Philippus Stroctius in memoriis vitae suae (Lorenzo
Strozzi, Vita de Filippo Strozzi ed. Bini Bigazzi 1851
p.70): E2b1 tal punto (I.e. diem XVI Augusti 1489 quo
dornus Stroctiana aedificari coepta est) dal
soprannominato Benedetto Biliotti e Maestro Niccolo e
Maestro Antonio Benivieni medici, el vescovo de'
Pagagnotti e H. Marsilio, tutti lo approvorono per
buono.
81.

Liber de vita 3.1.45

82.

ibid. 3.1.56:
A qulbus formis ordinatissimis dependent inferiorum
formae

83.

ibid. 3.1.67:
non tarn sub adrniniculo formaruin figurarumque coelestlurn
guam situ stellarum et habitu motlonum aspectuumque
planetaruin, turn inter se, turn ad stellas planetis
sublirniores.

84. B. Copenhaver, 'lamblichus, Synesius and the Chaldean Oracles' p.453
85.

Liber de vita 3.1.69:

Anima guidem nostra ultra vires membrorum proprias
conuiuinem ubique promit in nobis vitae virtutem, maxime
vero per cor, tanquam ignis animae proximi fontern.
Similiter anima mundi ubique vigens per Solem praeclpue
suam passim explicat communis vitae virtutem. Unde
quidam animam et in nobis et in mundo In quolibet membro
totam potissimum in corde collocant atque Sole.
86.

ibid. 3.11.13
-339--

87. Ibid. 3.11.26:
Saturnus non facile connunem significat humani generis
qualitatem atque sortem, sed hominem ab allis
segregatum, divinum aut bruturn, beaturn aut extrema
miserla pressum.
88. ibid. 3.11.28:
Mars, Luna, Venus affectus et actus homini curn ceteris
animantibus aeque communes.
89. ibid. 3.11.8:
Quo enim potentior causa est, eo est promptior ad
agendum, eo igitur propensior est ad dandurn. Exigua
igitur praeparatio mobis insuper adhibita sufficit
coelestium muneribus capiendis, si modo quisque ad Id
praecipue se accommodet, cui est praecipue subditus.
90.

Ibid. 3.11.76:
Lunae per victum piantis similem.

91. ibid. 3.11.79:
turn vero musicam gravem quidem lovis Solisque esse,
levem Veneris, mediam vero Mercurli.
92.

ibid. 3.11.82:
Propria vero unicuigue regula fuerit expiorare quae
stella quid boni cuique in genitura promiserit, atque ab
ea pot lus guam ab al ia reposcere gratiam

93.

ibid. 3.11.90:
Ubi etlam probant ex applicatione quadam spiritus nostri
ad spiriturn muri per artem physicam affectumque facta

94.

ibid. 3.XVII.28:
Non ignoras concentus per numeros proportionesque suas
vim habere mirabilem ad spiriturn et animum et corpus
s itendum, movendurn, aff iclendum.

95.

ibid. 3XVII.32:
Hae namque harmonicis turn radils, turn motibus suis omnia
penetrantibus spiritum Indies Ita clam afficiunt, ut
musica praepotens palarn afficere consuevit.

96.

ibid. 3.XII.109:
Unde sicut res quaedam non alibi guam hic nec alias guam
tunc proprie nascuntur feilciter et coalescunt atque
servantur, sic et materialis actio, motus, eventus tails
aut tails non alias efficaciam sortitur effectumque
perfectum guam guando coelestium harmonia ad idem
undique consonat.

97.

See Coperihaver, 'Scholastic Philosophy and Renaissance Magic' pp.5256, 539. Flcino's medical authority on occult properties would be
Calen (e.g. De affectu renlbus lnsldentluxi dignotione et curatione for further references see Coperthaver, 'Scholastic Philosophy' p.525
n.7) who stressed the importance of the 'indescribable properties' of
-340-

natural remedies which act 'from the whole substance' and whose
effects cannot be rationally understood.
98. Ficino, Llber de Sole XI, Op.o. p.972 ;
nia sane coelestia proprium lumen nascentia secum
attulerunt, sed vel exiguum, vel nobis occultum, sive
raritate quadam et candore, sive alia de causa lateat.
99. Liber de vita 3.XVI.19:
Siquidem aer et qualitas elus et sonus minus efficax
solida transit subito et sua quadam afficit qualitate.
100. ibid. 3.VI.1:
Praecipua vero disciplina est recte tenere quem
spiritum, quam vim, guam rem potis5imum hi planetae
significant.
101. Ficino mentions Al-Kindi at L1berde vita 3.XXI.15. He would also
have confirmation from P].otinus, Ennead IV.4.35: "without choosing to
do so, any (heavenly body] gives off a kind of irradiation from
itself." (trans. Armstrong)
102. Liber de vita 3.III.5
103. ibid. 3.X. In this chapter Ficino uses specific astrological
terminology to give detailed instructions for electing times to make
medicines. See Kaske, Three Books on Life, 'Traditional Material and
Innovations' pp.31-8. She gives the following explanation for
'dignity' and 'term': "Any given sign (of the zodiac] offers many
other relations to the planets: it is to one planet a debility, but a
dignity - namely a house (or domicile) and an exaltation - to two
others; each third of it is allotted as a 'face' to a different
planet; and varying still smaller arcs of it are allotted to different
planets as their termini, fines, 'bounds' or 'terms'."(p.35)
104. ibid. 3.VI
105. For example, Ficino himself was only too aware of his need for Jovial
companions to counteract his melancholic, Saturnine tendencies (see
letter to the Archbishop of Axnalfi quoted on p.287) He would have
understood the opposition of Saturn and Jupiter in his natal chart,
falling across the Ascendant/Descendant axis, to reflect the
importance of finding his own Jovial qualities through 'the other'
(the seventh house traditionally symbolisthg the marriage partner.
See this chapter part one, ref .167 below; Op.ozn. p.901: "in Leone
Jovem in septima"). Other references to the balancing of 3upiter and
Saturn: Letters vol.2 p.16; Llber tie vita 2.VII.73; 2.XVI.14; 3.1.114;
3.IV.55; 3.V.18; 3.VI.5; 3.VI.42; 3.VI.61; 3.VI.170; 3.XI.52;
3.XXII.18; 3.XXII.58; 3.XXIV.7
106. Liber tie vita 3.VI.170:
Denique ubi Martem times, oppone Venerein. Ubi Saturnuni,
adhibe lovem. Ac da operant ut in perpetuo quodam pro
viribus motu verseris, tantum defatigatlone vitata, ut
et proprium inotum externis motibus clam nocituris
opponas, et coelestem actum pro viribus imiteris. Quod
si poteris spatia motibus ampHora peragere, sic et

-341-

coelum potius imitaberis, et plures coelestium vires
passim diffusas attinges.
107. ibid. 3.XI.16:
Igitur ad motum nitentis aquae, sereni quoque aeris
ignisque moderate distantis atque coeli motum mundanae
vitae suscipes, si ipse quoque leniter et ferme
similiter movearis, quosdam pro viribus gyros agens,
vertigine devitata, coelestia lustrans oculis, mente
versans.
108. ibid. 3.XXIV.29
109. ibid. 3.XXIV.35:
Fratres certe sunt individuique comites Phoebus atque
Bacchus. Ille quldem duo potissimum vobis affert: lumen
videlicet atque lyram; hic item praecipue duo: vinum
odorenue yin! ad spiritum recreandum
110. ibid. 3.XXIV.46. Della Torte Storla de11'Accadeia Platonica
p.811 relates an anecdote that Ficino carried a hip-flask of wine with
him at all times.

111. Op.oa. p.817 (trans. School of Economic Science):
Aeterni huius Solis radii quidam sempiterni sunt hominum
mentes, caliginosa nube corporis circumfusae, sed in
suuxn se Solem cogitatione, et affectu pro arbitrio
reflectentes. Ita profecto resilint, sicut ab initio
suo inde profilierunt. Ergo cum possint aliquando medio
quovis sublato in Solem suum, tam rite contemplando,
quam recte amando refluere, proculdubio inde absque
medio effluxerunt videlicet ab ipsa aeternitate proximae
sine dublo sempiternae.
112.Liber de vita 3.XI.65:
Saturn!, Martis, Lunae sanus cosiinuniter spiritus non
multum habet
113. ibid. 3.11.58:
lam vero si quis convicerit Saturntmi et Martem natura
moxios esse, quod equidem nunquam crediderim, tamen his
quoque utendeum, quemadmodum venenis nonnunguain utuntur
etmedici
114. ibid. 3.XI.85:
Unde ad secretiora et altiora contemplanda conducit.
115. ibId. 3.XI.140:
Soni quinetiam cantusgue grati blandique ad Gratias
omnes spectant atque Mercuriuui; minaces autem admodum
atque flebiles Martem praeferunt et Saturnum.
116. See Copenhaver 'Scholastic Philosophy' pp.531-49 on the opinions of
Ficino's thristian and Arabic precedents and authorities on the use of
amulets and images, in particular Thomas Aquinas (Suia contra
gentiles III, 92, 99, 104-5; Suima theologlae 1,65,91,2,110,115, II11,96,2; De occultis operlbus naturae 9-11, 14, 17-20); St. Augustine
-342-

(De doctrina christiana 2.21.36, 29.45); Avicenna (Liber canonis
len (De simplicium medicamentorum temperamentis
Avicennae fol.33);
10.2.1, 19, 21, 6.3.10, 10.2.19) and Albertus Magnus (De mineralibus
2.3.5ff; Specu1u astronoiae 11, 16)

117. Llber de vita 3.XIII.38; XV.104
118. ibid. 3.XV.70; 3.XVT.95
119. ibid.3. XVI.119; 3.XVIII.80; 3.XX.30
120. See Copenhaver, 'Scholastic Philosophy' p.528
121. Liber de vita 3.XV.102:
merito diffidunt pierique imagines eiusmodi coelestem
aliquam virtute habere. Ego quoque ambigo saepius ac,
nisi et omnis antiquitas et omnes astrologi vim
mirabilem habere putarent, habere negarem.
122. ibid. 111:
si te prius hic adrnonuero, ne putes probare me usum
imaginum, sed narrare.
One finds both Ficino and Jung in agreement with regard to the use of
unorthodox remedies; Jung almost repeats verbatim Ficino's opinion
expressed in his letter to Poliziano (Op.om. p.958) when he says "The
irrational fullness of life has taught me never to discard anything,
even when it goes against all our theories ... or otherwise admits of
no inmediate explanation." ('Foreword' to the I Ching p.xxxiv)
123. Copenhaver, 'lamblichus, Synesius and the Chaldaean Oracles' p.452
124. Liber de vita, Apologia 1.16:
Igitur esca tituli tam suavis guam plurimos alliciet ad
gustandum, sed in numero tanto ignorantes pier ique
futuri sunt (ut arbitror), maligni quoque non pauci.
Alius ergo dicet: Nonne Marsilius est sacerdos? Est
profecto. Quid igitur sacerdotibus cum medicina? Quid
rursuin cum astrologia counnercil? Alius item: Quid
chirstiano cum magia vel imaginibus? Alius autem et
quidem indignus vita vitani invidebit coelo.
125. Copenhaver, 'lamblichus, Synesius and the thaldaean Oracles' p.455
126. See Kaske, Three Books on Life, 'Repercussions' pp.55-70 for a
discussion of the conflicts with the thurch resulting from th
publication of the Liber de vita.
127. Copenhaver, 'Scholastic Philosophy' pp.531-7
128. ibid. p.533 (referring to Aquinas, Suinma contra gentiles III 104-5)
129. Liber de vita 3.XVII.53:
quatenus opportune fiunt dominaritibus illis atque
examussim ad illas configurantur ... Nonne sonante
cithara quadam altera reboat? Ob Id tantum, si et Ipsa
similem figurarn habeat atque e corispectu si posita, et
f ides in ea positate et intentae similiter.
-343-

130. ibid. 3.XVIII.16. See Jung, Mysterium Coniunctionis paras.121-3,
Psychology and Religion, West and East paras.258-80 on the symbolism
of the cross.
131. ibid. 3.XVII.61:
Ergo ne dubites, dicent, gum materia quaedam imaginis
faciendae, alioguin valde congrua coelo, per figuram
coelo similem arte datarn coeleste munus turn in se ipsa
conciplat, turn reddat in proximum aliquem vel gestantem.
132. ibid. 3.XX.30:
Similiter [Arabes et Aegyptil] stellarum spiritus per
radios opportune susceptos suffumigationesque et lumina
tonosgue vehementes competentibus imaginum materiis
inseri, mirabiliague in gestantem vel propinquantem
efficere posse.
133. ibid. 3.XXII.114:
expositos, inquam, non tam naturali guodain pacto guam
electione arbitril liberi vel affectu.
134. ibid. 3.XX.41:
Tradunt Arabes spiritum nostrum guando rite fabricamus
imagines, si per imaginationem et affectum ad opus
attentissimus fuerit et ad stellas, coniungi cuin ipso
mundi spiritu atque cum stellarum radlis, per quos mundi
spiritus agit; atque ita coniunctum esse ipsum quogue in
causa, ut a spiritu mundi per radios quidam stella
aliculus spiritus, is est vivida quaedam virtus,
infundatur imaqini, potissimum hominis tunc operantis
spir itul consentanea.
135. ibid. 3.XX.48
136. ibid. 3.XX.60
137. ibid. 3.XX.73:
lam vero amor ipse fidesque erga coeleste donum saepe
coelestis adminiculi causa est, atque vicissim amor et
f ices hthc aliquando forsan proficiscitur, quod ad hoc
ipsum jam nobis faveat dementia coeli.
138. Jung, Man and his Symbols p.87
139. Jung, Synchronicity p.85. In his theory of synchroniclty, Jung
postulates two distinct ways in which the 'a-causal' connecting
principle has its effect: firstly independently of human consciousness
and intervention (such as represented by the Platonic theory of
Ideas), where two or more causally unrelated events coincide in time
and have the same or similar meaning, and secondly where the meaning
is dependent on the observer being 'drawn in' to the event and on his
subjective response to it. Jung, like Ficino, suggests that
astrologers tend to delude themselves that the effectiveness of their
art can be proved 'scientifically' and objectively, because they are
inevitably implicated in their judgements:
"Had the astrologers (with but few exceptions) concerned
themselves more with statistics and questioned the
-344-

j ustice of their interpretations in a scientific spirit,
they would have discovered long ago that their
statements rested on a precarious foundation. But I
imagine that in their case too, as with me, a secret
mutual connivance existed between the material and the
psychic state of the astrologer. This correspondence is
simply there like any other agreeable or annoying
accident, and it seems doubtful to me whether it can be
proved scientifically to be anything more than that."
See also Jung, 'Foreward' to Wilhelm's I Ching or Book of Changes and
M. Hyde 'Jung and Astrology' pts I and II
140. Llber de vita 3.XX.21
141. ibid. 3.XXI.1:
Verba praeterea quaedam acriore quodam affectu
pronuntiata vim circa imagines magnam habere censent ad
effectum earum illuc proprie dirigendum, quorsum
affect us intenduntur et verba.
142. ibid. 3.XIII.22, 3.XXI.6:
non enim philtra docemus sed medicinas.
143. ibid. 3.XXI.14; see Origen, Contra Celsum 1.25, 5.45, 8.37; Synesius
De soirnlis 132C3-7 (Ficino's translation in Op.om. p.1969); Al-Kindi,
De radlis ch.6; Zoroaster, fragment 150 of the Chaldean Oracles in Des
Places, Oracles Chaldaiques pp.169-70; lamblichus De mysteriis 74-5
(Ficino's version in Opom. p.1902)
144.

Op.oii. p.13O6:

Magos carminibus suis immortalitateni corporibus
polliceri. Magicen Zoroastris Plato In Alcibiade nihil
aliud, guae divinum cultum esse dicit: hic insuper
ac3didit, non magicis tanturn carminibus, verum etiam
philosophicis rationibus, et temperari animus, et corpus
vel semper, vel diu saltem procul a morte servari.
Profecto oratio illa, quae temperatiam audlentibus
omnino sit persuasura, atque insuper effectura, duo
potissimum exigit, et vim a Deo infusam, et rationes a
philosophis comparatas. Atque orationem e duobus
nominat magicarn. Qua Phoebus primo, deinde de
Pythagorici morbos ab animo et corpore mirabiliter
expellebarit.
145. ibid. p.1307
146. Letters vol.2 p.9, Op.om. pp.723-4:
Hunc igitur si quando loquentem nobis audite liceret,
audiemus frequenter verbis suis nonnullos citharae suae
modulos permiscentem. Praesertim quurn ipse semper turn
Phoebo musicae gravioris, Id est, poesis patti, turn
Veneri levioris musicae matri
147. Ion 533d, Phaedrus 245a

148. Letters vol.1 p.46, Op.om. p.614:
hi vero sunt, gui divino afflati spiritu gravissima
-345.-

quaedam, ac praeclarissima carmina ore, ut alunt,
roturido prorsus effundunt... nam levior lila, de qua
paulo ante mentionem fecinius, vocum duntaxat suavitate
permulcet: poesis autem, quod divinae quoque harmoniae
proprium est, vocum atque motuum numeris gravissimos
quosdam, et ut POeta diceret, deiphicos sensus ardentius
exprimit, quo fit, ut non solum auribus blariiatur,
verum etiam suavissimum, et ambrosiae coelistis
simllim.nn menti pabulum afferat, ideoque ad divinitatem
propius accedere videatur.
149.Liber de vita 3.XXI.42:
sic ex tonis primo quldem ad stellarum normam electis,
deinde ad earundem congruitatem inter se compositis,
counem quasi formam fieri, atque in ea coelestem
aliquam suboriri virtutem. Difficillimurn quldem est
iudicatu, guales potissimum toni qualibus conveniant
stellis, quales item tonorum c<xnpositiones qualibus
praecipue sideribus aspectibusgue consentiant. Sed
partim diligentia nostra, partim divina quadam sorte non
al iter Id assequi possumus
150. ibid. 3.XXI.60:
Aptare vero se ipsum ad occultas dotes eius atque
mirificas solius sapientis est off icium.
151. ibid. 3.,XXI.62:
Prima est exqulrere quas in se vires quosve ex se
effectus stella quaelibet et sidus et aspectus habeant,
quae auferant, quae ferant; atque verborum nostrorum
significationibus haec inserere, detestari quae
auferunt, probare quae ferunt. Secunda considerare quae
stella cui loco maxima vel homini dominetur; deinde
observare qualibus coiinunIter hae reglones et personae
tonis utantur et cant ibus, ut ipse similes quosdam una
cum significationibus modo dictis adhibeas verbis, quae
sideribus eisdem stLiies exponere. Tertia situs
aspectusgue stellarum guotid lanos anirnadvertere, atque
sub his explorare ad quales potissimum sermones, cantus,
motus, saltus, mores, actus incitari homines pier ique
soleant, Ut talia quaedam tu pro viribus imiteris in
cantibus coelo cuidam simili placituris simllemque
susceptur Is influxum.
152. ibid. 3.XXI.95. See Kaske, Three Books on Life note 14 p.454
153. ibid. 3.XXI.82:
spirans adhuc et quodauiodo vivens
154. ibid. 3.XXI.112:
praesertim quoniam spiritus eiusmodi musicus proprie
tangit agitque in spiritum inter corpus animamque medium
et utrunque affectione sua prorsus afficientein.
155. Aristotle, De aniaa 11.8 402b 5-6, 420b 31-2
156. See C. Burnett, 'Sound and its Perception in the Middle Ages' pp.46-7
-346-

157. e.g. in Boethius, De inztitutione musica (also 1.12-14 vox denotes
human voice); Guido d'Arezzo, Micrologus; Heinricus of Augsburg Musica
quaestio 109 (assigning specific pitches to planets). See this
chapter part one, ref.7 above
158. Liber de vita 3)0(1.122:
lam veto voces tardas, braves, raucas, querulas Saturno
tribuimus; Mart! veto contrarlas, veloces acutasque et
asperas et minaces; medias veto Lunae.
159. Ibid. 3.XXI.124:
Concentus autem b y! quldem graves et intentos dulcesque
et cuin constantia iaetos. Contra Veneri cum lascivia et
moilitie voluptuosos cantus adscribimus. Inter hos veto
medlos Soil tribulmus et Mercurlo. Si una cum gratia
suavltateque sunt venerabiles et simplices et intent!,
Apoll me I ludicantur. SI una cum lucunditate
remisslores quodammodo sunt, strenui tamen atgue
muitiplices, Mercurlales existunt.
160. See this chapter part one, ref.103 above
161. Llber de vita 3.XXI.130:
adeo ut cum eoruxn more opportune canendo et sonando
ciaxnaveris, responsuri protinus videantur vel instar
echo, vel sicut corda guaedam in cithara tremens,
quotiens vibratur altera temperata similiter.
162. ibid. 3.XXI.144:
Memento veto orationeto apte et opportune compositam et
affectu sensuque plenam atque vehementem similem
cantibus vim habere.
163. In the Apologia to the tibet de vita (1.130) Ficino refers to himself
and Pico as the brothers Phoebus (Pico) and Dionysus (Ficino): "I
often call him my Phoebus and he in turn calls me Dionysius and Liber,
for we are brothers" (Hunc ego saepe Phoebum appello meum, Ille me
Dionysium vicissim atque Liberum). Elsewhere (2.XX.42) he elaborates
on the relationship between Phoebus and Bacchus, saying "Phoebus and
Bacchus are always Inseparable brothers; the two are practically
identical ... they are always brothers and comrades and practically
always second selves." (Phoebus et Bacchus semper individul fratres
sunt; ambo fete sunt idem ... Semper ergo fratres comitesque sunt,
fete semper alter alter et idem.)
164. Pico, Conclusiones numero XXXI no.2, Omnia quae extant opera p.159:
Nihil efficaclus hymnis Orphei in naturali Magia, Si
debita musica, animi intentio, et caetera circumstantiae
quas norunt sapientes, fuerint adhibitae.
See chapter two part one, ref.134 for full title
165. tIbet de vita 3.XXII.9:
per imaginationis conceptus motusgue concinnos, per
congruas rationis discursiones, per tranquillas mentis
contemplationes.
166. ibId. 3.XXII.35
-347-

167. Ficino talks about his own horoscope in two letters: to Giovanni
Cavalcanti (Letters vol.2 pp.33-4, Op.om. pp.732-3) and to Martinus
Uranius (Op.om. p.901). The second account is the more accurate:
ascend isse tunc Aquarium ferme medium, una cuin Piscibus,
arbitror. Saturnuin in Aquar io tunc Or lent is angulum
tenuisse, Martem in eodem, Carcerem duodecima tenuisse,
in Scorplone solem, atque Mercurium in domo nona, Lunam,
in Capricorno: in Leone Jovem in septima. Ibidem in
Virgine Venerem, in Ariete Fortunam.
A detailed study of Ficino's natal chart in relation to his life and
work has yet to be undertaken - forthcoming paper by author.
168. Letters vol.4 p.60, Op.om. pp.804-5:

Vaticinatus es, (arbitror) guam vehementer optarem
iandiu penes aliquam lovialem vitam agere, quo nescio
quid amari, atque, ut ita dixerim, Saturni guod mihi vel
inseruit genesis, vel adiunxit philosophia, aliquando
dulcissimo Iovis aliculus commertlo leniretur.
169. Liber de vita 3.XXII.101. See lamblichus, De mysterlis 8.6-7
(Ficino's version in Op.om.p.3Ol), Orphic Hymn to Eros in ed. Abel,
Orphlca p.89, no.58.4; Kaske, Three Books on Life note 10 p.456.
PART TWO: Musica Instrun,entalis
1.

Op.om. p.944:

Hoc enim seculum tanquam aureum, liberales disciplinas
ferme lam extinctas reduxit in lucem, graminaticarn,
poesim, orator lam, picturam, scuipturam, architecturam,
muslca, antiquum ad Orphicam Lyram carminum cantum.
Idgue Florentiae.
2.

Op.om. p.871:

Adduxerunt item ille Astrologi ad suum ludicium
confirmandum quod fatili quodam tempore antiquum
cytharae sonum, et cantum, et carmiria Orphica oblivioni
prius tradita luci restituisses
3.

Angelo Poliziano, Opera p.310:
longe felicior guam Thraclensis Orphei ... veram ni
fallor Eurydicen hoc est amplissimi iudicii Platonicam
sapientiam revocavit ab inferis.

4.

Supp.Fic.II p.225:
Orphea sed verum faciet te barbara vestis
cum tibi sit cantus illius atque lyra.

5.

Ibid. p.2G2:
Ad Marsillum Ficinum.
Panthoidem priscum post fata novissima silvas
Orphea mulcentem substinuisse ferunt.
Post hunc ingressus divini corpus Homerl
Cantavit numeros ore sonante novos.
Pythagore post hec manes intrasse benignos
Dicitur et mores edocuisse probos.
-348-

Inde ubi digressus varios erravit in aflflo,
Ennius accepit in sua membra pius.
QuI simulac yates mortalia vincla religutt
Et moriens campos Ivit ad Elislos,
Illic usque manens alios non Induit artus
Neve sacrum passus deseruisse nemus,
Marsilius donec divina e sorte daretur,
Indueret culus membra pudica libens.
Hinc rigidas cythara quercus et carmine mulcet
Atgue feris iterum mollia corda facit.
6.

ibid. p.225:
Orpheus hic ego sum, movi gui carmine silvas,
Qui rabidis fed mollia corda feris.
Hebri guamvis unda fluat veloclor Euro,
Victor tamen cantu substitit lila meo.

7.

Lorenzo de' Medici, L'Altercazlone cap.II, in Opere vol.11 p.41.
Quoted In Della Torre, Storia dell'Accademia Platonica
p.791:

Forse caduta è dal superno regno
La lira ch'era tra le stelle fisse
8.

ibid.

9.

Quoted in Della Torre, Storia dell'Accadernia Platonica p.791:
Marsilil citharam crispus si tentet Apollo,
Et dextra et cantu victus Apollo cadit.
ft furor est, cum cantat amens cantante puella
Ad flexum, ad nutuin percutit ille lyram.
Tunc ardenti oculi, tunc planta exsurgit utraque,
ft quos non didicit, comperit ille modos.

10.

Letters vol.1 p.198, Op.om. p.673:
Plato noster in Dialogo gui Ion inscribitur, carmine
ille solum divina Musica musarumque furore infusa poetis
existimant, quae quand Musica humaria cantantur, et
cantorem Ipsum, et audientes quodammodo concitarit in
furorem. Alexandri vero carmina hen ad Marsilium
scripta esse talia mox cithara mea plunibus audientibus
comprobavit ... Quainobrem non tam diligentlae tuae, quae
tamen est non mediocris, guam musarum aspirationi tuam
hanc debes Braccio poesim.

11.

Letters vol.1 p.144, Op.ow. p.651:
Laudas Lyram Aureli nostram, carminibus laude dignis.
Ego carmina tua vicissim Lyra laudabo. Sed ut laude
digna. Ut tu vera loquenis.

12.

Letters vol.1 p.179, Op.om. p.665:
Audivi quandoque Laurentium Medicem nostrum nonnulia
horum similia ad lyrani canentem, furore quodam divino,
ut arbitror, concitum.

13.

Pico owned copies of Ptolemy's Harmonics, Ficino's De ratlonibus
musicae and a musica nova Impresa which may have been Ramos de
Pareja's Musica practica. See C. Palisca, Humanism in Italian Musical
-349-

Thought pp.30-31. On Ramos, see pp.300-2 of this thesis; on Baccio
Ugolini, pp.321-3

14. Letters vol.4 pp.16-17, Op.om. p.788:
nos ... (ut Ita loquar) lyrare ne delyremus ... salva
f it Seinper nobis rite vocantibu.s cithara mediocris.
15.

Op.om. pp.822-3:

Postquam tibi modo scripsi Vile, surrexi properavi,
sumpsi lyram. Incoepi longum ab Orphei carmine canturn.
Tu quoque vicissim, postguam legeris hic iterurn Vale,
(si sapis surge), protinus surge, libens sume lyram,
laborum dulce lenimen.

16. Letters vol.4 p.16, Opom. p.788:
eteris enim lingua tantum, vel calamo loquor, tibi
veto saepe piectroque lyraque ailoquin plectra sine te
mihi silent, mutua sine te mihilyra.
17. Letters vol.2 p.14, Op.om. p.725:
Mi Foresi, quid agis hodle? Lyram pulsas? Cane ne hanc
sine Marsilio tuo pulses. Alioquin Si fidem fregeris,
f ides tibi penitus dissonabunt. Ego quotiens ad lyram
cano, tecum concino, non est mihi suavis absque amico
suavissimo melodia.
18. Letters vol.2 p.33, Op.o. pp.734-5:
lubes, ml Joannes, ut Saturno, de quo super lot Ibus
diebus valde quaerebar, palinodlam canam ... accuso
melancholiam, rem, Ut mihi quideni vldetur, amarissimam,
nisi frequenti usu citharae nobis quodammodo delirita
dulcesceret.
19. See this chapter part two, ref.14 above
20.

Op.on. p.844:

Aura qualibet et leviorem te esse putare, si forte
putares ipse me levi quadam commatum aura, turn vere
superiore, turn autumno praesenti, ab urbe in colles
secessisse charegianos. Sed absit Ut eum ullo pacto
levem putem, gui vel faxis est gravior. Nempe cum non
absque ratione iudicavissem, multo satius fore te huc ad
me mantem ascendere, guam me his temporibus ad te monte
descendere, saepe Apollinem obsecravi, ut lyrae nostrae
lila nunc Orphei Axnphionisque dictaret carmtha, guibus
1111 quondam quercus et saxa movebant, quo ipse te
arboreurn, meo iucidio, saxeumque traherem? Respondit
Phoebus. Erras, Marsilil, nimium, non enirn arboreus,
aut lapideus, (Ut opinaris), est loannes, alioquin iarn
pridem tua ilium (mihi crede) cithara rapuisses, non
lapideus, inquam, imo ferreus est loannes. Hoc ergo
maioris est artis opus. Quare posthac non loco, sed
forma mutate, saxa conabere. Ingens istud vecchii
montis saxum, Cut potes) metamorphosea Zoroastris arte
transferas in magnetem, ita demuin ferreum ilium huc
hominem attrahes. Haec modo nobis oriente Sole, in ipsa
vecchii montis sliva deambulandibus Apollo consuluit.
-350-

Haec igitur in praesentia molior. Vide precor aniice,
quam ardua tui gratia moliar. Vide quaxu frustra te
cogente laborem. 0 quanto melius, guantoque facilius te
sponte loannes mutari tua, guam meo saxa labore mutari.
cum prinium ipse ferreus esse desieris, tunc ego frustra
laborare lam desinam.
21. See I. Linforth, The Arts of Orpheus pp.179-89. Linforth stresses the
paucity of evidence surrounding their use for any ritual purpose:
"Everything about the hymns, except what can be learned from the text
Itself, Is a matter of speculation."(p.182)
22. The hymns are considered to be by a variety of authors, from the early
centuries A.D., perhaps the leaders of mystery sects; see Cornford,
'Mysticism and Science' p.140:
"The rise of mystical cult-societies or non-social
religious groups seems to coincide with the breaking up,
in the sixth century, of the old social units based on
the theory or fact of blood-kinship. It had also
psychological causes: there was a deepening and
quickening of religious experience - the revival
associated with the name of Orpheus."
23. For example, Linforth, The Arts of Orpheus pp.1-173; Walker, 'Orpheus
the Theologian' pp.100-7; J. Warden, Orpheus pp.3-50.
24. In Iarnblichus, Be vita Pythagorica. See chapter two part one, ref.86
25. See Linforth, The Arts of Orpheus pp4-9; Warden, Orpheus pp.6-12.
Sources include Pindar Fourth Pythian ode (462 B.C.); Euripides
Hypsipyle (end 5th c.); Simondes fragment (556-468 B.C.); Apollonius
of Rhodes Argonautica (4th c. B.C.); the Orphic Argonautica (an
account of the voyage of the Argo dating from the early centuries
A.D., supposedly by Orpheus).
26. Ficino, Be amore VII.14, Op.om. pp.1361-2 (Jayne, Plato on Love
pp.170-i):
Primus itaque furor inconcinna et dissonantia temperat.
Secundus temperata unum totum ex partibus efficitur.
Tertius unum totum supra partes. Quartus in unum quod
super essentiam, et super totum est ducit.... Cnnibus
his furor ibus occupatum fuisse Orpheuxn libri elus
testimonlo esse possunt.
27. lamblichus, De vita Pythagorica XXVIII; Proclus, In Platonis
theologiam I.vi. See E. Wind, Pagan Mysteries in the Renaissance
pp. 36-7
28. St. Augustine, Contra Faustum XIII.15. See Warden, Orpheus p.91
29. Ldnforth, The Arts of Orpheus p.296. See pp.291-306 for Linforth's
"conclusions and guesses" on Orphic religion.
30.

See Della Torre, Storla dell'Accadernia Platonlca p.789

31. Ficino, Liber de vita 3.XV.44:
Ego autem cum haec exp].orata hactenus habuissem, admodum
-351-

gratu]abar cogitabamque luvenis adhuc magneti pro
viritxis insculpere coelestis Ursae figuram
32. See ref .25 above; Ficino's version s unpublished - see ref .35 below

33. 0. Corsi, 'The Life of Marsillo Ficino' in Letters vol.3 p.138
34.

Op.oa. p.933, written in 1492.

35. ibid; (translation in Hankins, Plato In the Italian Renaissance
pp.456-7):
Argonautica et hymnos Orphei et Hoiaeri et Procull,
Theologiaiue HeSIOdI, quae adolescens (nescio quomodo)
ad vez
Mhi soli transtuli ... edere nxuam placuit,
ne forte lectores ad priscum deorum daemonuuue cultum
iaadiu mer Ito reprobatum revocare viderer. Quantum enim
Pythagoricis quondam curae fuit ne divina in vulgus
ederent, tanta mihi semper cura fuit, non divulgare
prophana
36. Letters vol.1 p.32, Op.oa. p.608:
Contuli hen
in agrum tharegium, non agri, sed animi
colendi gratia, veni ad nos Marsill quampnimum. Per
tecum Platonis In nostni librum de so bono, qi.m te
isthic arbitror lam e &aeca lingua in Latinam, ut
promiseras, transtulisse. Nihil enim ardentius cupio,
guam quae via commodius ad felicitatem ducat cognoscere.
Vale et veni non absque Orphica lyra.
37. Della Tome, Storia dell'Accadeaia Platonica pp.808-?, quoting an
aneoiote by Benedicto Coluccio.
38. Pico, Omnia quae estant opera p.159:
Secretam Magiam a nobis pnimum ex Orphel hymnis elicItam
fas non est in publicum explicare.
39. IbId., Concluslones nusero XXXI no.7:
Qul nescienit perfecte sensibiles propnietates per viam
secretae Analoglae intellectuarizare, nihil ex hymnis
Orphei sanum intelliget.
40. Walker, Spiritual and Demonic Magic pp.60-2.
41. The surviving portions of P].etho's hymns (Nomol) are edited by C.
kiexandre in TraIté des Loix. See R. Webb, 'The Nomol of Gemistos
Plethon in the Light of Plato's Laws'
42. Pletho, De legibus quoted In Walker, Spiritual and Demonic Magic p.61
43. See Op.om. p.1537:
Magnus Cosimo Senatus consulto patriae pater, quo
tempore concilium In Graecos atque Latinos sub Eugenlo
Pont If ice Florentlae tractabatur, Philosophum graecum
nomine Gemistum, cognomine Plethonem, quasi Platonem
alterum de mysterils Platonicis disputantem frequenter
audivit, e cutus ore ferventi si afflatus est protinus,
-352-

sic animatus, ut inde Acadeaiai quandam alta monte
conceperit, hanc oportuno prim tempore par iturus.
44. See Walker, Spiritual and De.onic IfagIc pp.60-63
45. See Hankins, Plato In the Italian Renaissance p.281, where he quotes
from Ficino's Coanentary on Plato's Laws (Op.o.. p.510):
quemadmodtnn ligna quae casu exsiccavit ventus saepe
mox natura ignis accendit, similiter posse animos ex
religioso quodam ritu, quaavis apnd sapientes minus
ptobato, perfunctos occultis modis mellon ntmUne
corripir, ut gui nesceientes qucmodo in nientem ipsam
seorst a sensibus ascenderunt, ex alto lam feliciter
accendantur.
46. Walker, 'Orpheus the Theologian' p.109
47. Pico, Oanla quae extant opera p.159, Concluslones nuero XXXI no.3:
Nonlna deorum, quos Orpheus canit, non deciplentem
daemonum, a quibus malum et non bon provenit, sed
naturalium virtutum, divthanue sunt nomina, a yen Deo
in utilitatem maxime hominis, si eis uti scivenit, murxlo
dlstributartmL.
48. (i Benivieni and other musicians in the Platonic Academy, see Della
Tome, Stonla dell'&ccade.Ia Platonlca pp.788-800
49. In Supp.Fic.I pp.S1-S
50. Ficino, De amore 111.3, 0p.o. p.1329 (Jayne, Plato on Love pp.66-7):
I I voces acutas, et graves matura diversas certis
intervaflis et modulis sibi invicem magis amicas
faciunt. Ex quo harmoniae compositlo et suavitatis
nascitur. Tardiores etiaxn moths et velociores ita
Invicea teaperant, ut amid potissimum fiant, et
thythmum concinnitatemque exhibeant.
51. cf. Plato, Tiaaeus 47d; the attunement of the human soul is a process
of the restoration "of understanding and what is understood to their
original likeness to each other."
52. See Cornford, 'Mysticism and Science' p.150
53. For a thorough explanation of the extremely complex modal systems of
the ancient and medieval theorists, see article on 'Mode' in The New
Grove vol.12 pp.376-450
54. In H. Allen, The Phliebus Commentary ch.XXVIII p.269:
Ham si sentitono In tonum ac tonum alt transitus,
ciatonos onitur melodia gravis et constans; si per
semitonos plures eatur, chromatica mollis; si autem per
minora quodaodo, harmonica difficilis. Atque heec
aunt quae lubet Plato circa musicam animadverti, In
Pythagonici atque Orphici, harmoniam vocaverunt earn
concinnitatem, quae In vocum modulis ex elusmodi
observations resultat
-353-

55.

In M. Allen, The Philebus Co.aentary ch.XXVIII p.266:
Induxit autem tetrachordum Orte. Naia in hymno Phoebi
lyram Phoebo dat quattuor cum fidibus, dicitque aestatem
produci cum acutaia tangit, hiemem cum gravem, cum medias
duas autumnum atque ver.

56.

See Palisca, Humanism in Italian Musical Thought p.7. According to
Palisca the Greek modal theory as laid down by Boethius was first rediscovered by Johannes (11icus (1415-73) who taught at a school at
the Gonzaga Court in Mntua founded in 1424 by Vittorino da Feltro,
where astrology also formed part of the curriculum. He also points
out that many early Renaissance theorists merely applied ancient ideas
to the existing thurch modes.

57.

For example, in Cuido d'Arezzo (c.1030), Hicrologus XIV; Hermannus
contractus (d.1054), De ausica; Frutolfus of Michelsburg (before
1100), Brevlarum de musica et tonarlus; Johannes Afflighemensis
(c.1100), De ausica XVI; Jacques de Liege (1260-1330), Speculua
ausicae; Uglino of Orvieto (1430), Declaratio auslcae dlsclpllnae

58.

Johannes Afflighemensis, De ausica XVI, in W. Babb, Hucbald, Guldo and
John on Music p.133, 1.109-113. This ref. 1.110

59.

Jacques de Liege, Specului .usicae XIV.8

60.

Hartianus Capella, De nuptils Philogiae et Hercurii; Dionysius
Areopagitus, The Mystical Theology and the Celestial Hierarchies. See
Regino of Prüm (842-914), Eplstola de armonica instltutione, excerpts
in Heyer-Baer, The Music of the Spheres and the Dance of Death p.349;
Aurellan of Réôme (mid 9th C.), Musica disclplina VIII; Anonymous 11th
c. hymn, Naturalls concordia cum planetis quoted in Heyer-Baer p.78;
Jacques de Liege, Speculum musicae XIII

61.

Aurelian of Ré8me, Musica disclplina VIII.23-8

62.

3. Dauphiné, 'La Husique des Elements' p.32

63.

Anselmi, De muslca ed. G. M3ssera. Source is ms.H 233 in the
Ambrosiana Library, Milan, dated Parma, 15th april 1434

64.

The Astronomla source is Vatican Library cod.4080 (15th century); the
authenticity of the Opus de aagia disclplina is more open to doubt.
Massera (pp.16-17) mentions another treatise on magic by )nselmi,
Ouarta pars quarti tractatus Glorgil Parmensis de modis specialibus
lmaginum octavi orbis, Vatican Library cod.5333 (1542) and suggests
that it may form part of the Opus de magia, found in the Laurenziana
Library me .Plut.44.35 (16th century). These sources remain to be
clarified. See L. Thorndike, A History of Magic and Experimental
Science IV p.242 ff, V p.118

65.

Anselmi, Opus de aagla disciplina fol.7v:
Incantatio quidem est refligiosa verborum prolatio
necessaria ad exequtionem propitii cuius sunt partes:
Invittlo, Invocatlo, Coniuratio, Oratlo et Imprecatio.

66.

ibid. fol.79v:
Tuum est consillum sapientia et intellectus et memoria:
-354-

occulta et profiddurra cognosceri et intelligere et
ormentiam et stolidatem et ignoratium ubi vis extubere.
67. See 3. Handschin, 'Anselmi's Treatise on Music annotated by Gafori';
this ref. p.130; C. Palisca, Humanism in Italian Musical Thought says
"Ficino, by making the Timaeus accessible through his translation and
cmmentary, gave the speculation about cosmic harmony a fruitful new
direction."
68. See Massera, Introduction to Anselmi's De musica pp.19-22
69. John Scotus Eriugena was the first to give a flexible interpretation
of planetary pitches; see J. Godwln, Harmonies of Heaven and Earth

pp.140-2; on Anselmi, pp.142-3
70. Anselmi, De muslca 1.153-5
71.

ibid. 1.139

72. Not much is known about the life of Ramos, except that he was born in
Baez about 1440 and lectured at the university of Salamanca. By 1472
he had left Spain and was certainly in Bologna in the 1480s when his
treatise was published and where he gave lectures on Boethius. Two
years later he travelled to Rome, where he was possibly a member of
the Vatican choir. See 0. Strunk, Source Readings in Music History
vol.2 p.10
73. Ugollno of Orvieto, Declaratio muslcae disclplinae ed. A. Seay p.147
74. Republic 531
75.

Philebus 56a

76. Ramos, Muslca practica 111.2.3, ed. J. Wolf pp.96-99, trans. in
Strunk, Source Readings in Music History vol.2 pp.12-14
77. Ramos, Musica practica 1.1.2, ed. Wolf p.4, trans. in Strunk, Source
Readings In Music History vol.2 p.1].
78. See J. Haar, 'The Frontispiece of Gafori's Practica muslca' p.14; C.
Miller, introduction to Gaffurius' De harmonla musicorum
lnstrumentorum opus pp.17-8; also, Gaffurius Theorica musica 1.2,
IV.3,8 on modes, pitches and planetary orders.
79. FicIno, Theologla Platonica IV.1, Op.om. pp.130-i. See also Op.om.
pp.652, 1458-60; M. Allen, Marslllo Ficino and the Phaedran Charioteer
pp.84, 194-6; Letters vol.1 p.143. Platonic sources for the Muses as
creators of harmonja Include Alcibiades 108c:
What Is the art which includes harping and singing and
teaching the measure correctly? ... Who are the
goddesses that foster the art? The Muses.
Also, Timaeus 47d
80.

Op.oi. p.1456

81. Nicolaus Burtius, Opusculum musices, Bologna 1487
-355-

82. Caffurius, De harionia musicorum instruaentorum opus IV.1-l7. For
example, in IV.9 he attribues the Mixolian mode to Saturn and the
Dorian to the Sun "for in its median position among the seven primary
modes it shares its own tetrachord with the other modes: the Sun has a
median position among the seven planets and customarily gives light or
heat to other planets from its own rays." (in C. Miller translation,
p.189)
83. For a modern translation, see A. Barker Greek Musical Writings vol.2.
I discuss this treatise again on p.306
84. Ficino, Liber de vita 111.21.65; see p.284. The Latin tonus generally
refers to tone, note, pitch or Interval, whereas the Greek tonos can
mean mode, pitch, accent, metre, tension or sound-intensity - It has a
more qualitative connotation (from Liddell-Scott Greek Lexicon).
85.

Supp.Fic.I

p.51

86. See W. Bowen, 'FIcIno's Analysis of Musical Harmonla'

87.

Op.oa. pp.685-97

88. Ficino, De amore 111.3, Op.om. pp.1329-30 Wayne, Plato on Love

pp.66-i):

Ides in Musica observatur: culus artifices, qul numeris,
quos numeros, aut magis, aut minus diligant,
investigant. Ii inter unum ac duo, atque unum et septem
minium amorem inveniunt. Inter unum vero, tria,
quatuor, guingue, sex, amorem vehementiorem reperiunt.
Ficino's source is Plato, Symposium 187:
"Music may be called a knowledge of the principles of
love in the realm of harmony and rhythm."

89.

Supp.FIc.I pp.52-4: De causis consonantie coamunibus. See Bowen,
'Ficino's Analysis' p.23

90.

Supp.Fic.I p.53 (trans. School of Economic Science):
Tria vero uni ad ad untnu facile ad unm facile
admoventur. Ternarlus enim numerus individuus et
comprehensor et perfectissimus omnium apud multos
habetur, qua in re cum unitate maxima congruit.

91.

Ibid. p.54:
Quamobrem quotiens voces duas maxime discernit ut duas,
offenditur maxime. Ubi veto discernit minus, minor thi
offensio provenit. Ubi denique minima minima. Appetit
quidem auditus unum, quoniam et ipse unus est atque ab
uno, sed unum cupit ex multis perfecte conflatum atque
ea proportione compositum, qua et Ipse unuu guiddam
naturaliter contemperatur ex multis. Denique qaoniam
auditus Ipse multitudine quadam naturalium partium
constat In unam formam penitus conspirantium, ideo
numerum vocum libenter adsciscit in vocem unam atque
concentum per fecte redactum.

-356-

92. ibid. p.Sl:
Mitto nunc quod sexquioctava quidem tonuin, minor vero
semitonum edit.
93. ibid. p.Sl:
Tertio sexquiquarta, ex qua vocis tertie lerils nascitur
harmonia Cupidem referns et Adonem ... Praecipue vero
tertia, qulnta, octava ceteris gratiores tris nobis
Gratias referunt.
94. Bowen, 'Ficino's Analysis' p.24
95. Supp.Fic.I p.52:
Principlo vox lila gravis ob ipsam motlonis tarditatem
in qua versatur quasi stare videtur. Secunda veto
oxnnino cadit a prima ideoque penitus dissonat. Tertia
demum spiritu quodammodo resumpto quasi resurgit
consonantiamque recuperat. Quarta veto cadit a tertia
atque iccirco pene lain dissona, baud tamen ita dissonat
ut secunda, accessu videlicet lepidissimo imminentis
quite conditia atque interim precedentis tertie lenitate
permuicta. Posthec veto quinta post casum quarte iaxn
resurgit, resurgit inquani perfectius quam vox tertia,
guippe cum vocalis ressurrectionis hec impleat summum.
Cetere namque post eain redire lam potius in priores guam
resurgere a Pythagoricis iudicantur. Sexta igitur
redire videtur ad tertiain, ex qua bis replicata
componitur, ac lenitate quadain molli tertie maxine
congruit. Deinde septima vox infeliciter revertitur
izamo relabitur in secundam elusque sequitur
dissonantiam. Octava denique in primam feliciter
restituitur, guq quidem restitutione dum octavam cur
prima Iterum repetita componit, noveni Musarum cornplet
chorurn ex statu vocis et casu, resurrectione quoque et
reditu quasi quattuor gradibus concinne dispositum.
96. Plato, Tlinaeus 54c-68d
97. Supp.F'Ic.I p.54
98. Ficino's familiarity with Ptolemy's work is testified by Liber de vita
3.IV.53 (referring to HarmonIcs 111.15):
Ptolemaeus, ubi de consonantla disputat, lovern alt cur
Sole prae ceteris perfectissime consonare
99. A. Barker, Greek Musical Writings vol.2 p.271
100. Ptolemy, Harmonics 111.5; the octave corresponds to the intellectual
part of the soul, the fifth to the perceptive part the the fourth to
the animating part.
101. ibid. 111.7
102. ibid. 111.9. See also Quintilianus, De muslca 111.23, Gaffurlus, De
harmonla musfcorum Instrumentoruin opus IV.17
103. Ptolemy, Harmonics 111.16
-357-

104. The opposition and square aspects were considered discordant because
they are composed of signs of opposing natures which tend to conflict
with each other rather than compromise. See Ptolemy, Tetrabiblos
1.13. Ptolemy takes as his starting point for the division of the
zodiac into opposition, trine, square and sextile aspects "the two
fractions and the two superparticulars most important in music" namely
the perfect 4th and 5th. See also Nicomachus of Gerasa, Introduction
to Arithmetic 1.19, 11.26
105. Supp.P'ic.I p.55:
guartum veto etsi dissonuin, tamen ut alunt dissonum
mediocriter, quais est apud musicos vocis quarte natura.
106. Op.om. p.1615:

lain vero non solum non dissonat cancer ab Arietie, sed
corisonat, partes enim utraeque sunt corporis plurimurn
uniformis, et suapte natuxa, quae apud nos dissonant
haronice temperantis, neque minus in coelo, quain in
musico cantu inter se oinnia conspnant. Sic et nobis
forsitan excogitare licebit humanam musicam ex harmonia
coe lest I coeluin nainque Pythagor id, De i lyram
appellaverunt. Coitum igitur Planetaruin apud nos
octavae vocis consonantia referat, haec enim cum prima
coire videtur, oppositionem veto coelestium, quae £ it in
septimo, vox quoque apud nos septima similter omniuxn
dissonantissima repraesentat sextilem aspectum, qui fit
in tertlo signo vox tertia, quadratuin quarta, trinum gui
in quito fit, quirita. Sicut ergo in consonantia nostra
inde pendente quarta vox, vel interdum septima, quae per
se dissonarent, tamen una cum caeterls ad gratiam
consoriaitiae conferunt, sic et xnulto magis in harmonia
coelesti aspectus omnes ad absolutam concordiam
necessarii iudicantur. Hinc £ it ut sapientiores
Astronomi quarturn aspectum adiunctum, vel sextili, vel
trino, non solum non horreant, sed exoptent: fit etiaxn
Ut per septenarios, vel dierum in morbis, vel annorum in
vita, quibus quadraturae, vel Lunae, vel Saturni mox
veniunt, mutationes in nobis non semper in peius, sed in
melius quandoque contingant.

107. Supp.FIc.I p.55:
Quid veto de sere sexto dicemus, quo quldem mollis et
ut ita loquar infirma sexte vocis consonantia
designatur? Hanc utique infirmitatem etsi astrologi in
genesi iudicanda esse malam existimant, prisci temen
theologi idea utilem esse putant, quoniazn homo ipse re
vera ipse sti animus, corpus veto animi hominisque
carcer, carcerisque infirmitas ei gui carcere sit
inclusus futura sit utilis. Sydus posthec septimum
angulare ut aiunt atque discordla lam prinio opposita
manifestisque inimicitiis valde robustum septimam musice
vocent prae se ferre fidetur, robusto quidem coin tono
seu vehementi potius manifestissime lam a prima voce
discordem. Sequitur octavum sydus quod etsi guia morti
ab astrologis deputatur vulgo infaustum videtux, est
tainen priscorum sententia theologorum celesti animo
felicissimum, guippe cuni terrenum 1111 carcerem denique
-358-

solvens et ab elementali dissonantia liberet et
consonantiae celesti restituat. Quapropter non iniuria
absolutazu atque ad principium redeuntem vocis octavae
significat consonantiam.
108. ibid. pp.55-6:
QUId vero de sydere decimo? Ambitionem quidem noc apud
astrologos humanae discordiae fundazuentum, apud vero
musicos vocis quarte discordiam quasi humanam mediazngue
ostendit. Undecimum deinde humane amicitie signuin
amicam demonstrat vocis tertie melodiam. Postremo
duodecimum iniznicis occultis et carceri deputatum
dissonum declarat lapsum secunde vocis a prima.
109. Ptolemy, HarmonIcs 111.7
110. ibid. 111.8 (trans. A. Barker):
Hence the configurations of stars that are diametrically
opposite one another in the zodiac are the most
invigorating of all of them, as are those among the
notes that make an octave with one another.
111. See Ptolemy, Tetrabibios 1.17.38
112. Quis dabit capiti mec aquain. For information on Isaac in particular

and sacred music in 15th-century Florence in general, see F. D'Accone,
'Heinrich Isaac In Florence' and 'The Singers of San Giovanni'; A.
Seay, 'The 15th-century Cappella'; 3. Haar Essays on Italian Poetry
and Music in the Renaissance pp.23,31,36; G. Reese, Music in the
Renaissance pp.169-71, 212-17

113. However, we do find evidence of Ficino's admiration for the organist
at the Cappella di San Giovanni, Squarcialupi (d.1475). E. Haraszti
('La Technique des Improvisateurs de Langue Vulgaire et de Latin au
Quattrocerito' p.24 n.3) quotes a manuscript in the Biblioteca
Leopoldina Laurentiana in Florence which contains a collection of
verses set to music celebrating Squarcialupi's skill: Collectio
cantionum Itallcarum cum notis musicis. Carmina variorum
clarissiquorum vlvorum in laudem A. Ssq. with verses by Marsillo

Ficino, Angelo Poliziano, Lorenzo de' Medici etc.

114. See Reese, Music In the Renaissance pp.167-l1; F. GhIsi I Canti
Carnascialeschi

115. See Reese, Music in the Renaissance pp.171-3
116. ibid. pp.165-7

117. See Haar, Essays on Italian Poetry and Music p.82, Haraszti, 'La
Technique des Improvisateurs' p.21
118. N. Pirrotta, Music and Theatre from Polizlano to Monteverdl p.22

119. Haar, Essays p.35
120. See Pirrotta, 'Music and Cultural Tendencies' p.138, Music and Theatre
p.22
-359-

121. Pirrotta, 'Music and Cultural Tendencies' p.142
122. Pirrotta, Music and Theatre p.22

123. Plrrotta, 'Music and Cultural Tendencies' p.143
124. De vltandis passionibus, quoted in Harasztl, 'La Technique des

Improvisateurs' p.27

125. Text and trans. in Pirrotta, 'Music and Cultural Tendencies' pp.151-2,
155:
narn cum verborum senteritiaeque numerl cum modorum
suavitate coniunguntur, nihil cause esse potest gum
propter aurium vim anirnique similitundinem maxima
permotto in audiendo fiat idque turn fere saepe evenire
solet, curn versibus aut turbidi canendo representat
motus, aut animi morum, disciplinaegue insitutione
admonentur, in qua sita foelicitas hurnana fit.
126. See Haar, Essays p.44

-

127. See Reese, Music In the Renaissance p.155
128. V. Calmeta, Prose e lettere edite e Inedite pp.2Off. quoted in

Pirrotta, Music and Theatre p.27. See also Plrrotta p.23 on Calmeta

himself as commentator and critic.

129. Phaedrus 245
130. Ion 533-6

131. Ficino, Commentarium In Phaedrum; text and translation in M. Allen,
Marsllic Ficino and the Phaedran CharIoteer pp.84-5:
Quaniobrem furor quilibet, sive fatidicus sive
mysterialis seu amatorius, durn in cantus procedit et
carmina, merito in furorem poeticuin videtur absolvi.
132. Letters vol.1 p.46, Op.om. p.614:
Alii namque vocuzu numeris varioruinque sonis
Instrumentorum coelestem Musicen imitantur, quos certe
leves, ac pene vulgares musicos appellaraus: nonnulli
vero graviori quodam firmiorique iudicio divinam ac
coelestem harmoniam imitantes, intimae rationis sensum
riotionesque inversum, pedes ac numeros digerunt: hi vero
sut, gui divtho afflati spiritu gravissima quaedam, ac
praeclarissima carmina ore, ut aiunt, rotundo prorsus
effurxlunt. Hanc Plato graviorem musicam poesimque
nomiat, efficacissiman harmonlae coelestis imitatriceni
quod divinae quoque harmoniae proprium est, vocum
atque motuum numeris gravissimos quosdam, et ut Poeta
diceret, deiphicos sensus ardentius exprimit ... Oriri
vero poeticum hunc furoreni a Musis existimat, gui autem
absgue Musarum instinctu Poeticas ad fores accedit,
sperans quasi arte quadam Poetain se bonum evasurum:
thanem ilium quidem, atque eius poesim esse censet,
eosque Poetis, gui coelesti inspiratione ac vi
rapiuntur, adeo divinos, saepe numero Musis afflatos
-360-

Census expromere, ut ipsimet postdum extra furorem
positi, quae protulerint Linus intefligant.
133. Op.oi. p.1365:
Quicunque numine quomodolibet occupatur, profecto
propter ipsam linpulsas divini vehementlam, virtutisque
plenitudinem, exuberat, concitatur, exultat, finesque et
mores h.manos excedit.
134. Ficino, De aaore VII.14, Op.oa. p.1361 (Jayne, Plato on Love
pp.170-i):
Poetico ergo furore primum opus est, qul per Musicos
tonos quae torpent suscitet: per harnonicam suavitatem
quae turbantur, mulcet: per diversorum denique
consonantiam, dissonantem pellat discordiam, et varias
partes animi temperet.
135. Flcino, Liber de vita 3.XXI.47
136. Castiglione, 11 Libro del Cortegiano Book I. The edition I have used
for the original Italian (1528) is unpaginated; &glIsh translations
in G. Bull, The Book of the Courtier. See B. Becherini, 'fl.
Corte1ana e la Musica' p.92
137. castiglione, 11 Libro del Corteglano Book I. See Becherini 'j].
Corteglano' p.92. I am grateful to Anthony Rooley for first
introducing me to the concepts of sprezzatura and grazia and their
importance for the study of Renaissance performance practice.
138. Castiglione, II Libro del Corteglano Book I. See also G. Caccini,
preface to Le Nuove Musiche, where he talks of "una certa nobile
sprezzatura di canto" present in his new manner of singing (ed. Wiley
Hitchcock, p.44)
139. Castig].ione, II Libro del Cortegiano Book I (Bull p.67):
trovo una regula universalissima: la qual ml par valer
circa questo in tutte le cose humane, che 51 facciano, o
dicano pii che alcuna altra. Et ciô è fuggir quanto pitt
si pô: et come un asperissimo et pericoloso scoglio la
affettazione, et per dir forse una mova parola, usar in
ogni cosa una certa sprezzatura, che nasconda 1' arte, et
dlmostr ci6 che si fa, e dice venir fatto senza fat ica,
e quasi senza pensarvi. Da guesto credo lo che derivi
assai la grazia
140. See W. Kemp, 'Some Notes on Music in Castiglione's I]. Libro del
Corteglano' p.360
141. Caffurius, Practica us1ca ed. I. Young, p.181
142. Castiglione, 11 Libro del Corteglano Book I:
Vedete adunque come I]. mostrar l'arte, ê un cosi intento
studio, levi la gratia d'ognl cosa.
143. See ref .149 below

144. In Plato, Phaedrus 251
-361-

145. Published in Florence, c.1500. Given that in this poem Pulci lampoons
Ficino and his Academy (and generally caused Ficino much anger by his
slanderous and underhand behaviour towards him - see Letters
vol.1 pp.168-170) it has been suggested that this illustration
represents Flcino himself.
146. Castiglione, Ii Libro del Corteglano Book I (Bull p.69):
Ciô procede che quel continuare nelle perfette genera
satietâ, e dimostra una troppo affettata armonia, ii che
mescolando le imperfette, si fugge, col far quasi un
paragone, donde piâ le orrechie nostre stanno suspese, e
pl avidamente attendono, e gustano le perfette: e
dilettansi tal'hor di quella dissonantia della seconda,
o settima, come di cosa sprezzata.
147. ibid. Book I (see Kemp, 'Some Notes on Music' pp.355-6):
(la sprezzatura] porta ancor seco un'altro ornamento: ii
quale accompagnando qual si voglia act lone huinana, per
minima che ella sia, non solamente subit scopre 11 saper
dl chi la fa, ma spesso lo fa estimare molto maggior di
quello che e in efetto, perche ne gli animi deli
circunstane imprime opinione che chi cosl facilmente fa
bene, sappia molto piX di quello che fa: e se in quello
the fa ponesse studio, e fatica, potesse farlo molto
megl lo ... un musico se nel cantar pronuncia una sola
voce terminata con suave accento in un gropetto
duplicato con tal facilitâ, che pala che cosI venga
fatto & caso, con quel punto solo fa conoscere che fa
molto pii di quello che fa.
148. ibid. Book II (Bull p.121)
149. Ibid. Book II (Bull p.120):
tanto di venust& ad efficacia aggiunge alle parole che è
gran meraviglia.
150.Haraszti, 'La Technique des Improvisateurs' p.20
151.Kemp, 'Some Notes on Music' p.358
152. Becherini, 'Il Corte giano e la Muslca' pp.86,91
153.See Kemp, 'Some Notes on Music' p.358
154. On the lira see article in The New Grove, vol.11 pp.l9-24. Becherini
('Ii. Cortegiano e la Musica' p.91 n.31) quotes Agnolo da Firenzuola
(Opere 1802) on the revival of the Greek custom of accompanied
singing, who clearly equates the viola with the lira:
a quelli massimamente che avessero qualche dimestichezza
con le Muse, era la viola, o vogliam dire la lira, assal
pi conveniente.
On the iconography of Orpheus playing this instrument, see G.
Scavizzi, 'The Myth of Orheus in Italian Renaissance Art, 1400-1600'
in ed. J. Warden, Orpheus, the Metamorphoses of a Myth pp.111-162.
See note 166 below. Philip Pickett (Behind the Mask; Monteverdi 's
1'Orfeo' p.15) has drawn attention to the direct connection between
Ficino's magical singing of the Orphic hymns ad lyrain and Orfeo's
-362-

invocation to Apollo in Act III of Monteverdi's opera. Orfeo,
ostensibly singing to C2iaron, could also be seen to call on his father
Apollo, accompanied by a halo of strings in imitation of a lira:
"Orfeo now turns to his father with an incantation
exactly as prescribed by Marsilio Ficino. He offers up
a most restrained and dignified prayer for Apollo's aid,
calling down his father's benign magic; he 'accompanies'
himself on the lira da braccio; he chooses the
appropriate key of G (3d), even beginning his
incantation on the keynote C (Sol); he calls on the
benign star by name (So 1); and he ment loris the colour or
metal associated with it (aurea)."
155. Becherini, 'j . Corteg ipno e la Musica' p.86
156. The relevant passage is quoted in Haraszti, 'La Technique des
Improvisateurs' p.20 (from Karl Weinmann, Johannes Tinctoris (14461511) and sin unbekannter Traktat: De Inventlone et usu iusicae. Elne
historisch-krltische Untersuchung Regensburg 1917 p.42)
157. Cetula probably refers to cithara (Latin) or cetra (Italian) - I was
unsuccessful in tracing it in any dictionary. Tinctoris (De

lnventione et usa &usicae, quoted in Haraszti, 'La Technique des
Improvisateurs' p.2O) defines it as a folk instrument, used by
"certain rustics" (quosda rusticos) for their songs arid dances.
Tambura is defined as an arabic instrument like a mandolin, cetra,
guitar or lute (Dizionario Etiwologlco Itallano V, Florence 1957)
158. Tinctoris, De Inventione et usa usicae (Haraszti p.20):
A Graecis Cut atunt) comperta, non soluin forme (sicut
ifla) differens a leuto, sed etiam chordarum
dispositione ac pulsatione, Enimvero sive tres el sint
chorda simplices ut in pluribus per geminam diapentem
sive quinque (ut in aliquibus) sic et per unisonos
temperate inequalecta hoc est tumide sunt extente ut
arculus (quum chorda elus pills equinis confecta sit
recta) unam tangens, justa libitum sonitoris, alias
reliquat inconcussas.
159. As confirmed by Pirrotta, Music and Theatre p.29
160. Quoted in Pirrotta, 'Music and Cultural Tendencies' text p.150, trans.
p.154:
quod idem fere effet de hispana lyra dicendum, nisi eius
equalis ].eritaque suavitas soleret aurlum satietate semi
longlorque similitudo videretur, gue expectari aurum
terminatione possit.
161. See I. Woodfield, The Early History of the Viol chapter 3, The vlhuela
de ano pp.38-60
162. Tlnctoris, De inventlone et usu iuslcae, quoted In Haraszti, 'La
Technique des Improvlsateurs' p.20:
Viola vero cum arculo nonsolum ad hunc usum sed etiam ad
historlarum recitatlonem In plerisgue partibus orbis
assumitur.
-363-

163. See I. Woodfield, The Early History of the Viol chapter 5 on the
introduction of the viol into Italy, pp.95-8 on the vihuela da arco.
164. Pirrotta, Music and Theatre pp.9,23
165. The Oxford Latin Dictionary defines cithara as 'lyre' and lyra as

'lyre' or more generally as "a poet's inspiration or powers". The
Dictionary of Medieval Latin (London 1975) defines cithara as 'harp'.
For the Italian equivalents, the Grande Dizlonario della Lingua
Italiana (Turin) gives the following definition for cetra or cetera:
"ancient lyre, also lyric poetry and inspiration, lyric poetry itself"
and describes a lira as an ancient instrument smallet than a cetra but

in the same lyre-form.
166.Although we also find him playing lute and lyre: see ed. Warden,
Orpheus pp.112,115,126,139, representations by Lucca della Robbia,
Maso Finiguerra, Francesco del Cossa, Agostino Veneziano.
167.Bidone was an esteemed singer who worked in Ferrara and Mantua at the
beginning of the 16th century. He was credited with having no equal
in vocal technique, astounding listeners with his fast ornamentation
and sudden dramatic effects. Marco Cara was a more traditional
composer/improviser who cultivated a smooth, refined style of solo
song with accompaniment. See Kemp, 'Some Notes on Music' pp.154-5,
who points out that in referring to these two musicians Castiglione
"is restating the accepted Platonic-Aristotelian classification of the
modes by their ehtical qualities of relative excitation and
mollification." (p.355)
168.castiglione, Ii Llbro del Corteglano Book I (Bull p.82):
[La] maniera dal cantare di Bidon ... è tanto
artificiosa, pronta, vehemente, concitata, e di cosi
vane melodie, che I spirti di chi ode tutti si
cooveno, e s' inf iammano, e cos I sospes i par the si
levino in fino al cielo. Ne men coemove nel suo cantar
ii notro Marchetto Cara, ma con pi molle armonie: che
per una via placida, e piena di flebile dolcezza
Intenerisce, e penetra le anime, imprimendo in esse
soavemente una dilettevole passione.
169.On Pletrobono, see Haraszti, 'La Technique des Improvisateurs' p.25;
L. Lockwood, Music In Renaissance Ferrara pp.98-108; Pirrotta, 'Music
and Cultural Tendencies' pp.139-41, Music and Theatre p.26
170. See Lockwood, Music in Renaissance Ferrara p.99; Pietrobono's skill is
praised by Cornazano, (anino, Cortese and Tinctoris among others.
171.Lockwood, Music in Renaissance Ferrara p.68
172. Cornazano, La Sforziade Book 9, canto VIII. The quotations are from
lines 6,25,49,63. See Haraszti, 'La Technique des Improvisateurs'
p.25; Lockwood, Music in Renaissance Ferrara p.102, Pirrotta 'Music
and Cultural Tendencies' pp.144-5
173. See ref .165 above

-364-

174. Cantoni here probably refers to the top strings of the lute, not the

lower ones, allowing for Cornazano 's poetic license and lack of
technical musical knowledge; see note 177 below.
175.Pirrotta, 'Music and Cultural Tendencies' p.146
176.See ibid. p.26
177. In De cardinalatu, quoted in Pirrotta, 'Music and Cultural Tendencies'
p.150, trans. p.154:
enim Petrus bonus Ferrariensis et hi qui ab eo nanarunt
frequenter per hyperboleon iteratione utebantur.
178. ibid. pp.149, 153:
quaeque maxine lucunda .aurium mensione indicantur: narn
liii certi digitorurn cursus turn iteratlo, turn conclusio,
turn vocurn extenuatio et quasi interductio facile in
hominum mentes irrepere exquisita suavitate solent.
179. Tinctoris, De inventione et usu iusicae, quoted in Harasztl, 'La
Technique des Improvisateurs' p.25:
Petrus Bonus all! quad malta difficillus est soil,
cantus non modo duarurn partium verum etiarn trium et

quatuor artificiosissime promunt.
180. See Lockwood, Music in Renaissance Ferrara p.103
181. See Pirrotta, Music and Theatre p.26
182. By Cortese; see Pirrotta, 'Music and Cultural Tendencies' p.143
183. ibid. pp.151,155
184. See Calneta, La vita di Serafino Aqullano 1505 p.63, mentioned by
Haraszti, 'La Technique des Improvisateurs' p.18
185. Harasztl (ibid. pp.17-18) describes the atmosphere at Cortese's Roman
Academy, where the participants passed the time being entertained by
Serafino, "con harmonie de sua musica et con 1 'arguit& di suoi
straninoti".
186. See ibid. p.17
187. ibid. p.17
188. For an extensive discussion of Poliziano's Orfeo, its dating, style of
performance, intrumentatlon, musical form etc. see Pirrotta, Music and
Theatre chapter 1: 'Orpheus, singer of strabotti'
189. Cortese, De cardinalatu, in Pirrotta, 'Music and Cultural Tendencies'
p.161
190. R. Brandolini, De musica et poetica In A. Ancona, L'Orlgine del Teatro
Italiano pp.106-7, quoted in Haraszti, 'La Technique des
Improvisateurs' p.26
191. Pirrotta, Music and Theatre pp.24-36
-365-

192. ibid. p.24
193. ibid. p.15
194. On ugolini's involvement with the Academy, see Della Torte, Storia

deli 'Accadeila Piatonica pp.796-800
195. See Tosulinson, 'Authentic Meaning in Music'
196. Op.o. pp.936-7
197. Toinlinson, 'Authentic Meaning in Music' p.130. Ficino's De aore

was completed in 1469. See chapter four, pp.268-9 of this thesis.
198. In his De asore 1.3 (Op.oM. p.1323, Jayne pp.37-8) Ficino wrote:

"In the Argonaut ica, when'Orpheus ... sang about the
beginnings of things, following the theology of Hermes
Trismegistus, he placed thaos before the world, and
located Love in the bosom of that thaos, before Saturn,
Jove and the other gods; and he praised Love in these
words: 'Love is the oldest, perfect in hiielf and best
unse' •" (Orpheus in Argonautica, c de return
principils coram thirone heroibusque cantaret, Mercuril
Tr ismegist 1 Theologiam sequutt: chaos ante mundum

posuit, et ante Saturnum, lovem, caeterosque deos.
Ainorem in ipsius chaos sinu locavit, laudavltque his
verbis: antiguissimurn seipso perfectum,
consultlssimumque Amorem...)
and at De aaore 111.3 (Op.oi. p.1330, Jayne p.67):
"The god Orpheus rightly called [Love] 'clever, doublenatured, holding the keys of all things'." (Hunc merito
divus Orpheus appellavit solertem bigenium, omnium
claves habentem.)
199. Letters vol.1 pp.198-9, Op.o. pp.634-5

200. Tomlinson, 'Authentic Meaning in Music' p.131
201. Op.oa. p.95l

202. See ref .154 above
203.Tomlinson, 'Authentic Meaning In Music' p.134
204. See Reese, Music in the Renaissance pp.155-83
205.Pirrotta, Music and Theatre p.25
206. ibid. p.25
207. Ibid. pp.32,33,35
208. See also Haar, Essays p.46; Horace Ode in Pirrotta, Music and Theatre
p.31
209. On the connection between Ficino and Caffurius, see 0. Kinkeldy,

'Franchino Gafori and Marsillo Ficino'
-366-

210. C. Miller, in his introduction to De harionia ausicorua instrurnentorurn
opus (p.16 n. 22) points out that this setting Is one of the earliest
attempts to set Latin humanist verse syllabically. The poet is
Lancinus.
211. Sources: K. Jeppesen, Die mehrstirnmige italienische Laude urn 1500 1935
212. Letters vol.1 p.143, Op.orn. p.652:
Ego autem, ut de Marsilio tuo aliquid dicam, eo consillo
post Theologiae, vel medicinae stodia gravioribus
fidibus cantibusque frequenter tnc.mibo, Ut caetera
sensuum oblectamenta penitus negligain, molest las animae,
corpor isque expellam

213. Source: F. Bossinensis, Tenon e contrabassi intabulati col sopran In
canto figurato per cantar e sozar cal iauto, llbro secondo 1511
214. Petrucci's sixth book contains the only three settings in this style
in the whole of the frottola repertoire, and since nos. 2 and 5 are
definitely ascribed to Giustinlani, it seen probable that this one
also stems from his pen. The popularity of his style is evident from
Petrucci 's use of the term 'Giustiniana' to indicate a composition in
this florid style with improvisatory ornamentation. See }iaar, Essays
pp. 32-3
215. See Haar, Essays pp.92-99
216. See Pirrotta, Music and Theatre pp.14,20
217. Poliziano, Letters Book XII, quoted in Pirrotta, Music and Theatre
p.36
218. Letters vol.3 p.1?, Op.oi . p.757:
Stndeo pro vinibus semper Id agere, quod bonum esse tam
prudentum consilium, quum ratio diligens persuasenit.
Neque noc ipsuxa ad externum allquem refero fructum, gui
et futurus sit et brevis, et in hominum, vel fortunae
arbitnio positus, sed pnimum quidem ad verum illud
gaudium, quod in ipsa boni actione percipitur. Quod
quidem bonum gaudiuuue et si temporale did potest,
quoniaxa non continue sixailiter exercetur atque sentitur,
initium tamen est, et in nostro arbitnlo situm.
Eiusmodi vero bonum in praesentia aeternitategue placet.
Non istud dico, quia ego nunc prorsus ipsa fruar
aeternitate, sed guia ego nunc prorsus ipsa fruar
aeternitate, sed quia intelligo id non ob aliam rationem
nisi quia ldeae, Id est, aeternae rationi Deigue
omnipotentis anti congruit, congruere menti, atque
placere. Proinde quemadmodum bonum iUud ad intimum
gaudium retuli, ita refero gaudium ad Ideam, ut
videlicet ea ratlone mini placet bonum, ut ipse Deo
maxims placeam, omnis boni bono, sine quo nthil potest
mthi placers.

-367-

Figur 7.

Appendix 1.2. from Ramos de Pare j a, l4uslca practica 111.3. 1482

-369-

'V

I

I
I.

'0. -

I
2v

Ii
,,

'0
2M
I

'1 :' j
Appendices 2.1, 2.2. Stranibottl by Baccio Ugolini and Seraflno Agullano

-370-

Michele pesenti Ode iaffica. Testo di Orazio. Da Frotiole libro primo (0. Petrucci,
Venezia x5 04). L q (parzialmente omessa la parte dell'alto).

2

Mu - Si - ces

tie -

tae,

- que

chor

ra per

-

cor - ri - gunt

dis.

son

se - ptenl - que mo-dos

se

Thra - cis au

bat.

co -

- pteni

-

ti

gni - ta

pla -

to - ti - dem -

-

svl

qui

Is -

- vis

Appendices 2.3, 2.4. Sappic Odes set by M. Pesenti (from Petrucci Book I,
1504) and F. Gaffurius (from De harmon1 musicoruin lnstrumentorurn opus 1518,
verse 7 only)
-371-

Passio sacra
F,anci5ci dr Dana Ven,,ti dicU Vroter
Petiucci, Larnentationu!x1 Liber pritnus lol.48v_Sor
(Bologna, Bibboteca del Conservatozio)

Altus
Tenor
Bassus

AppendIx 2.5. Lauda: Passlo Sacra

(res i.4.f)

—372-

i37 *

Aye, panis angelorum
(Gas par?
10

5,'

___

___

A - ye,

pa - mis

___________

- -

an - ge - lo - rum, De_ I

.
Ave,panis angelorum. -

y

A e, panis angelorum. -

y

A e, panis angelorum.

AppendIx 2.6. Lauda: Ave panis angelorum
-374-

-

-

' 1}

ta..tisque lux san -

--

E pc fzthirci dal perpctuo danno
gTiocth! in qua the .uepeente
VctiquJi
fbrm (ahime) no quci o1ore Dolccciro iba.c :.itro pesv

No
Ch conwp1aan CU= di Iamczue
Pari iigrauc va;ucrfj doicn!
nti Lirpa matte e crdo afanno
Sefpodra upcoee
Pcrtibrard ca!ico
rrio
PcodecotILc vcI a! duto Ieno)

. perdrt Ia propLl u;a offrir II Irngue
1 cut fol dt uedn-Io non tu degno
Ecco the horut dtrtcra I! vo!to cxahgue
echtozccIcço ba
Come ro d.nlnrvrra Izrigue
Q.ual huom zoera d ptancz I

Apperix 2.7. Capitolo: Se Eal per maraveglia

— 375-

Pcnranco a t'i fupTiio a ta! morte

Sc bcn haue( ii cor dun du fa
Gia le (rrarc C In cxpugrnbd orre
Dc ltnfcmal reamc ha rorc & prtro
Pee Cut! moro p. 0 conf&e & f%xtc
fpCCrcIcookbracciaft:1c

mad

-

l4ri d,d'q fo
le
Cbe ,j
on kpc

C, .oflft Th ma cipat
5a. fpu&a c kaz dot

11

Appendix 2.8. Chul dicese (Petrucci Book VI, 1505)

-376-

BIBLIOcAPHY

1. PRIMARY SC*I

Afflighemensis, Johannes De iusica ed 3. Smith van Waesberghe Corpus
scrlptorua de ausica I 1950, trans. in W. Babb Hucbald, Guldo and John
on Music: Three Medieval Treatises ed. C. Palisca, New Haven and London
1978
Albumasar Introductorius in astronoaiaa trans. Hermann of Carinthia 1141,
printed by J.P. Leucensis, Venice 1506
Albertus Magnus B. Albert! Magnl ... oiera oinia ... ed. A. Borgnet, Paris
1893.
De ineralibus trans. D. Wyckhoff Book of Minerals Oxford 1967
Speculua astronoalae ed. S. Caroti, Pisa 1977

Al-Kindi De radlls ed. M.-T. d'Alverny ari F. Hudry in Archives d'hlstolre
doctrinale et littérature du aoyen ge 41, 1974 pp.139-260
Pnselmi, Giorgio Astronoala Vatican Library cod.4080 ff.41r-87r
______ De iuslca ed. G. Massera, Florence 1961
Opus de iagla disciplina n. Biblioteca Laurenziana Fl. Plut.44.35
ff.lr-23iv/?Vatican Library cod.5333 ff.1-38
Aquinas, Thomas De occultls operlbus naturae in J.B. Aflister, The Letter
of St. Thoaas Aquinas De occultl5 operlbus naturae Catholic University
of America Philosophical Studies 42, Washington 1939
_____ Suaia contra gentiles in 5uia philosophica, seu de veritate
catollcae fidel contra gentiles ed. 3. de Rubeis, Paris 1925

_______ Sumia theologiae ed. 3. de Rubeis, Turin 1922
Aristotle The Coaplete Works ed. Jonathan Barnes, 2 vols. PrInceton 1984
De anisa (On the Soul) trans. H. Lawson-Tancred, Harmondsworth 1986
____ De coelo (On the Heavens) trans. W.K.C. Guthrie, London and
Onthridge, ss .1971
Augustine, St. De civltate Del trans. H. Betterison City of God

Harmondsworth 1984
_______ De doctrina chrlstlana ed. H.J. Vogels S. Aurelli Augustini De

doctrina christiana libros quattuor Bonn 1930
Aurelian of Ré&ue Musica discipllna ed. L. Gishee Corpus scriptorua de
ausica XXI 1975, trans. 3. Ponte, Colorado 1968

-377..

Avicenria Avicenna latinus; edition critique publiée sous le patronage de
l'Union Acadélque Internationale 4 vols. ed. S. van Riet, Louvain 196889
_______ Liber Canonis Avicennae Venice 1507, repr. 1964
Boethius De instltutione usica trans. C.M. Bower Boethlus: Fundaaentals of
Music, An Introduction and Translation ed. C. Palisca, New Haven 1989
Burtius, Nicolaus Opusculua auslces Bologna 1487, reprint 1969
Caccini, Giuiio Le Nuove Musiche ed. H. Wiley Hitchcock, Madison 1970
Cu1nta, Vthcenzo Prose e letter edite e lnedlte ed. C Grayson, Bologna
1959
Castiglione, Baldassare Ii Llbro del Cortegiano 1528 edition, trans.
C. Bull The Book of the Courtier Harmondsworth 1967
Censorinus De die natal ed. N. Sal1iann, Leipzig 1983. Trans. W. Maude,
New York 1900
thaldaean Oracles De oraculls chaldalcis ed. W. Kroll, Hildesheim 1962
- Oracles Chaldafques ed. E. Des Places, Paris 1971
_______ Oracuia .aglca Zoroastris cui scholiis Plethonis et Pselll ed.
J. Opsopoeus 1599
_______ The Chaldean Oracles ed. R. Majercik, in Studies In Greek and Roian
Religion vol.5 ed. H.S. Versnel, Leiden etc. 1989
Cicero De republica trans. C. Walker Keyes De re publica; De legibus

London 1928
Contractus, Hermannus De usica ed. L. Ellinwood, Rochester 1936
. Codex Paris, Bib. Nat. nouv. aeg. 1472.
Cornazano, Antonio La Sforzlade
Canto VIII reprinted in N. Pirrotta, 'Music and Cultural Tendencies In
15th-century Italy' Journal of the American Musicological Society XIX
(1966) pp.144-5

Cortese, Paolo De cardlnalatu libri tres Castel Cortesiano 1510, Liber II
Lois 72r-74v reprinted in N. Pirrotta, 'Music and Cultural Tendencies
in 15th century Italy' Journal of the Aaerlcan Muslcoloqical Society XIX
(1966) pp.147-151
- The Divine Naaes and Mystical Theology trans. J.D. Jones, Milwaukee
1980
_______ The Mystical Theology and the Celestial Hierarchies trans. F1itors
of The Shrine of Wisdom, Brook, Surrey 1965

-378-

Eriugena, John Scotus Perphyseon ed. H.-J. Floss in Johannis Scoti opera
quae supersunt oinia ed. J.-P. Migne, Patrologia Latina vol.122, Paris
1853
Ficino, Marsilio Coientariui in Platonis PhaedruM trans. M. Allen Harsilio
Picino and the Phaedran Charioteer California 1981
_______ Coiaentariva in Platonis Philebua trans. M. Allen Mars1110 Ficino,
the Philebus Coientary California 1975
_______ CouentariuM in Platonis Sophistaa trans. M. Allen Icastes:
Narslllo Ficino's Interpretation of Plato's Sophist Berkeley 1989

_______ De aaore trans. S. Jayne Harsilio Ficino, Coiaentary on Plato's
Syaposlui on Love Dallas 1985
______ Epistolae trans. members of the Language Department of the School
of Economic Science The Letters of Marsllio Ficlno 4 vols. Lor1on 1975,
1978, 1981, 1988
______ (attr.) Liber de arte chialca in ed. J.J. Mangeti, Bibliotheca
chealca curlosa artis aurlferae Geneva 1702, vol.11 pp.172-82
_______ Liber de vita trans. C. Kaske & J. Clark Three Books on Life
Binghamton, New York 1989
______ (attr.) Hyanl Orphel ed. I. Klutstein Marsilio Ficino et la
Thêologie Ancienne Florence 1987

_______ Suppleaentui Ficinianua: Harsilil Ficini Florentlni opuscula
inedita et dispersa ed. P.O. Kristeller, 2 vols. Florence 1937
_______ Theologia Platonica trans. R. Marcel Théologie Platonicienne de
l'laaortalité des aes 2 vols. Paris 1964
______ Opera oanla 2 vols. (continuous pagination) Basle 1576, facsimile
Turin 1959
Firmicus Maternus, Julius Hatheseos libri VIII ed. W. Kroll, F. Skutsch &
K. Zeig].er, LeIpzig 1897-1913; trans. J.R. Brams Ancient Astrology,
Theory and Practice New Jersey 1975
Frutolfus of Michelsburg Breviarva de ausica et tonarius ed. C. Vivell,
Vienna 1919
Caffurius, Franchinus Theorica ausica 1492, reprInt Intro. C. Vecchi,
Bologna 1969

_______ Practica ausica 1496, ed. I. Young, Madison 1969
_______ De haraonia ausicorua instruaentorua opus 1518, trans. C.A. Miller,
American Institute of Musicology, Ann Arbor 1977
Calen Claudil Galeni opera oania ed. C.G. Kuhn in Medicorua graecorua opera
quae extant 26 vols. LeIpzig 1821-30
-379-

uricus, Luca Oratlo de inventoribus et laudibus astronoiiae 1531 in J.

Sacrobosco Sphaera 1531
Giido of Arezzo Micrologus trans. W. Babb in Hucbald, Culdo and John on
Music: Three Medieval Treatises ed. C. Palisca, New Haven and London
1978
Heinricus of Augsborg Musica ed. J. Smith van Waesberghe, Buren 1977
Hers Trismegistus (supposed author) Corpus Herieticu; ed. W. Scott
iferietica 4 vols. Oxford 1924-1936, repi. Boston 1985. Pliander and
Asclepius in vol.1
Hesiod Theogony in Hesiod and Theognis trans. D. Wender, Harmondsworth 1973
}4oner, The Iliad trans. E.V. Rieu, Harmondsvorth 1950 repr.1977
_______ The Odyssey trans. E.V. Rieu, Harmondsworth 1946 repr.1976
Hoaeric HyMns trans. T. Sarient The Hoaeric Hyans New York/London 1973
lamblichus In Nicoaachi arithleticaR introductionem liber ed. H. Pistelli,
Leipzig 1894
_______ De Mysterils Aegyptlorui trans. T. Taylor & A. Wilder, ed. S. Ronan
On the Mysteries Tunbridge Wells 1989
_______ De vita Pythagorica ed. C. Deubner, Leipzig 1937. Trans. i) G.
Clark On the Pythagorean Life Liverpool 1989; ii) T. Taylor Life of
Pythagoras London 1818, repr.1986
Isidore Hispaniensis Episcopi Etyaologiarum sive originua libri XX Oxford
1987
Jacques de Liege Speculu. ausice ed. R. Bragard Corpus scriptorum de
ausica III
Julian, &aperor, the Apostate Works of the Eaperor Julian ed. W.C. Wright,
London 1913
Jung, Carl Gustav Mon Collected Works 9 pt.II, Bollingen Foundation,
Princeton 1978
_______ Alcheaical Studies C.W.13, Bo].lingen/Princeton 1967, London 1968
_______ The Archetypes and the Collective Unconscious C.W.9 pt.I, Bollingen
& London 1959, repr.1990
_____ Foreword to I Ching or Book of Changes trans. R. Wilhelm, London
1968
_____ Man and his Syabols London 1964
______ Kysterlua Coniunctionis C.W.14, Bollingen & London 1963
______ Psychological Types C.W.6, Bollingen & London 1971
-380-

_______ Psychology and Alchemy C.W.12, Bollthgen & London 1968, repr.1989
_______ Psychology and Religion: West and East C.W.11, o1lirigen & London
1958
_______ The Structure and Dynamics of the Psyche C.W.8, Bollingen & London
1969
_______ Synchroniclty, an Acausal Connecting Principle C.W.8, Bollingen &
London 1960
_______ Two Essays on Analytical Psychology C.W.7, Bollingen & London 1953
Lactantius Institutes trans. W. Fletcher The Works of Lactantlus inburgh
1871
Lilly, William Christian Astrology 1647, facsimile ed. London 1985
Macrobius Commentarium in soanum Sclplonis libri duo a cura di Luigi
Scarpa, Padova 1981; trans. W.H. Stahl Commentary on the Dream of
ScIplo New York 1952

Manilius, Marcus Astronomica ed. G.P. Goold, Cambridge Mass. 1977
Marinus Vita Procll trans. K.S. Guthrle The Life of Proclus or Concerning
Happiness, ed. D.R. Fideler, Grand Rapids 1986
Martianus Capella De nuptils Phllologlae et Mercurii trans. W.H. Stahl & R.
Johnson with E.L. Burge The Marriage of Mercury with Philosophy vol.11
of Martlanus Capella and the Seven Liberal Arts New York 1977
Medici, Lorenzo de' Opere ed. A. Simioni, Ban 1914
Nicomachus of Gerasa Enchlridlon in A. Barker Greek Musical Writings
vol.2, Cambridge 1989 pp.247-69
_______ Introductlo arlthaetica trans. J. Bertier Introduction
arlthaétique Paris 1978
Origen Contra Celsum trans. H. thadvick, Cambridge 1953
Orpheus The Hymns of Orpheus trans. P. Taylor, London 1792; trans. A.N.
Athanassakis The Orphic Hymns Montana 1977
_______ Orphica ed. E. Abel, Leipzig 1885 repr.1971
_______ Orphlcorua fragwenta ed. 0. Kern, Berlin 1922 repr.1963
Picatrix, the Latin Version of the Ghaat al-Hakia ed. D. Pingree,
Studies of the Warburg Institute 9, London 1986
Pico della Mirando].a, Giovanni Joannls Pici Mlrandulae omnia quae extant

opera Venice 1557
_______ Disputatlones adversus astrologiam dlvinatricem 2 vols. ed.
E. Garin, Florence 1946
-381-

Philo Judaeus De somnis trans. F.H. Colson & G.H. Whitaker, London 1934
Plato Collected Dialogues ed. E. Hamilton & H. Cairns, Princeton 1961
Pletho, Gemistus De legibus trans. A. Pellisier Traité des Loix, ou recueil

des fragments ed. C. Alexandre, Anterdam 1966
Pliny Natural History trans. H. Rackhain, Cambridge Mass. 1979
Plotinus The Enneads trans. 1) S. MacKenria, London 1962 ii) A.H.
Armstrong Plotlnus 6 vols. Cambridge, Mass. 1966-87
Poliziano, Angelo Opere Basle 1553
Stanze, Fabula dl Orfeo ed. S. Carrai, Milan 1988
Porphyry Vita Plotini in Plotinus I trans. A.H. Armstrong, Cambridge Mass.
1966
Proclus Commentary on the Chaldaean Oracles trans. T. Moore Johnson
Excerpts from the Commentary of Proclus on the Chaldean Oracles in
Iambllchus: The Exhortation to Philosophy, Including the letters of
lamblichus and Proclus' Commentary on the Chaldean Oracles Grand Rapids
1988
____ De sacrificio et magia ed. S. Ronan On the Sacred Art in
Iambllchus: On the Mysteries Tunbridge Wells 1989
Hymn! ed. E. Vogt, Wiesbaden 1957

____ In Platonis theologiam libri sex Hamburg 1618 trans. T. Taylor The
Six Books of Proclus, the Platonic Successor, on the Theology of Plato
London 1816
Instituto theologica trans. E.R. Dodds The Elements of Theology
Oxford 1933
Psellus, Michael Expositio in Oracula Chaldalca in Works ed. 3.-P. Migne,
Patrologia Graeca vol.122, 1889
Pseudo-Ptolemy Centiloguium trans. in Ptolemy's Tetrabiblos ed 3.M.
Ashmand, London 1917
Ptolemy, Claudlus Harmonicorum slve de musica libri ties ed. I. During Die
Karaonlenlehre des Klaudios Ptolemaios in Gäteborgs HOgskolas Arsskrift
36.1, 1930; trans. in A. Barker Greek Musical Writings vol.2, Cambridge
1989 pp.275-391
Tetrabiblos trans. F.E. Robbins, Cambridge Mass. 1980

Quintllianus, Aristides De auslca libri tres ed. R.P. Winnington-Ingram,
Leipzig 1963, trans. A. Barker Greek Musical Writings vol.2, Cambridge
1989 pp.392-535

-382-

Ramos de Pareja, Bartolomeo Husica Practica 1492 ed. 3. Wolf in
Publikationen der Internatlonalen Musikgesellschaft Beihefte II,
Leipzig 1901
Regino of Prim Epistola de armonica institutione ed. Gethert Scriptores
eccleslastici I, 1831 pp.230-47. Trans M.P. Leroux 'Letter on Harmony'
in The Harmonica institutione and tonarius of Reglno of Priim Ann Arbor
1970
Synesius of Cyrene De somnlls in Opera Omnia ed. J.-P. Migne, Patrologia
Graeca vol.66
Theon of Smyrna Mathematics useful for understanding Plato ed. 3. Dupuis
Théon de Smyrne: Exposition des Connalssances l4athematiques utiles pour
la lecture de Platon Paris 1892
Tinctoris, Johannes De Inventlone et usu ausicae ed. K. Welnmann, Munich
1960
____ Opera theoretica ed. A. Seay in Corpus scrlptorum de
musica XXII 1975-8 3 vols. (contains treatises 1 to 9 only)
Ugolino of Orvieto Declaratio musicae dlsciplinae 1430 ed. A. Seay in
Corpus scriptorum de musica VII 1960-2

2. SEcXNDARY scus
a) Wotks on (or containin g material on) Ficino
Allen, M. 'Marsilio Ficino on Plato, the Neoplatonists and the christian
Doctrine of the Trinity' in Renaissance Quarterly XXXVII (1984) pp.55584
_______ The Platonism of llarsilio Ficino: A Study of his 'Phaedrus'
Commentary, its Sources and Genesis Berkeley 1984
Bowen, William R. 'Ficino's Analysis of Musical Harmonia' in Ficino and
Renaissance Neoplatonlsa eds. K. Eisenbichler & O.Z. Pugliese, Ottawa
1986 pp.17-27
thastel, André Marsile Ficin et l'art Geneva and Lille 1950
Clark, John 'Marsillo Ficino among the Alchemists' in Classical Bulletin
vol.59, (1983) pp.50-4
castelli, Patrizia (et al.) Ii Lume del Sole: Marslllo Ficino Medico
dell'Anlra Florence 1984
Copenhaver, Brian 'lamblichus, Synesius and the (thaldaean Oracles in
Marsillo Ficino's De vita libri tres: Hermetic Magic or Neoplatonic
Magic?' in Supplementum Festivum: Studies In honour of P.O. Kristeller
ed. 3. Hanklns, Binghamton New York 1987 pp.441-55
-383-

____ 'Renaissance Magic and Neoplatonic philosophy: Ennead 4.3-5 in
Ficino's De vita coelitus comparanda' in Marsilio Ficirio e ii Ritorno
di Platone 2 vols. ed. G. Garfagnini, Florence 1986 pp.351-369
____ 'Scholastic Philosophy and Renaissance Magic in the De vita of
Marsillo Ficino' in Renaissance Quarterly XXXVII (1984) pp.523-54
Eisenbichler, K. & Pugliese, O.Z. (eds.) Ficlno and Renaissance
Neoplatonism Ottawa 1986
Garin, Eugenio Astrology in the Renaissqnce London 1983
____ 'Recenti Interpretazioni di Marsilio Ficino' in Giornale critico
della Fllosofia Itallana XXI (1940) pp.299-318
Greene, Liz The Astrology of Fate London 1984
Hanicins, James Plato In the Italian Renaissance 2 vols. Lelden etc. 1990
Heitzman, Marion 'La Libert& e ii Fato nella filosofia di Marsilio Ficino'
in Rivista dl filosofia neo-scolastica )OCVIII (1936) pp.35O-71, XXIX
(1937) pp.59-82
Hiliman, James 'Plotino, Ficino and Vico as Precursors of Aichetypal
Psychology' in Loose Ends Irving, Texas 1978 pp.146-9
_______ Revlsioning Psychology New York 1975 p.197
Kaske, Carol 'Marsillo Ficino and the Twelve Gods of the Zodiac' in Journal
of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes XLV (1982) pp.195-202
____ 'Ficino's shifting attitute towards astrology in the De vit
coelitus comDaranda, the letter to Poliziano and the A pologia to the
Cardinals' in Marsillo Flcino e 11 Ritorno dl Platone 2 vols. ed. G.
Garfagnini, Florence 1986 pp.371-8O
Kinkeldey, 0. 'Franchino Gafori and Marsilio Ficino' in Harvard Library
Bulletin I (1947) pp.379-82
Klutstein, Ilana Marsillo Ficino et la Theologle Ancienne Instituto
Nazionale di Studi sul Rinascimento, Quaderni di 'Rinascimento' 5,
Florence 1987
Kristeller, P.O. Karsillo Flcino and his Work after 500 Years Florence 1987
The Philosophy of Marsillo Flclno trans. V. Conant, New York 1943

'The Scholastic Background of Marsillo Ficino' Traditio vol.2
(1944) pp.257-318
Lo Presti, Carlo Corporelt& e ImagInazione come Indici dell'espresslone
auslcale tra edioevo e rinascimento unpublished 'tesi di laurea',
Universita degli studi di Torino, 1988-9
Marcel, Raymond Marslle Flcin Paris 1958
-384-

Marslllo Flcino e ii rltorno di Platone, Mostra de Manoscrltti Stampe e
Docuaentl, Catalogo a cura di S. Gentile, S. Niccoli and P. Viti,
Florence 1984
Moore, Thomas The Planets Within: Marsilio Ficino's Astrological Psychology
London & Toronto 1982
Panofsky, E, Saxi, F. & Klibansky, R. Saturn and Melancholy London 1964
Panofsky, E. Studies In Iconology New York 1939
Plckett, Philip Behind the Mask: Monteverdi's L'Orfeo unpublished study,
London 1992
Titli, Maria 'Marsllio Ficino e la Musica' in l4usica/Realtà no.30, 1989
pp.97-106
Tomlinson, Gary 'Authentic Meaning in Music' in Authenticity and Early

Music ed. N. Kenyon, Oxford 1988 pp.126-l36
Torre, Arnaldo della Storia dell'Accademia Platonica dl Firenze Florence
1902
Trinkaus, tharles In Our Image and Likeness: Humanity and Divinity in
Italian Humanist Thought 2 vols. thicago 1970
____ 'Marsillo Ficino and the Ideal of Human Autonomy' in Marsillo
FIclno e Ii Ritorno di Platone 2 vols. ed. G Garfagnini, Florence 1986
pp. 197-210
Voss, Angela 'Ficino and Astrology' in Astrology; the Astrologers'
Quarterly vol. 60 no.3 1986 pp.126-138, no.4 pp.191-99
_______ Review of FlcIno, Three Books on Life eds. C. Kaske and 3. Clark in
Aries vols.12-13 (1992) pp.68-73
_______ Review of Performance: Revealing the Orpheus Within by Anthony
Rooley (Shaftesbury 1990) in Early Music vol.XIX no.3 (1991) pp.451-3
- 'The Renaissance Musician: Speculations on the Performing Style of
Marsllio Ficino' in Temenos 11 (1990) pp.31-52
Wadsworth, J.B. 'Lorenzo de' Medici and Marsillo Ficino: an experiment in
Platonic Friendship' in Romanic Review XLVI (1955) pp.90-100
Walker, D.P. 'Marsilio Ficino and Astrology' in Marsillo Ficino e 11
Ritorno dl Platone 2 vols. ed. G Garfagnini, Florence 1986 pp.341-9
____ 'Ficino's splrltus and Music' in Annales Muslcologlques I (1953)
pp.133-50
____ 'Orpheus the Theologian and Renaissance Platonists' in Journal of
the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes XVI (1953) pp.100-120
Spiritual and Demonic Magic from Flclno to Campanella London 1956
-385-

Watts, Pauline Moff it 'Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite and Three
Renaissance Platonists: Cusanus, Ficino and Pico on Mind and Cosmos' In
Suppleaentum Festivum: Studies In honour of P.O. Kristeller ed. J.
Hankins, Binghamton New York 1987 pp.279-98
Wittkover, R. & M. Born under Saturn London 1963
Yates, Frances Glordano Bruno and the Hermetic Tradition London 1964
_____ ideas and ideals in the North European Renaissance Collected
Essays vol.3, London 1984
Zambelli, Paola 'Platone, Ficino, e la magia' in Studia Humanitatis:
Ernesto Grassl zum 70. Geburtstag ed'. E. Hora & E. Kessler, Munich 1973
pp.121-42
Zanier, Giancarlo La Mediclna Astrologica e la sua Teorla: Karsiiio
Ficino e I suol criticl contemporanel Rome 1977

b) Other secondary sources

Ancona, A L'Orlgine del Teatro Italiano Turin 1891
Anderson, W.D. Ethos and Education in Greek Music Harvard 1966
Armstrong, A.H. 'The Divine Enhancement of Earthly Beauties' In HellenIc
and Christian Studies HampshIre 1990 pp.50-81
_______ 'The Hidden and the Open in Hellenic Thought' ibid. pp.81-117
________ 'Platonic Mirrors' ibid. pp.147-181
_____ 'Was Plotinus a Magician?' In Plotinian and Christian Studies
(1979) pp.73-9
Barker, Andrew Greek Musical Writings 2 vols. I The Musician and his Art
Cambridge 1984, II Harmonic and Acoustic Theory Cambridge 1989
Barnes, Jonathan Aristotle Oxford 1982
Becherini, Bianca 'I]. Corteglano e la musica' In La Bibliofilia XLV (1943)
pp. 84-96
_____ 'Musica Italiana a Firenze nel XV secolo' In Revue Beige de la
?fusicologle viii (1954) pp.109-113
Bertozzi, Marco La Tirannia degli Astri, Aby Warburg e l'Astrologla di
Palazzo Schifanola Bologna 1985
Burkert, Walter Lore and Science in ancient Pythagoreanisa cambridge Mass.
1972
Bürgel, 3.C. The Feather of Slmurgh: the Licit Magic of the Arts In
Medieval Islam New York 1988
-386-

Burnett, tharles 'Astrology and Medicine in the Middle Ages' in Bulletin
for the Society for the Social History of Medicine 37 (1985)
______ 'Hermann of Carinthia's Attitude towards his Arabic Sources, in
particular in respect to theories on the human soul' in L'Homme et son
unlvers au aoyen age, actes du septlème congres international di
philosophic Bédlévale, ed. C. Wenin, Louvain-la-Neuve (1986) pp.306-22
______ 'Sound and its Perception in the Middle Ages' in The Second Sense:
Studies in Hearing and Musical Judgement from Antiquity to the
Seventeenth Century eds. C. Burnett, H. Fend & P. Gouk, Warburg
Institute Surveys arid Texts, London 1991 pp.43-69
The Cambridge History of Late Classical and Early Medieval Philosophy ed.
A.H. Armstrong, Cambridge 1967
The Cambridge History of Renaissance Philosophy ed. C.B. Schmitt & 0.

Skinner, Cambridge 1988
carmody, Francis Arabic Astronomical and Astrological Sciences In Latin
Translation: a critical bibliography Berkeley 1956
Coleman, P.R. 'Cicero and the Music of the Spheres' in Classical Journal
XLV (1950) pp.237-41
Cornelius, Geoffrey 'The Moment of Astrology' in Astrology, the
Astrologers' Quarterly 6 pts.: I vol.57 no.3 (1983) pp.97-112; II vol.57
no.4 (1983-4) pp.140-SO; III vol.58 no.1 (1984) pp.14-24; IV vol.58
no.2 (1984) pp.85-95; V vol.59 no.1 (1985) pp.42-9; VI vol.59 no.4
(1985-6) pp.207-221
Cornford, F.M. 'Mysticism and Science in the Pythagorean radition' In
Classical Quarterly XVI (1922) pp.137-150
_______ Plato's Cosmology London 1937
cumont, Franz Astrology and Religion among the Greeks and Romans Dover 1960
D'Accone, Frank 'Heinrich Isaac In Florence: New arid Unpublished Documents'
in Musical Quarterly XVIX (1963) pp.464-83
_______ 'The Singers of San Giovanni in Florence during the 15th Century'
in Journal of the American Muslcological Society XIV (1961) pp.305-58
Dauphine, 3. 'La Musique des éléments, motif privilégié de l'hazmonia mundi
au Morn Age' in Les Quatre léments dans la Culture Médiévale ed. D.
Buschinger & A. repin, Goppingen (1983) pp.27-35
Detienne, M. & Verriant, J.P. Cunning Intelligence In Greek Culture and
Society Hassocks: Harvester Press 1978
Dicks, D.R. Early Greek Astronomy London 1970
Dodds, E.R. The Greeks and the Irrational Berkeley 1951

-387-

'Theurgy and its Relationship to Neoplatonism' in Journal of Roman
Studies )OcXVII (1947) pp.55-69
Eco, Umberto Art and Beauty In the Middle Ages New Haven & London 1986
Einstein, A. The Italian Madrigal 3 vols. Princeton 1949
Festugière, A.-J. La Révélation d'HerRès Tr1segiste 4 vols. Paris
1949-54, vol.12 1950
Foen, Garth The Egyptian Heraes Cambridge 1986
Franz, Marie Louise von Alcheaical Active Iag1nation Dallas, Texas 1979
_______ On Divination and Synchronlclty Toronto 1980
Friedman, J.B. Orpheus In the Middle Ages Cambridge Mass. 1970
Garin, Eugenio Ermetlsmo del Rinasciento Rome 1988
Ghjsi, F. I Canti Carnascialeschi nelle fontl iusicall del 15 e 16 secolo
Florence/Rome 1937
Godwin, Joscelyn 'The Golden (thain of Orpheus' in Teenos 4 (1983)
pp. 7-24
_______ Haraonies of Heaven and Earth London 1987
_______ Music, Mysticlsn2 and Magic London 1986
_______ Mystery Religions London 1981
_______ 'The Revival of Speculative Music' in Musical Quarterly LXVII 1982
pp. 373-389
Graves, Robert The Greek Myths 2 vols. Harmondsworth 1955
Gutas, D. Avicenna and the Aristotelian Tradition Lelden etc. 1988
Guthrie, W.K.C. A History of Greek Philosophy vol.1 Cambridge 1962
_______ Orpheus and Greek Religion London 1935
Haar, James Essays on Italian Poetry and Music in the Renaissance 1350-1600
Berkeley 1986
_______ 'The Frontispiece of Gaforl's Practica musics 1496' in Renaissance
Quarterly XXVII (1974) pp.7-22
_______ 'Roger Caperon and Ramis de Pareja' in Acta Muslcologica xli (1969)
pp. 26-36
Handschln, J. 'Anselmi's Treatise on Music annotated by Gafori' in Muslca
discipllna II (1948) pp.l23-

-388-

Haraszti, Fidle 'La Technique des Improvisateurs de Langue Vulgaire et de
Latin au Quattrocento' in Revue Beige de la Musicologie viii (1954)
pp. 12-31
Heaton, John Hetis - Divination, Psychotherapy and Cunning Intelligence The
Company of Astrologers, London 1990
Heninger, S.K. Touches of Sweet Harmony: Pythagorean Cosmology and
Renaissance Poetics Berkeley 1974
Hibbert, christopher The Rise and Fall of the House of Medici Harmondsworth
1980
Hollander, 3. The Untuning of the Skies Princeton 1961
He, Maggie Jung and Astrology London 1992
_______ 'Jung and Astrology, a Critique' in Astrology, the Astrolgers'
Quarterly vol.58 no.3 (1984 pp.139-152, no.4 (1984) pp.185-199
Jacobi, Jolande The Psychology of C.G. Jung Yale 1973
Jaffé, Anie].a The Myth of Meaning in the work of C.G. Jung Zurich 1984
Kemp, W.H. 'Sone Notes on Music in Castiglione's Ii Libro del Cortegino'
in Cultural Aspects of the Italian Renaissance: Essays in honour of
P.O. Kristeller ed. C.H. Clough, Manchester 1976 pp.354-69
Kerenyl, Karl Apollo Dallas, Texas 1983
Kristeller, P.O. Iter Italicum 3 vols. Leiden, 1963, 1967, 1983
_______ 'Music and Learning in the Early Italian Renaissance' in
Renaissance Thought II, New York 1965
Renaissance Concepts of Man New York 1972
Renaissance Thought and the Arts Princeton 1980

Lemay, Richard Abu Mashar and Latin Arlstotellanism In the Twelfth Century
Beirut 1962
______ 'The Origin and Success of the Kitab at-Tamara, Liber Fructus' in
First International Symposium of the History of Arab Science Aleppo 1
976, Proceedings vol II, Contributions in European Languages pp.92-b7
____ 'The True Place of Astrology in Medieval Science and Philosophy' in
Astrology, Science and Society ed. P. Curry, Woodbridge 1987
Levis, C.S. The Discarded Image Cambridge 1964
Lewy, Hans Chaldaean Oracles and Theurgy Paris 1956, rev. ed. M. Tardieu,
ParIs 1978
Lifley-Harvey, Suzi 'Reflections ... Joseph Campbell' in Astrological
Journal XXXII no.2 (1990) pp.92-4
-389-

Linforth, Ivan H. The Arts of Orpheus Berkeley 1941
LIpçan, Edward Musical Thought in Ancient Greece Columbia 1964
Lockwood, Lewis Music In Renaissance Ferrara 1400-1505 Oxford 1984
Luck, George Arcana Mundi Baltimore 1985
McClain, Ernest The Myth of Invariance London 1978
_______ The Pythagorean Plato New York 1978
Head, G.R.S. Thrice-Greatest Hermes 3vols. London and Benares 1906
Merlan, Philip 'Plotinus and Magic' in Isis XLIV (1953) pp.341-8
Heyer-Baer, Kathi Music of the Spheres and the Dance of Death Princeton
1970
Moran, D. The Philosophy of J.S. Eriugena Cambridge 1989
Murdoch, Iris The Fire and the Sun; why Plato banished the Artists London
1977
Nasr, S.H. An Introduction to Islamic Cosmological Doctrines Cambridge
Mass. 1964
Neugebauer, Otto The Exact Sciences In Antiquity New York 1969
The New Grove 'Lira da bracclo' vol.11 pp.l9-24
_______ 'Mode' vol.12 pp.377-448
Otto, Walter F. The Homeric Gods London 1955
Palisca, Claude Humanism in Italian Musical Thought Yale 1985
Pingree, David 'Astrology' in Religion, Learning and Science In the
Abbasid Period eds. M.L. Young, J.D. Latham & R.B. Serjeant, Cambridge
1990
Pirrotta, Nino 'Music and Cultural Tendencies In 15th century Italy' In
Journal of the American Muslcologlcal Society XIX (1966) pp.127-61
_______ & Povoledo, E. Music and Theatre from Poliziano to Monteverdi
Cambridge 1982
Price, A.W. Love and Friendship in Plato and Aristotle Oxford 1989
Reese, Gustave Music in the Middle Ages London 1941
_______ Music In the Renaissance London 1978
Robb, N. The Neo-platonlsm of the Italian Renaissance London 1935
Santillana, Glorgio de & von Dechend, ilertha Hamlet's Mill Boston 1969
-390-

Seay, A. 'The 15th-century Cappella at Santa Maria del Fiore in Florence'
in Journal of the American Musicological Society pp.45-55
______ 'Ugolino of Orvieto, Theorist and Composer' in Husica discipline IX
(1955) pp.111-166
Seznec, Jean The Survival of the Pagan Gods trans. B. Sessions New York
1953
Shaw, Gregory 'Theurgy: Rituals of Unification in the Neoplatonism of
lamblichus' in l'raditio XLI (1985) pp.1-28
Sheppard, Anne 'Proclus' Attitude to Theurgy' in Classical Quarterly XXXII
(1982) pp.212-24
Smith, Andrew Porphyry's Place In the Neoplatonic Tradition The Hague 1974

Sternfeld, F.W. (ed.) Music frou the Middle Ages to the Renaissance London
1973
Strunk, Oliver Source Readings in Music History 1. Antiquity and the
Middle Ages; 2. The Renaissance 2 vols. Boston 1950, repr.London 1981
Stewart, R.J. Prophecy Shaftesbury 1990
Taylor, A.E. A Comientary on Plato's Tiaeus Oxford 1923
Thorndike, Lynn A History of Magic and Experlaental Science 8 vols. New

York, 1923-58
Underhill, Evelyn HysticisR New York 1961
Vogel, C.J. de Pythagoras and early Pythagoreanism Assen 1966

Waite, A.E. Occult Science London 1981
Walker, D.P. The Ancient Theology London 1972
________ 'The Astral Body in Renaissance Medicine' in Journal of the
Warburg and Courtauld Institutes XXI (1958) pp.119-133
Warden, John (ed.) Orpheus, the Metaorphoses of a Myth Toronto 1982
Webb, Ruth 'The Nomoi of Gemlstos Plethon in the light of Plato's Laws' in
Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes vol.LII (1989) pp.214-9
Wind, Ekgar Pagan Mysteries In the Renaissance London 1958
Winnington-Ingram, R.P. 'Aristoxenus and the Intervals of Greek Music' in
Classical Quarterly XXVI (1932) pp.195-208
_______ Mode In Ancient Greek Music Cambridge 1936
Woodfield, Ian The Early History of the Viol CambrIdge 1984
Woodhouse, C.M. George Geaistos Plethon Oxford 1986
-391-

