Part I: Anupalabdhi and Apoha in a Śaiva Garb**

Raffaele Torella

At the outset of an article published in 1988, I noted that the
Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vivr̥ti or ṭīkā (henceforth Vivr̥ti) would deserve a
prominent place in any imaginary catalogue of the lost works of Indian
philosophical literature (Torella 1988: 137). Thirteen years later, in
which the Pratyabhijñā school of the Kashmirian Śaivādvaita has
continued to be one of my preferred fields of research, I would still
fully subscribe to that earlier statement. The role of Utpaladeva’s long
commentary on his Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Kārikā (ĪPK) as the real centre of
gravity of Pratyabhijñā philosophy has become, in fact, clearer and
clearer, though the later Śaiva philosophical tradition chose instead
Abhinavagupta’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vimarśinī (ĪPV) as the standard text.
This brilliant and more compact and accessible text was copied again and
again over the centuries and became popular in south India too, where a
number of manuscripts in the principal southern scripts are still
available. The success of a particular commentary is very often the
indirect cause of the decline of others, which are less and less read
and, consequently, copied, until they are completely or almost
completely lost. One could mention, among others, the particularly
exemplary case of the Yuktidīpikā on the Sāṁkhya-Kārikā that has come
down to us in a very few copies.

I need not repeat here what I have already said elsewhere on the nature
of the Vivr̥ti and its relation to the other commentaries.1 Suffice it to
recall that Utpaladeva is said to have composed the ĪPK and the concise
Vr̥tti at the same time, and later on to have devoted an analytic
commentary to the complex of Kārikā–Vr̥tti, i.e. our Vivr̥ti (or Ṭīkā), in
which he discussed possible alternative views and rejected them, also
indulging in occasionally quite long digressions on particular subjects.

The only mention of an extant fragmentary manuscript of the Vivr̥ti
occurred in K.C. Pandey’s pioneering book on Abhinavagupta and the
so-called Kashmir Shaivism (Pandey 1963: 69-70; see also Torella 1988:
141). Though the original manuscript was apparently lost, a transcript
of it, by Pandey’s own hand, was found among the papers left by the
learned scholar upon his demise and kept by his widow on behalf of the
Abhinavagupta Institute, University of Lucknow. During my visit to
Lucknow in 1987, Mrs Lila Pandey and the Trustees of the Institute were
so kind as to show me the notebook with the transcript, but did not
allow me to copy or photograph it, except for a small portion (10 pages
out of 49), which I edited and translated in the above-mentioned
article. My efforts in later years to secure the entire transcript were,
despite the good offices of N. Rastogi and J.P. Sinha, totally
unsuccessful. By now, Pandey’s transcript is to be considered
definitively lost.

The good fortune that sometimes helps scholars in their research,
counteracting the obstacles set up by human unhelpfulness, took me in
1998 to the India National Archives in Delhi in search of the
manuscripts used by the paṇḍits of the Srinagar Research Department for
the editions of the Kashmir Series. I was interested in those
manuscripts because of the important marginal notes that some of them
contained, where I assumed to find quotations from lost Kashmiri works.
When I chanced upon a Śāradā manuscript, entitled Pratyabhijñā-Vivr̥ti
(Skt. ms No. 30), belonging to a small fund of manuscripts that the
Maharaja of Jammu & Kashmir had transmitted to the National Archives in
1948, I began looking through it with the same scepticism with which I
had in the past looked through manuscripts with the same title all over
India (in all cases, the title had simply been the outcome of careless
cataloguing). Very soon, however, I realized that what I had in front of
me was precisely the original of Pandey’s transcript, as described by
him on the very first page of his notebook.2 Once the transcript had
become irretrievably lost to us, the original came to light again.

The thirty-three folios of the manuscript cover the full text of ĪPK
1.3.6 through 1.5.3 along with Utpaladeva’s Vr̥tti and Vivr̥ti, plus
Abhinavagupta’s Vimarśinī. The manuscript begins with the Vimarśinī’s
bhūmikā to ĪPK I.3.6 (saṁskāre saty api smr̥tiḥ [. . .], vol. 1, p. 103,
l. 6) and ends abruptly with iha bodhas tāvad abhinnaḥ prakāśamātram eva
hy asya paramā-<rthaḥ>, i.e. the first line of the Vimarśinī on ĪPK
I.5.4-5 (vol. 1, p. 135, ll. 5-6). Although the portion of the recovered
text is comparatively short, it proves to be particularly important for
the study of Pratyabhijñā philosophy since some very crucial points are
dealt with there at great length. Among them, we find the nature of
cognition, its being self-aware, the impossibility of a cognition’s
becoming the object of another cognition, the necessity for the various
cognitions to rest on a single substratum for a connection between
cognitions to be possible, and the necessity for cognition and its
object to share the same essential nature, i.e., “light”. Utpaladeva,
and after him Abhinavagupta, progressively attain their final position
by means of a very interesting dialogue, mainly with the Buddhist
pramāṇa tradition and the Vijñānavāda, with the participation of the
Mīmāṁsakas (Bhāṭṭas and Prābhākaras) on specific points.

In this contribution I am continuing, after an interval of thirteen
years, my above-mentioned article, which contained the edition and
translation of the full text of the Vivr̥ti on ĪPK 1.3.6 up to the
beginning of the Vivr̥ti on ĪPK 1.3.7. The present article is devoted to
the edition and translation of the full text of the Vivr̥ti on ĪPK 1.3.7.

The third āhnika of ĪPK deals with the untenability of the opponent’s
theses as regards the unification of cognitions, which alone renders all
human experiences (vyavahāra) possible (cf. the relevant colophon of the
Vimarśinī [ĪPV I: 112]: paradarśanānupapattir nāma tr̥tīyam āhnikam). The
theses of the opponents were presented in the previous āhnika (ibid.:
89: pūrvapakṣavivr̥tir nāma dvitīyam āhnikam). In order to better
understand the content of v. 1.3.6 of the ĪPK, we must read it together
with the previous verse, to which it is closely connected (tr. Torella
2002: 102-03):

Thus, the functioning of the human world — which stems precisely from
the unification (anusandhāna) of cognitions, in themselves separate from
each other and incapable of knowing one another — would be destroyed . .
. (I.3.6) . . . if there were no Maheśvara who contains within himself
all the infinite forms, who is one, whose essence is consciousness,
possessing the powers of knowledge, memory and exclusion (I.3.7).

Utpaladeva’s final aim is to establish a single cosmic consciousness,
i.e. Śiva, as the common background of all reality and, particularly, of
all human experiences. He pursues this intention not by apodictically
stating the Śaiva truth — for example, by resorting to the authority of
revealed texts — but by critically examining diametrically opposed
doctrines, i.e. those of the Buddhist pramāṇa philosophers. In doing so,
he recognizes the leading position of the Buddhist philosophy in the
Kashmir of his day and at the same time shows that he is not afraid of
challenging the great cultural prestige of the Buddhist doctrines.
Moreover, in many cases he makes use, as far as possible, of their
arguments to preliminarily build up and then refine his own position.
This way of carrying out the “duel” with the pramāṇa philosophers
reminds one of the attitude often found in oriental martial arts.
Instead of directly attacking his adversary, Utpaladeva seeks to exploit
the adversary’s intellectual ability to finally turn it back upon him.
The main technique on which Utpaladeva’s argumentation is based is the
one well known in śāstric debate as prasaṅga-viparyaya. The Buddhist
ideas are not rejected at the outset but are rather apparently accepted
and then pushed to their extreme consequences.

As a result, the Buddhist opponent is finally confronted with two
alternatives: either to abandon his own specific theses or, if he is
still convinced of them (and, interestingly, this is the case not only
for the Buddhist, but for the Śaiva philosopher himself), to change the
perspective from which they are to be viewed. In other words, he should
accept the overall theoretical Śaiva framework precisely to safeguard
his own Buddhist ideas.3

The main part of the Vivr̥ti passage edited here is devoted to the
discussion of the Buddhist concepts of “non-perception” (anupalabdhi)
and, less extensively, of “exclusion” (apoha) as the very core of
conceptual thought. If one accepts the self-contained nature of
cognition (as the Buddhist does), it becomes impossible to account for
either of them. On seeing an empty surface we would not be allowed to
say that there is no jar there because the cognition of a certain object
would not be able to give rise to, at the same time, alternative
cognitions later to be rejected. Yet the world of human knowledge,
language and practical activity has among its pillars precisely the
possibility of taking something for “absent”, or of building mental
images by way of exclusion. Furthermore, granted that the Buddhist
description of how an individual cognition works in isolation is
considered as basically correct, the capability of the individual
cognitions to communicate with each other, to enter into a network, is
required. Such a “network” cannot be provided but by the single and
unitary consciousness in which all of them are rooted, in a word: by the
Śiva-nature which permeates reality, constituting its ultimate ground.

Both the topics of anupalabdhi and apoha will receive a separate and
extensive treatment later on in the ĪPK (see I.7.7-11 for anupalabdhi
and 1.6.1-5 for apoha). Here they are preliminarily discussed from a
particular viewpoint, i.e. as exemplary grounds for the necessity to
postulate a single consciousness-principle (in the case of anupalabdhi)
and a basic “universal” stuff in everything (in the case of apoha). The
Buddhists account for the establishment of the absence of a jar in a
certain place by saying that the cognition of the empty place, being
aware of itself as opposed to the cognition of the place together with a
jar, is also aware of the place as “devoid of a jar”. In fact, if a jar
were present in a certain place, the jar would also be manifested in the
cognition of the place since both the jar and the place share the same
capacity [of being perceptible] (tulyayogyatārūpatvāt). This can be
maintained, the Buddhists go on, because particulars belonging to the
same class (i.e. “visible” particulars) are grasped by one and the same
cognition (here a “visual” cognition), and, consequently, in the case of
a jar being there, the cognition of the place should also contain a
manifestation of the jar; but in the case at issue, this is not so.
Utpaladeva points out that we are dealing here with two distinct and
separate cognitions, which are bound to remain so: the one can by no
means include or exclude the other, unless one intends to explain the
establishment of the absence of a jar in terms of inference, which is
not assumed by the Buddhists (see Torella 2002: 143 n. 17). These and
other arguments are taken into account in the text (see below). To
summarize, each cognition sheds light on itself alone; or, in other
words, each cognition has its own self-awareness (svasaṁvedana), which
can by no means act as a common basis where two distinct cognitions may
meet. No single cognition, Utpaladeva concludes, not even perceptual
cognition, can by itself establish the absence of something. The only
way to fill the gap between cognitions and in this way give a reasonable
explanation of the establishment of “absences” which is so common in
everyday life is to accept their resting on a single consciousness.
Instead of a multiplicity of unrelated svasaṁvedanas each corresponding
to a single cognition, Utpaladeva posits the one supreme
consciousness-principle as the common svasaṁvedana of all cognitions,
which in this way derive from it the capacity to enter into relation
with each other.

The starting point for the discussion of the apoha issue is clearly
stated in Abhinavagupta’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vivr̥ti-Vimarśinī (ĪPVV I:
292, 9ff.): Why, on the appearance of a particular object, should one
figure out something different destined to be excluded later (nanu
svalakṣaṇe ’vabhāte kuto ’tadrūpam āśaṅkyate yad apohyate)?
Abhinavagupta is not satisfied with Dharmakīrti’s answer, elaborated at
length in the Svārthānumānapariccheda chapter of his Pramāṇa-Vārttika
and Svavr̥tti: the correct knowledge of the particular (svalakṣaṇa) is
continually threatened by erroneous superimpositions (samāropa), caused,
e.g. by misleading similarities — such as the brightness equally found
in mother-of-pearl and in silver — which make the knower mistake one
thing for another. The doubt which projects alternative objective forms
to be negated would arise precisely because the knower is aware of the
fact that in principle many superimpositions are possible; thus a
definite ascertainment becomes possible only after hypothetical mistaken
forms are preliminarily rejected. Subsequently, Abhinavagupta takes into
account the position of Śaṅkaranandana (ll. 18ff.), who in his
Apohasiddhi recognizes prasaṅga, i.e. the mere possibility that a thing
be different from itself (?) (anyathā-prasaṅga), as the cause of doubt.4
Both samāropa and prasaṅga are untenable for Abhinavagupta because, no
matter whether they derive from beginningless nescience or from other
causes, they ultimately lead to a regressus ad infinitum.

Utpaladeva puts forward his own version of how apoha works, taking for
granted that apoha is indeed the pivot of all conceptual thought. His
view, evidently nourished by Buddhist ideas, is centred on the plurality
of causal efficiencies found in any object, an idea he substitutes for
that of the plurality of wrong assumptions (vikalpa, samāropa), with
respect to which Abhinavagupta will clearly explicate the fault of
infinite regress (anavasthā) (cf. below, n 68) already implicit in
Utpaladeva’s argument. But, more importantly, he makes an additional
remark. On the level of māyā, on which alone discursive thought
(vikalpa) is at work, the objects should be at their highest level of
differentiation; then, how can their cognition also evoke “other”
objects? Utpaladeva’s answer is rooted in Śaiva theology. The
īśvaratattva-level on which the whole manifested world is still enclosed
in the I (sarvam idam aham) remains so to speak in the background even
in the world of māyā, which is marked by full-fledged differentiation.
This is especially true for the process of cognition, in which even the
fully differentiated object ends up flowing into consciousness and being
absorbed into it; moreover, as is often repeated by the Śaiva
philosophers, if the object were not essentially light, it could not at
all shine in cognition (cf. ĪPVV I: 294, ll. 18-20: sa hy eko ’pi bhāvo
vastuto ’nyaiḥ saha tadātmaiva yadyapi māyāśaktyā pr̥thakkr̥taḥ, tathāpi
bhātatvād eva anyonyātmatām unmīlayati; see also p. 296, ll. 5-8). This
latent basic non-differentiation of the object (from other objects and
from the Self) is, according to Utpaladeva, what finally renders the
process of apoha possible, the potential “openness” of the object (and
the subject) being the very ground for the “doubt” about it. On this
premise alone, the Buddhist apoha is accepted by the Śaivas, who take it
as a particular śakti figuring side by side with jñāna-śakti.

Text5

[f. 4v,16] vivr̥tau — yujyeta6 punar etādr̥śo vyavahāro yady eṣām
anubhavasmr̥tyādīnāṁ cinmātrasāratvenaika evātmā syāt, yasyaitā
viśvātmanaḥ parameśvarasya jñānādikā vicitrāḥ śaktayaḥ,7 anyathā tu na
syād iti ।।

na ced antaḥkr̥tānanta [f. 5r] viśvarūpo maheśvaraḥ ।

syād ekaś cidvapur jñānasmr̥tyapohanaśaktimān ।। [1.3.7]

[Vimarśinī follows] [f. 6r,4] atra vr̥ttiḥ — cittattvam eva viśvarūpam
ato ’tiriktasyānupapatter aśeṣapadārthajñānānām anyonyānusandhānam
asyaiva jñānādiśaktayaḥ, mattaḥ smr̥tir jñānam apohanaṁ ceti hy uktam ।।

vivr̥tiḥ — prakāśarūpaṁ8 hi cittattvaṁ kartr̥tāmayam ādisiddham eva
tadatiriktatvaṁ ca nīlasukhāder jaḍābhimatasya bhāva9jātasya svayam
aprakāśarūpatvaṁ syād atadrūpatve ca prakāśamānatānupapattiḥ, na hy
aśvetarūpaḥ prakāśaḥ śveta iti bhavaty etac copapādayiṣyate10 । tad āha
cittattvam evety ato ’tiriktasyeti ca । bhinnāvabhāsinām api cārthānāṁ
cidekarūpatve tadviṣayāṇāṁ jñānānām avivādasiddham eva tadātmakatvam, na
hi tāni tato bhedena prathante, tathāpi11 viṣayabhedāvakalpita-12
bhedānām api teṣāṁ vibhinnadeśakālāvacchede ’py
ekacin-mayasvabhāvaviśrāntir eva । anyathā sarveṣām eva jñānānām
ekasvasaṁvedanarūpāntarmukhacittattvamayasvabhāvābhāve
kevalapradeśajñānaprakāśasamaye saghaṭapradeśajñānaṁ nāstīti kathaṁ
ni[f. 6v]ścīyate, jñānānāṁ svaprakāśarūpatayā
ghaṭādiviṣa-yavadekajñānasaṁsargitvābhāvāt ।

kevalapradeśe hi ghaṭo yadi syāt, tat tatra pradeśajñāne
tulyayogyatārūpatvāt so ’pi prakāśeta tathā ca saghaṭapradeśajñānam etat
syāt, na kevalapradeśajñānam; ataḥ kevalapradeśajñānaṁ svātmānaṁ
saghaṭapradeśajñānaviparītaṁ saṁvedayamānaṁ pradeśam api ghaṭarahitaṁ
saṁvedayate iti ghaṭābhāvasiddhiḥ pradeśe syāt ।

yāvatā kevalapradeśajñānena yadi nāma svātmā
saghaṭapradeśa-jñānaviparītaḥ saṁviditas tato dvitīyam arthāntarabhūtaṁ
saghaṭa-13 pradeśajñānaṁ svaprakāśarūpaṁ nāstīti kathaṁ sidhyet ।

ghaṭo nāstīti kāmaṁ sidhyet, anyathā ghaṭāsadbhāve tasyaiva
pradeśajñānasya saghaṭapradeśajñānatāpattiprasaṅgāt । na ca tat
saghaṭapradeśajñānam, api tu tadviparītam,14 atas tajjñānasaṁvedyo nāsti
ghaṭa iti bhavet ।

dvitīyaṁ tu saghaṭapradeśajñānaṁ nāstīti kena jñātaṁ yatas15
tajjñānasaṁvedyaḥ syād api tatra ghaṭaḥ, na ca tatra dvitīyaṁ
saghaṭapradeśajñānaṁ yadi syāt tan16 na prakāśeta, na ca prakāśate ’to
nāstīti vaktuṁ yujyate tad eva hi paryanuyuktam ।

katham etaj jñānam aghaṭapradeśajñā[f. 7r]ne17 prakāśata iti tu tenaiva
svaprakāśena svātmā tathā jñāyeta, ghaṭe yadvad aghaṭābhāvarūpatā ।

dvitīyaṁ tu saghaṭapradeśajñānam arthāntarabhūtam aghaṭa-18
pradeśajñānābhāvam api na na19 vyabhicarati yena tatprakāśād eva
saghaṭapradeśajñānābhāvo ’pi jñāyeta, dvitīyārthāntarabhūtasaghaṭa-
pradeśajñānabhāvābhāvayor api tasyāghaṭa20
pradeśajñānapra-kāśasyopapatter ekatarā21navyabhicārāt ।

atha saghaṭapradeśajñānaṁ ghaṭamātrajñānaṁ vā na pradeśajñānād bhinnaṁ
sambhavaty ekajātīyarūpaviśeṣaviṣayasyāpi cākṣuṣasyaikatvaniyamāt,
anyathā ghaṭe ’pi pratiparamāṇujñāna-bhedāpatter ghaṭābhāsa eva na syād
ityādiyuktibhis tat kevala-pradeśajñānam evedaṁ ghaṭe sati
ghaṭapratibhāsam api syāt, na ca tatheti tata eva kathaṁ na
ghaṭajñānābhāvasiddhiḥ ।

tad evam iyannyāyānusaraṇād ānumāniky eva ghaṭābhāvasiddhiḥ syāt, na
prātyakṣī. yadi vā samandhakāre22 rūpajñānaṁ nāstīti kathaṁ jñāyeta,
tarhy atraitad api vaktuṁ yujyeta23 +yadi rūpajñānaṁ syāt tad etat
sparśādijñānābhinnam eva syād+ [my tentative restoration: yadi
rūpajñānaṁ tattatsparśādijñānābhinnam eva syād] iti rūpasparśajñānānāṁ
bhinnendriyajanyānām anekatvenaivopagamāt ।

nāpy uttarakālotpannavikalpaḥ24 smr̥tir vā sparśa-jñānamātrābhāsā
rūpajñānābhāvāvyabhicāriṇī25 tam api sādhayati, yato26 rūpasyāpi tadā
sadbhāve yathā[f. 7v]sau sparśajñānābhāsā tathā rūpajñānābhāsā caiva27
syāt, na caivaṁ tadātmānaṁ sparśajñānamātrābhāsaṁ saṁvedayamānāpi
rūpajñānābhāsavivekaṁ sādhayatīti । tato yady api svātmani
rūpajñānābhāsaṁ vyavacchindyāt saṁvedyamānākāraviparītatvāt tathāpi
pūrvaṁ sparśajñānamātraprakāśakāle rūpajñānaṁ nābhūd iti kathaṁ jānīyāt,
sparśamātrajñānasya tatra parisphurataḥ pūrvoktanyāyena
dvitīyarūpajñānābhāvāvyabhicārābhāvāt28 । smārtaṁ hi vijñānaṁ
pūrvānubhavasaṁskārajaṁ pūrvānu-bhavānusāreṇaiva vyavasthāpakaṁ bhavati,
na tu svātantryeṇa pūrvapravr̥ttānubhavabhedasākṣātkāri sad yena
svātmany29 ābhāsamānākāraviparītaṁ rūpajñānaṁ pūrvasmin kāle
vyavacchindan viṣayam api pūrvabhāvinaṁ vyavacchindyāt, yathā
pradeśamātrajñānaṁ svātmani saghaṭa-30 pradeśābhāsatāvyavacchedena bahir
ghaṭam api vyavacchinattīty āhuḥ । tato vikalpajñānaṁ
pūrvānubhavasaṁskārāt tadanusāri jāyamānam, yathā tatpūrvānubhavadvayaṁ
pr̥thakpr̥thakprakāśam ekaprakāśasaṁsargarahitam āsīt, tathānubhūtam31
anubhavāmīti ca tat parāmr̥śati ।

tataś cobhayaparāmarśe ’pi
tatsvaprakāśasparśarūpajñāna-dvayamātravyavasthānaṁ syāt,32 na tv
ekakālikatvena yena tad andhakārakālagatasparśajñānamātraṁ
tātkālikarūpajñānavimuktaṁ svābhāsopārūḍhaṁ [f. 8r] parāmr̥śad api
tadandhakārakāle rūpajñānaṁ nirākuryāt । yāvatā jñānānām
anyonyaprakāśarahitānāṁ svātmamātrapratiṣṭhānāṁ yathā na svayaṁ
tulyakālatāvyavasthāpanaṁ tathā vikalpenāpi tatsaṁskārajanmanā
svarūpamātraprakāśakānekajñāna-33 parāmarśakena naikakālavyavasthāpanaṁ
śakyaṁ pūrvānubhūtātiriktavastusaṁsparśisaṁvedanatvābhāvāt tasya, na
cāpi pūrvānubhūtavastusaṁsparśitvam api vikalpānāṁ ghaṭata ity uktam ।
tad evam ekāntarmukhasvasaṁveda- narūpacittattvātmatāviśrāntiṁ vinā
jñānānām aindriya-kāṇām apy anyonyaṁ sahabhāvapr̥thagbhāvaprakāśo na syād
ity arthānām api sadasattāniyamaniścayo na syāt, tataś ca
sarvavyavahārocchedaprasaṅgaḥ । tasmād eṣām ekacittattvaviśrāntirūpam
anusandhānam avaśyābhyupagantavyam । tad āha aśeṣapadārthajñānānām iti
jñānānāṁ bahūnām anusandhānam eva cittattvam ity anena ekaśabdo ’pi
vivr̥taḥ ।

smr̥tyādau34 cānekānubhavānām anusandhānam eka-cittattvaviśrāntir evāta
evābhedenātra cittattvam anusandhānam iti tasya caivam avibhedena
vakṣyamāṇanayenāśeṣabhāvanirbharasya35 tattadvicitrabhāvāvabhāsanāmayaṁ
jñānaṁ nāma śaktir eva । phalabhedāropitabhedo36 hi padārthātmaiva
śaktir ucyate sā ca śaktiḥ svecchā[f. 8v]vaśenaiva na punar
anyakāraṇasāmarthyasācivyena yasya phalati37 sa maheśvara iti sūtre
tathā nirdiṣṭaḥ । cittattvasya caikarūpatvam agre pratipādayiṣyate ।38
smr̥tir api pūrvāvabhāsitavastunaḥ pūrvāvabhāsitatvena vartamānakāle
prakhyāpanaśaktiḥ । deśakālaviśeṣāvacchedaśūnyatvena
vicitrecchābodhitā39vabhāsabhedavāsanāmātropapāditavikal-
parūpavijñānāpohanaśaktiḥ śaṅkitapratipakṣapratikṣepaparatvād vikalpānām
। padārthāntarasamparkarahite ’py arthe pratiniyataprakr̥tāv avabhāte40
vividhārthakriyākāriṇy api viśiṣṭaikārthakriyārthina īśvarāṅgabhūta
ivānyonyātmatayā
śaṅkyamānatattadarthakriyākāritattatpratipakṣanirākriyāṁ vinā na tena
vyavahartum alaṁ pratipattāra iti svabhāva evaiteṣāṁ41 padārthānām
anyonyabhedamayatvāt ।

tad viśvavyavahāraprajanaiṣā vikalpavyāpārāpohanaśaktir iti gītāsu
bhagavatāviṣṭamaheśvarabhāvena parigaṇitā । tad āha mattaḥ smr̥tir iti ।
etac ca jñānaśaktibhedāt ।।

Translation

Vivr̥ti: On the contrary, such a world of practical experience
(vyavahāraḥ) will become possible (yujyeta)42 — if all the various
cognitions — direct perception, memory, etc. — have only one intrinsic
nature (ātmā),43 being in essence consciousness only. Of this [ātman],
namely the Supreme Lord, whose essence is all, these cognitions, etc.,
represent the various and multiform powers.44 [The world of practical
experience] would otherwise be impossible.

Kārikā: “. . . if there were no Maheśvara who contains within Himself
all the infinite forms, who is one, whose essence is consciousness,
possessing the powers of knowledge, memory and exclusion.” [1.3.7]

Vr̥tti: The mutual unification of all cognitions of things is
[constituted by] the consciousness principle itself (cittattvam) whose
form is all, since nothing distinct and separate (atiriktasya) from it
is admissible. The powers of knowledge, etc. only pertain to this
[consciousness-principle]. For it has been said: “From me derive memory,
knowledge and exclusion.”45

Vivr̥ti: For the consciousness-principle, whose form is light,
constituted by agency, is established since the very beginning. If the
world of objects, such as a patch of blue colour or pleasure,
[erroneously] assumed as being insentient, were separate from it, this
would [amount to saying] that its nature is not by itself light. But if
[things] did not have light as their essence, their shining would be
impossible, for, as we are going to demonstrate,46 a light which is not
white47 cannot become white. This concept has been expressed [by the
Vr̥tti] with the phrases “the consciousness-principle itself” and
“distinct and separate from it”. If the objects, though appearing as
differentiated [from consciousness], are to be recognized as constituted
solely by consciousness, it is established beyond discussion that [also]
the cognitions which refer to them are made of consciousness.48 For
cognitions never manifest themselves separately from it; all the same,49
though they (i.e. the cognitions) may show [a certain level of]
differentiation somehow induced (avakalpita)50 by the differentiation of
their contents, yet, despite this delimitation due to spatio-temporal
differences, they ultimately do rest (viśrāntir eva)51 on their own
nature consisting of a single and unitary consciousness (ekacit).52 If
it were not so, and all the various cognitions did not have as their
essential nature the consciousness-principle, introverted, in the form
of a single and unitary self-awareness (eka-svasaṁvedana), how could
one, at the moment when the cognition of an empty surface occurs, arrive
at the statement “There is no jar here” [lit.: “This is not the
cognition of a surface with a jar”]? For cognitions, being by their very
nature conscious of themselves [alone], cannot combine to form a single
[complex] cognition (ekajñānasaṁsargitvābhāva)53 having as its object a
jar and so on.54

[Buddhist:] In fact, if a jar were in an empty place, then also the
[jar] would be manifested in the cognition of the place since [both the
jar and the place] share the same capacity [of being perceptible]
(tulyayogyatārūpatva),55 and in this way it would be the cognition of a
place with a jar, not the cognition of an empty place. Therefore, the
cognition of an empty place, being aware of itself as opposed to the
cognition of a place with a jar, is also aware of the place as devoid of
a jar. In this way the absence of a jar in the place can indeed be
established.

[Śaiva:] But if the cognition of an empty place is aware [only] of
itself as opposed to the cognition of the place with a jar, how would it
be possible to establish that there is not a second56 cognition — which
is another fact-event (arthāntarabhūta) — having the place with a jar as
its object and being manifest by itself?

[Buddhist:] It is none the less true that, some way or other, one should
be able to affirm that a jar is absent, for otherwise it would ensue
that when there is no jar that very cognition of the place [without a
jar] would be the same as the cognition of the place with a jar.
However, that cognition would not be the cognition of the place with a
jar, but a cognition opposed to it;57 hence we would have: “There is no
jar being cognized by that cognition.”

[Śaiva:] But by which cognitive act is a second (dvitīyam) (i.e.
distinct and separate)58 cognition of the place with a jar cognized as
not being there, thanks to which [one could say that] the jar, being
potentially cognized by that same cognition, should also have been
there? If such a distinct and separate cognition were there, it could
not but be manifested (na ca . . . na prakāśeta), whereas, on the
contrary, it is not manifested. Therefore, one cannot reasonably say
that it exists.59 In fact, this is precisely what has been questioned.

[Buddhist:] But to him who might wonder how this cognition can be
manifested when [only] the cognition of the place without a jar occurs,
we would reply that it is cognized by that (i.e. the latter’s) very
self-awareness, just as when there is a jar, its being there has the
form of the not-being-there of a non-jar.60

[Śaiva:] However, the distinct and separate cognition of the place with
a jar, which is “another” fact-event, is not also invariably accompanied
by the absence of the cognition of the place without a jar, so that
simply from the manifesting of the latter61 one could also cognize the
absence of the cognition of the place with a jar.62 For, even as regards
the presence and the absence of a distinct and separate cognition of the
place with a jar which is “another” fact/event, there is no invariable
concomitance with either [the absence or the presence of the cognition
of the place without the jar], since the cognition of the place without
a jar is manifested [in both cases].63

[Buddhist:] But the cognition of the place with the jar or the cognition
of the jar alone cannot occur separately from the cognition of the
place, since a visual cognition having particulars belonging to the same
class as its objects is by necessity unitary.64 If it were not so, also
with reference to a jar the manifestation “jar” itself would not take
place because one would come to have a single and separate cognition for
every single atom.65 Therefore, from these arguments and others of this
kind it ensues that this cognition of the place alone should, in the
case of a jar being there, also contain the manifestation of the jar.
But [in the case at issue] it is not so.66 Due to this very reason, the
establishment of the absence of the cognition of a jar cannot be
questioned.

[Śaiva:]67 Thus, if we accept your argument as following such a line of
reasoning, the absence of a jar comes to be established by means of
inference (ānumāniky eva), not by means of direct perception (na
prātyakṣī).68 If, on the other hand, someone [i.e. a Buddhist] objected
that on these conditions one could not [even] say when one is in
continuous darkness that there is no cognition of a visible form, [we
would reply that] in this case this too69 would be admissible, provided
that such a cognition of a visible form were not distinct from the
cognition of a tangible form and so on — whereas [on the contrary] the
cognitions of tangible and visual forms, being produced by different
senses, are to be admitted as [differentiated and therefore] not
[reducible to] one.70

Nor can a conceptual elaboration, which takes place at a later time,71
or memory, in which only the cognition of a tangible form is manifested
and which is [consequently deemed as] invariably associated with the
absence of the cognition of a visual form, also establish the absence of
the cognition of a visual form. For if at that time a visual form had
also been there, then, just as [now] in this [memory] the cognition of a
tangible form is manifested, in the same way also the cognition of a
visual form should be manifested in it.72 In fact, although [memory], in
the manner [outlined above], is aware of itself — referring to that time
— as containing the manifestation of the mere cognition of a tangible
form, it does not [contextually] establish a discrimination (i.e. the
absence) of the manifestation of a cognition of a visual form.
Therefore, although it may [be admitted to] exclude in itself the
manifestation of a cognition of a visual form as being opposed to the
form being currently cognized, none the less how could it (i.e. memory)
know that previously, i.e. at the time when only the cognition of a
tangible form was manifested, there was no cognition of a visual form?
For on the basis of the already stated reason, there is no invariable
concomitance of the cognition of a mere tangible form, which is taking
place there, with the absence of a distinct and separate cognition of a
visual form. In fact, that [particular kind of] cognition that is memory
(smārtaṁ vijñānam) derives from the impressions left by a previous
perception [and] performs the task of determining [its object] only by
conforming to the previous perception, [that is,] not by autonomously
(svātantryeṇa)73 having access to the particular perception that
occurred in the past, so that, while excluding in itself the cognition
of a visual form in the past74 as being opposed to the form currently
being manifested, it might also exclude its object [equally] belonging
to the past.75 In the same vein, some [opponents] maintain that by
excluding the manifestation in itself of the place with a jar the
cognition of a mere [empty] place also externally excludes a jar. For
the above-mentioned reason, just as two [distinct] former perceptions
each shining by its own light were not associated into a single light,
in the same way a discursive cognition (vikalpajñāna)76 — which derives
from the impressions left by a former cognition and [consequently]
conforms to it — is reflectively aware (parāmr̥śati) of them in terms of
“[This has been] perceived” and “I am perceiving”.77

Therefore, although we have a reflective awarenesses of both
[cognitions], [none the less we do have] the determination only of those
two cognitions — that of a tangible form and that of the visible form —
taken in themselves (-mātra-), each being self-illuminating, but not the
determination of their occurring at the same time (na tv
ekakālikatvena), by virtue of which it (i.e. the memory/discursive
cognition) — being reflectively aware only of the cognition of the
tangible form which occurred at the time of darkness, free from any
cognition of a visual form occurring at the same time and resting in its
own self-manifestation (svābhāsopārūḍha) — might [be able to] negate the
cognition of a visual form at the time of that darkness.78

On the contrary, [perceptual] cognitions, being unable to illuminate
each other and each being grounded in itself only, cannot by themselves
establish their occurrence at the same time. Similarly, the discursive
cognition, too (vikalpenāpi), which originates from the impressions left
by them and has a reflective awareness of several [distinct] cognitions
each illuminating its own form alone, cannot establish their occurrence
at the same time, for it is not in the nature of [discursive cognition]
to be an awareness directly touching a distinct real entity which has
formerly been perceived. Nor, on the other hand, has it ever been said
that the discursive cognitions are admitted to directly touch (i.e. have
direct access to) the real entity formerly perceived. On these premises,
cognitions, even the perceptual ones (aindriyakāṇām api),79 could not be
manifested as mutually associated or separated, unless they rest on
having as their essential nature the consciousness-principle in the form
of a single and unitary introverted self-awareness. Consequently, one
could not determine for things, too, a restriction of their being
[mutually] present or absent, whence the destruction of the world of
practical experience would ensue. Therefore, we are obliged to admit for
cognitions [some] unification which has the form of their resting on a
single consciousness-principle. This [is what is meant by the Vr̥tti]
with the phrase “of all cognitions of things”. The
consciousness-principle is that very unification (anusandhāna) of the
many cognitions: in this way, also the word “one” in the Kārikā (cf.
ekacidvapuḥ) has been explained.

Also the unification of many perceptual cognitions in memory, etc. is
nothing but their resting on the single consciousness-principle; it is
for this very reason that “consciousness-principle” and “unification”
are put here [in the Vr̥tti] in a relationship of non-difference. And
thus, on the basis of the reasoning that will be stated below, to this
consciousness-principle, full of all things, there belongs a power, in
terms of non-differentiation [from it], named “knowledge”, consisting in
the manifestation (-avabhāsanā)80 of the various multiform things. In
fact, when something which is in itself a [unitary] substance
(padārthātmaiva) is superimposed with a differentiation deriving from
its different effects, we call it “power”.81 And by the word “Great
Lord” (maheśvara iti) the sūtra indicates him whose “power” yields fruit
due to his will alone, i.e. without the intermediation of the capacity
of other causes. And the fact that the consciousness-principle is to be
one and unitary in its nature will be explained later on.82 Memory, for
its part, is the power to make an entity, which has been manifested in
the past, known in the present as formerly manifested. We have the power
of exclusion (apohana-śakti) when a cognition in the form of conceptual
elaboration is generated exclusively by the latent impression left by a
particular manifestation, [a latent impression which is] awakened by the
wonderful (vicitra)83 will [of the Lord] as devoid of any specific
spatio-temporal delimitation. For these (i.e. “this kind of”) conceptual
elaborations have as their [specific] function that of rejecting
envisaged contrary options (śaṅkita- pratipakṣa).84 Also in respect to
an object being manifested without commingling with other realities
[and] having a well-defined nature of its own85 — but at same time being
capable of having a variety of possible causal efficiencies — the
knowing subjects aspiring to only one of these causal efficiencies — a
specific one — will not succeed in making use of such an object in the
various occurrences of practical life, unless we reject the various
contrary options, endowed with various causal efficiencies, which they
are figuring out.86 For the object, which is not separated from the
level of īśvara, as it were, has as its essence that of all other
objects.87 The above is the very essential nature of these88 realities
as they are characterized by mutual differentiation.89

Therefore, it is precisely this power of exclusion, whose sphere of
activity is represented by conceptual elaboration, that opens the way to
the transactions of practical life.90 On account of this, [the power of
exclusion] has been mentioned separately in the Songs by the Blessed
One, who possesses the status of the Great Lord. In fact, He said: “From
me memory [. . .]”.91 [All] these [powers derive] from a differentiation
of the power of Knowledge.

* Originally published in K. Preisendanz (ed.), Expanding and Merging
Horizons: Contributions to South Asian and Cross-Cultural Studies in
Commemoration of Wilhelm Halbfass, Vienna 2007, pp. 473-90.

* * I wish to thank Prof. Karin Preisendanz for her useful comments and
keen editorial care.

References

Texts

BhG = Bhagavad-Gītā, in BhGŚ.

BhGAS = Bhagavad-Gītārtha-Saṁgraha of Abhinavagupta, in
Śrīmadbhagavad-Gītā with Gītārtha-Saṁgraha, part I: Text, ed. S.
Sankaranarayanan, Oriental Research Institute, Tirupati, 1985.

Bhagavad-Gītā-Bhāṣya, in Śrīmadbhagavad-Gītā with the Commentaries
Śrimat-Śāṅkarabhāṣya (with Ānandagiri’s Vyākhyā), Nīlakaṇṭhī,
Bhāṣyotkarṣa-Dīpikā of Dhanapati, Śrīdharī, Gītārtha-Saṁgraha of
Abhinavaguptācārya, Gūḍhārtha-Dīpikā of Madhusūdana (with
Gūḍhārtha-Tattvāloka of Śrīdharmadattaśarma), ed. L.S. Panshikar, 2nd
edn., Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi, 1978.

BhGS = Sarvatobhadra, in The Bhagavad-Gītā with the Commentary Called
Sarvatobhadra of Rāmakaṇṭha, KSTS 64, ed. M.K. Shastri, Bombay 1943.

DhP = Dharmottara-pradīpa of Durveka Miśra, in Dharmottara-Pradīpa
[Being a Sub-commentary on Dharmottara’s Nyāyabindu-Ṭīkā, a Commentary
on Dharmakīrti’s Nyāyabindu], ed. Pandita Dalsukhbhai Malvania, rev. 2nd
edn., Patna 1971.

HB = Dharmakīrti, Hetubindu, ed. in Steinkellner 1967.

ĪPK = Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Kārikā and -Vr̥tti of Utpaladeva, ed. and tr. in
Torella 2002.

ĪPV = Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vimarśinī of Abhinavagupta, ed. Mukund Ram
Shastri, 2 vols., KSTS 22 and 33, Bombay 1918-21.

ĪPVV = Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vivr̥ti-Vimarśinī of Abhinavagupta, ed.
Madhusudan Kaul Shastri, 3 vols., KSTS 60, 62 and 65, Bombay 1938-43.

NB-Ṭ = Nyāyabindu-Ṭīkā of Dharmottara in DhP.

P = Pāṇini’s Aṣṭādhyāyī, ed. in Sharma 1995.

PV = Pramāṇa-Vārttika of Dharmakīrti, in Pramāṇa-Vārttika with the
Commentary “Vr̥tti” of Acharya Manorathanandin, critically ed. Swami
Dwarikadas Shastri, Varanasi, 1968.

PVSV = Dharmakīrti’s Svavr̥tti on Pramāṇa-Vārttika I, ed. in Gnoli 1960.

VP = Vākyapadīya of Bhartr̥hari, in Vākyapadīya with the
Prakīrṇakaprakāśa of Helārāja: Kāṇḍa 3, ed. K.A.S. Iyer, 2 vols., Poona,
1963-73.

Vākyapadīya, ed. in W. Rau, Bhartr̥haris Vākyapadīya: Die Mūlakārikās
nach den Handschriften, Abhandlungen für die Kunde des Morgenlandes 42,
Wiesbaden, 1977.

VBh = Vijñāna-Bhairava-Tantra with the Commentary partly by Kṣemarāja
and partly by Śivopādhyāya, ed. Mukunda Ram Shastri, Kashi Sanskrit Text
Series 8, Bombay 1918.

Studies and translations

Bühnemann, G., 1980, “Identifizierung von Sanskrittexten
Śaṅkaranandanas”, Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens, 24:
191-98.

Gnoli, R., 1960, Pramāṇavārttikam: Chapter One with the Autocommentary
(Serie Orientale Roma 23), Roma, 1960.

Iwata, T., 1993, Prasaṅga und Prasaṅgaviparyaya bei Dharmakīrti und
seinen Kommentatoren (Wiener Studien zur Tibetologie und Buddhismuskunde
31), Wien.

Krasser, H., 2001, “On the Date and Works of Śaṅkaranandana”, in R.
Torella (ed.) Le Parole e i Marmi: Studi in Onore di Raniero Gnoli nel
suo 70° compleanno (Serie Orientale Roma 92), pp. 489-508.

Pandey, K.C., 1963, Abhinavagupta: An Historical and Philosophical
Study, 2nd edn., Varanasi.

Sharma, R.N. (ed. and tr.), 1995, The Aṣṭādhyāyī of Pāṇini, vol. 3,
Delhi.

Steinkellner, E., 1967, Dharmakīrti’s Hetubindu: Teil I: Tibetischer
Text und rekonstruierter Sanskrit-Text; Teil II: Übersetzung und
Anmerkungen, Wien.

Steinkellner, E. and M.T. Much, 1995, Texte der erkenntnistheoretischen
Schule des Buddhismus (Systematische Übersicht über die buddhistische
Sanskrit-Literatur 2), Göttingen. (Abhandlungen der Akademie der
Wissenschaften in Göttingen, Philologisch- Historische Klasse, Folge
3/214).

Torella, R., 1988, “A Fragment of Utpaladeva’s
Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vivr̥ti”, East and West, 38: 137-74.

———, 2002, The Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Kārikā of Utpaladeva with the Author’s
Vr̥tti: Critical Edition and Annotated Translation, Motilal Banarsidass,
Delhi (I edn. Serie Orientale Roma 71, IsMEO, Roma, 1994), repr. 2014.

———, 2011, The Philosophical Traditions of India: An Appraisal,
Varanasi: Indica Books.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Cf. Torella 2002: xl-xliv.

2 “Leaf 33. Size 7⅟2 x 9⅟2”. Lines per page 19 approximately. Syll. per
line 21. Handwriting almost recent. Written on local paper which does
not seem to be old. Thirty-first leaf worm eaten, it is clear from the
notebook pages 44-46. The ms begins line no. 1, top: śrīgaṇeśāya namaḥ;
line 2: saṁskāre saty api, etc. Ends abruptly as can be seen at page 49.
Character Śāradā”. This description perfectly suits the National
Archives manuscript, except for the mention of the worm-eaten
thirty-first leaf, which, at least as far as I can see from a rather
faint xerox-copy, would seem more or less intact. According to Prakash
Pandey (personal communication), the manuscript belongs to the latter
half of the eighteenth century.

3 The technique of prasaṅga-viparyaya is also well known to Buddhists
(cf. Iwata 1993).

4 The ĪPVV seems to be the only work to quote from the Apohasiddhi;
among the five quotations (pp. 272, l. 14; 292, ll. 19, 21, 23; 293, l.
12) the second one is certainly in prose, thus showing that the
Apohasiddhi, just like other works by Śaṅkaranandana, consisted of
kārikās mixed with prose passages. Only three out of the five quotations
could be traced either in its single extant Sanskrit manuscript
(Bühnemann 1980: 193-94) or in the Tibetan translation (see Gnoli 1960:
xxiii-xxiv); on Śaṅkaranandana, see Steinkellner and Much 1995 and
Krasser 2001. (For a new interpretation of Śaṅkarānandana’s religious
affiliation see Torella 2011: 19 n.12) In a separate study under
preparation I propose to examine the context of the Apohasiddhi from
which the above passages have been drawn. I cordially thank Ernst
Steinkellner and Helmut Krasser for very kindly and generously putting
at my disposal all the available material on Śaṅkaranandana’s
Apohasiddhi, including a copy of the only available Sanskrit manuscript
(produced from Rahula Sankrityayana’s negatives) and a transcript of the
Tibetan translation.

5 The words underlined in the text are those literally cited in the
ĪPVV. Punctuation is mine (that found in the ms is often misleading).
The sandhi has been “normalized”.

6 Ms yujyate. I follow Abhinavagupta’s reading (ĪPVV I: 273, ll. 6-7):
tad etat tātparyam avataraṇikāyām āha “yujyeta” iti ।

7 At this point the ĪPVV seems to refer to other parts of the Vivr̥ti
which are not found in the ms (ĪPVV I: 273, ll. 15-16: śaktiyogalakṣaṇaṁ
ceti).

8 prakāśarūpaṁ, my emendation (ms viśvarūpaṁ), following Abhinavagupta’s
reading (cited and commented upon in ĪPVV I: 273, ll. 18-21) which seems
more appropriate to the context.

9 -sya bhāva-, my emendation (ms svabhāva-); cf. ĪPVV I: 273, l. 25.

10 upapādayiṣyate, my emendation (ms pratipādayiṣyatāṁ); cf. ĪPVV I:
274, ll. 17-18: upapādayiṣyata iti prakāśātmā prakāśyo ’rtha
ityādisthāneṣu.

11 tathāpi, my emendation (ms tathā hi); I follow the reading cited and
commented upon in ĪPVV I: 275, ll. 5-6 (s. n. 47 to the translation).

12 avakalpita-, my emendation (ms -vikalpita-). Cf. ĪPVV I: 275, ll.
7-8: bhedas tenāvakalpito ’vajñayāprarohayogena kalpitaḥ.

13 saghaṭa-, my emendation (ms ghaṭa-).

14 ĪPVV I: 277, l. 17 seems to have one more quotation from the Vivr̥ti
(ghaṭam api) which is not found in the ms.

15 Ms jñātam atas is to be corrected to jñātaṁ yatas. This was probably
the reading of the exemplar, as we can surmise from the anusvāra above
-ta- (subsequently deleted); the following ya- must have been misread as
ma-, thus suggesting the deletion of the anusvāra.

16 I correct ms tat to tan na, as meaning strictly requires.

17 aghaṭapradeśajñāne, my emendation (ms tatsaghaṭapradeśajñānaṁ). This
seems to be the reading required by the context. This would also tally
with Abhinavagupta’s remark (ĪPVV I: 278, ll. 2-3): nanv
aghaṭapradeśajñānaṁ prakāśata ity atredam eva tattvaṁ
saghaṭapradeśajñānaṁ na prakāśata iti.

18 aghaṭa-, my emendation (ms ghaṭa-), supported by Abhinavagupta’s
quotation and comments (ĪPVV I: 278, ll. 3-5: naitad ity āha “aghaṭa”
iti paryudāsavr̥ttyā hy atra vastvantaraprakāśo bhāti, na tu
prasajyapratiṣedhātmā saghaṭapradeśajñānaprakāśābhavaḥ).

19 na na, my emendation (ms na).

20 tasyāghaṭa-, my emendation (ms tasya ghaṭa-), supported by
Abhinavagupta’s paraphrase (ĪPVV I: 278, ll. 13-14):
kevalapradeśapratyayasyobhayathāpy upapatteḥ.

21 -anavyabhicārāt, my emendation. This (or also -vyabhicārāt) is in
fact the reading one would expect, instead of ms -avyabhicārāt
(ekatarāvyabhicārāt); see also Abhinavagupta’s comments ĪPVV I: 278, l.
13: avyabhicāro ’vinābhāvo nāsti.

22 The original reading of the ms was sambandhakāre, then transformed
into samandhakāre, which is in fact the correct reading (cf. ĪPVV I:
280, l. 23: santate ’ndhakāre).

23 yujyeta, my emendation (ms yujyate).

24 In the ms -vikalpa- has been later corrected to the correct
-vikalpaḥ.

25 -avyabhicāriṇī, my emendation (ms -vyabhicāriṇī); cf. ĪPVV I: 281,
ll. 18-19: [. . .] rūpajñānasyābhāvam avyabhicāreṇa bhavantaṁ sādhayet.

26 yato, absent in the ms but cited by Abhinavagupta, apparently has to
be added here. The following phrases up to sādhayatīti are taken by him
as a quotation (from an unknown source). Cf. ĪPVV I: 281, ll. 20-21:
tatra hetutvaṁ granthāntarasyāha “yataḥ” iti.

27 caiva, my emendation (the ms has cai-, corrected to nai- above the
line).

28 -abhāvāt, my emendation (ms -bhāvāt). Utpaladeva is here stating the
Śaiva position on the matter which in fact excludes any correlation
between the two cognitions.

29 The expected meaning (with the further support of Abhinavagupta’s
comments in ĪPVV I: 282, ll. 10- 15) has induced me to modify at some
places the transmitted text which is evidently corrupt. In fact, the ms
reads: ābhāsamānākāraviparītaṁ paricchindan pūrvasmin kāle viṣayam api
rūpajñānaṁ pūrvabhāvi vyavacchindyāt. In particular, Abhinavagupta’s
tādātmyena asahamānā (ibid.: l. 12) can by no means refer to the
transmitted paricchindan.

30 saghaṭa-, my emendation (ms ghaṭa-).

31 The ms has an anusvāra deleted above -ta-.

32 -vyavasthānaṁ syāt, my emendation (ms -vyavasthā na syān).

33 By reading -prakāśakānekajñāna-, I restore what seems to have been
the original reading of ms, which was corrected to -prakāśakāle jñāna-
(by changing -ne- to -le- and deleting -ka- by means of a horizontal
stroke).

34 smr̥tyādau, my emendation (ms smr̥tyātmā); cf. ĪPVV I: 285, l. 6.

35 The ms has nirbharasya, corrected to nirbhara-. The correct reading
is the original nirbharasya (cf. the paraphrase ĪPVV I: 285, ll. 21-25:
uktābhir yuktibhir ekasya [. . .] ityādivakṣyamāṇābhiḥ
samastabhāvapūrṇasya jñānaṁ nāma śaktiḥ).

36 phalabhedāropitabhedo, my emendation (ms phalabhedāropitadbhedo). The
passage is also quoted, with a slightly different, equally possible
reading in Kṣemarāja’s commentary on the Vijñāna-Bhairava-Tantra (VBh)
(p. 14, ll. 3-5): uktaṁ ca pratyabhijñāyāṁ “phalabhedād āropitabhedaḥ
padārthātmā śaktiḥ”.

37 The ms has pratiphalati, apparently corrected to phalati; the latter
reading, which I have accepted, is also confirmed by ĪPVV I: 289, ll.
6-7: “phalati” phalaparyantā saṁpadyate, na punaḥ pratihanyate yasya.

38 The following definitions of smr̥ti and apohana are incorporated in a
marginal note found in one of the mss of Abhinavagupta’s ĪPV used for
the Kashmir Series edition (Delhi National Archives, Sanskrit ms No. 5,
p. 131, right margin): deśakālaviśeṣā- vacchedaśūnyatvena
vicitrecchāprabodhitāvabhāsabhedavāsanā-
mātropapāditavikalparūpavijñānāpohanaśaktiḥ । pūrvā-vabhāsitavastunaḥ
pūrvāvabhāsitatvena vartamānakāle prakhyā-panaśaktiḥ smr̥tiśaktir ity
anayor bhedaḥ. Note 71 of the ĪPV edition (vol. I, p. 117) is based on
this marginal annotation.

39 The text as quoted in the ĪPV manuscript (see above n 38) has
-prabodhitā-.

40 avabhāte, my emendation (ms avabhāti). The latter reading would not
in itself be impossible; Abhinavagupta’s paraphrase and comments,
however, consistently have avabhāte).

41 If we rely upon ĪPVV I: 295, l. 25 (atrāha “māyīyānām” iti), we
should add māyīyānām (omitted in the ms) after eteṣām. However, this
would involve a slight redundancy, which is not usual in Utpaladeva’s
style. I prefer to surmise that eteṣām was omitted in the edited text of
ĪPVV, leaving merely māyīyānām which glossed it.

42 According to Abhinavagupta, here the meaning of the optative conforms
to Pāṇini’s Aṣṭādhyāyī (P) III.3.156: hetuhetumator liṅ, “Affix LIṄ
optionally occurs after a verbal root when hetu ‘cause’ and hetumat
‘effect’ are denotated” (tr. Sharma 1995: 574). The fact that cognitions
share the same essential nature is precisely what renders vyavahāra
possible.

43 Cf. ĪPVV I: 273, l. 12: “ātmā” iti svabhāvaḥ.

44 This means that they rest on the Lord, and are neither independent of
Him nor exceeding His own form (ĪPVV I: 273, ll. 14-15).

45 See below n 91.

46 See, e.g. ĪPK 1.5.3.

47 That is, a cognition in which the colour white does not appear.

48 For Abhinavagupta (ĪPVV I: 274, l. 25) this is a case of
daṇḍāpūpīyanyāya, “the maxim of the stick and cakes”. A stick and cakes
are usually tied together so that if something happens to the stick
(e.g. being eaten by rats) the same happens to the cakes.

49 Despite any “superficial” differentiation deriving from their
contents, cognitions too must have (at least) the same status of
ultimate non-differentiation from consciousness as their objects (ĪPVV
I: 275, ll. 5-7: “tathāpi” iti tenāpy ahamaṁśāvyatirekeṇa vartamānānām
ity arthaḥ).

50 The preverb ava- is given a derogatory meaning (avajñayā) by
Abhinavagupta: the objects are only able to shed an imperfect, i.e. not
fully developed (aprarohayogena), appearance of differentiation onto
their cognition (cf. n 12 to the text).

51 eva means here “restriction”. As the Vivr̥ti sets out to show, this
resting of the various cognitions on one unitary consciousness principle
is the necessary condition for the worldly transactions to take place
successfully (ĪPVV I: 275, ll. 14-17).

52 In this context, eka (qualifying cit, jñāna, etc.) always oscillates
between “one, single” and “unitary”, usually expressing both meanings at
the same time.

53 The Buddhist position Utpaladeva is referring to is clearly
formulated in Dharmottara’s Nyāyabindu-Ṭīkā (NBṬ): 101, ll. 13-14:

yadaikajñānasaṁsargivastvantaropalambhaḥ । ekendriya-jñānagrāhyaṁ
locanādipraṇidhānābhimukhaṁ vastudvayam anyonyāpekṣam ekajñānasaṁsargi
kathyate ।।

54 Utpaladeva’s criticism is addressed to the Buddhists, who, just like
the Śaivas, uphold the self-awareness of cognitions but, unlike the
Śaivas, reject a common ground for them, represented by the unitary
conscious subject. Interestingly, in order to present an exemplary
statement on the self-awareness of cognition, Abhinavagupta resorts to
Bhartr̥hari’s Vākyapadīya, by citing a well-known verse from the
Jātisamuddeśa (VP III.1.104):

yathā jyotiḥ prakāśena nānyenābhiprakāśyate ।

jñānarūpaṁ tathā jñāne nānyatrābhiprakāśyate ।।

(Incidentally, it is to be noted that pādas c and d differ considerably
from the text in Rau’s and Iyer’s editions, which both read: jñānākāras
tathānyena na jñānenopagr̥hyate.) The weakness of the Buddhist position
on the matter appears quite clearly in their treatment of the crucial
problem of anupalabdhi (non-perception) and abhāva (non-being, absence),
which therefore becomes the object of a sustained analysis in the
subsequent portion of the Vivr̥ti (ĪPVV I: 276, l. 24 to 277, l. 1:
anyavyavacchedair grahaṇavyavahāro ’pi svaparaviṣayo ya ucyate, so ’pi
na nirvahed ityāśayena saugatīyam abhāvasiddhiprakāram eva vicārayati).

55 Cf. Hetubindu (HB), p. 22*, ll. 2-4 (Steinkellner 1967: Teil I, p.
73): yatra yasminn upalabhyamāne niyamena yasyopalabdhir bhavati
yogyatāyā aviśeṣāt, sa tatsaṁsr̥ṣṭaḥ, ekajñānasaṁsargāt. See also the
sentences immediately following the NBṬ passage quoted above (n 50):
tayor hi sator naikaniyatā bhavati pratipattiḥ । yogyatāyā dvayor apy
aviśiṣṭatvāt (NBṬ, pp. 101, l. 14 to 102, l. 1).

56 As to the meaning of dvitīya (lit. “second”), see below n 58.

57 Cf. ĪPVV I: 277, ll. 18-19: saghaṭapradeśajñānaṁ tad bhavet, na tv
etadviparītāghaṭapradeśajñānam.

58 ĪPVV I: 277, l. 19: “dvitīyaṁ tv” iti vyatiriktam. In other words,
the perception of an empty surface cannot evoke the possible perception
of a surface with a jar, to be subsequently negated. This is apparently
what Abhinavagupta means to say with the laconic remark (ibid., lines
ll. 19-21): na hy aghaṭapradeśajñānena jñānāntarasya bhāvo jñāyate, yena
tadabhāvo ’pi jñāyeta.

59 Ibid.: 277, ll. 24-25: iti ca vaktuṁ na yujyata iti saṁbandhaḥ.

60 According to the Buddhists, we do not need a separate cognition to
account for the cognition of the absence of a non-jar when a jar is
cognized: it is the self-awareness of the cognition “jar” which
implicitly also cognizes the negation of its contrary. The jar itself
has as its own form the not being a non-jar.

61 That is, of the cognition of the place without the jar, i.e. an empty
space.

62 In other words, the negation of the cognition of an empty space in
the Buddhist argument is not to be taken in terms of prasajyapratiṣedha
but of paryudāsa: it does not confine itself to negating a thing but
affirms the presence of another (see n 18 to the text).

63 That is, of the space taken in itself, independently of the jar’s
being or not being there; cf. Abhinavagupta’s paraphrase (ĪPVV I: 278,
ll. 13-14): kevalapradeśapratyayasyobhayathāpy upapatteḥ.

64 Abhinavagupta develops the Buddhist’s arguments outlined by
Utpaladeva and casts them into full-fledged inferences based on various
forms of anupalabdhi (cf. ĪPVV I: 278, ll. 14ff.).

65 Cf. ĪPVV I: 278 l. 22 to 279 l. 1: kiṁ ca kevalapradeśo ghaṭo
vānantarūpaparamāṇumayaḥ saṁnihitānantāvayavo vā । tatra yāvanti
dravyāṇi, tāvanti cet pr̥thag jñānāni; tarhi teṣāṁ pr̥thak pr̥thak
svaprakāśatvenaikasamūharūpaprakāśābhāvāt pradeśajñānam eva na bhavet,
bhāti ca tat pradeśajñānam iti.

66 That is, when one is perceiving an empty space.

67 From this point onwards it is no longer feasible to present the
larger structure of the argumentation by demarcating the Śaiva and the
Buddhist positions, because the latter comes to be too closely embedded
in the former.

68 The Buddhist explanation is seen as not conforming to common sense,
which explains the matter under discussion in a much simpler way (ĪPVV
I: 280, l. 8: “evam” iti svakalpanayā lokapratītyananugr̥hītayā).
Moreover, the Buddhist argument would lead to a regressus ad infinitum
(ibid.: iyān ity anavasthāpādako nyāyaḥ).

Dharmakīrti himself was well aware of the risk involved in not
accounting for anupalambha directly, i.e. by explaining it within the
inner dynamics of the self-awareness of a perceptive act: the absence of
an object would be arrived at by means of its non-perception, but the
absence of its perception would need another anupalambha to be
established, which would lead to a regressus ad infinitum.
Pramāṇa-Vārttika [PV] IV.274-75:

tasmād anupalambho ’yaṁ svayaṁ pratyakṣato* gataḥ ।

svamātravr̥tter gamakas tadabhāvavyavasthiteḥ ।।

anyathārthasya nāstitvaṁ gamyate ’nupalambhataḥ ।

upalambhasya nāstitvam anyenety anavasthitiḥ ।।).

*Manorathanandin reads svasaṁvedanāt.

Verses 270-75 are quoted by Abhinavagupta in ĪPVV I: 279 l. 24 to 280 l.
5. The same kind of objection is put by Dharmakīrti into the mouth of an
opponent in his Svavr̥tti on Pramāṇa-Vārttika I.3 (PVSV: 4, ll. 15-17:
atrānupalabdher liṅgād asattāyām upalabdher abhāvo ’py anyayānupalabdhyā
sādhya ity anavasthānād apratipattiḥ syāt). The Buddhist explanation
itself would become acceptable (instead of coming to a dead end) if it
were placed in a Śaiva perspective (ĪPVV I: 280, l. 13: yad bhavadbhir
uktam, tad upapadyate . . .). For the Śaivas, in fact, a single
introverted self-consciousness is the common ground which unifies all
cognitions (ibid. l. 10: asmaddr̥śā jñānānāṁ svasaṁvedanam antarmukham
ekam eveti).

69 Cf. ĪPVV I: 280, ll. 24-25: “etad api” ity aprātītikaṁ niṣphalaṁ ca
sad apīty apiśabdārthaḥ.

70 If two things (e.g. a jar and a cloth) are the object of the same
sense, they are cognized by the same cognitive act. But this is not the
case with a visual and a tangible form. In the negative case it ensues
that in the dark the absence of a tangible form cannot be understood as
the absence of a visual form, since there is no single cognition in
which both a visual and a tangible form are manifested. Cf. ĪPVV I: 281,
ll. 1-4: abhinnendriyajanyānāṁ hi ghaṭapaṭādīnām iva saṁnihitānām eṣa
niyamaḥ — ekajñānagrāhyateti । na ca rūpasparśau rūparasau vā
samānendriyagrāhyau, yena tadviṣayam ekam eva jñānaṁ rūpasparśābhāsaṁ
saṁbhāvyeta rūparasābhāsaṁ vā.

71 If I understand correctly, this remark is meant to exclude the
vikalpa which immediately follows direct perception and transforms it
into a determinate cognition.

72 This inference would have as its hetu “the non-perception of the
effect” (kāryānupalabdhi), whose validity is viewed by Abhinavagupta as
highly questionable already in itself, i.e. prior to his examination of
the relevant arguments.

73 Namely, through an illuminating power of its own (cf. ĪPVV I: 282, l.
9: svātantryeṇa svena prakāśabalena). What memory can do is only to
recall the illuminating power belonging to the original perception, or,
in other words, it conforms to it or “imitates” it (ibid.: ll. 15-16:
smr̥tir hi pūrvam anubhavam anukaroti); however, this perception being
“imitated”, Abhinavagupta goes on, is to be related to the object of
memory (ibid., l. 16: paraṁ smartavyasaṁbandhinam).

74 That is, a cognition which had been hypothesized and then negated in
the past.

75 This crucial passage has been carefully examined and explained by
Abhinavagupta (ĪPVV I: 282, ll. 10-15). Memory, while cognizing the
previous cognition of a tangible form, contextually realizes that in the
range of its own cognitive act the cognition of a certain visual form,
opposed to that of the tangible form, would not be admissible. In this
way, memory would be allowed to establish now the previous absence of
the cognition of a visual form (and, through it, also the previous
absence of that visual form) on the basis of the fact that if the
cognition of a visual form had taken place it would have entered the
range of the memory cognition along with the cognition of the tangible
form. This argument, however, is based on a presupposition that is
altogether unacceptable to the Śaivas for whom a cognition cannot
possibly become the object of another cognition. In the case at issue,
the former cognition cannot become the “object” (viṣaya) of memory
(ibid.: ll. 7-8: na tu viṣayatvenābhāsayati jñānānāṁ parasaṁvedyatvasya
vistarato nirākr̥tatvāt).

76 According to Abhinavagupta, this is a general designation also
including memory (ĪPVV I: 282, ll. 24-25: “vikalpajñānam” iti
sāmānyoktiḥ smr̥tim api saṁgr̥hṇīte). Abhinavagupta (ibid.: 283, ll. 1-4)
also records a different interpretation by “others” who take vikalpa as
a particular form of memory, the only difference being that memory
proper refers to a perception which occurred in the past and is now
extinct (apart from the impressions left by it).

77 That is, memory and discursive cognition respectively.

78 Cf. the construction of the sentence by Abhinavagupta (ĪPVV I: 283,
ll. 15-16): rūpajñānaviviktasvābhāsopārūḍhasparśajñānaparāmarśi-
vikalpajñānam iti sambandhaḥ.

79 Utpaladeva is addressing again the Buddhist opponent: no single
cognition, particularly not even the perceptual cognition, can establish
the absence of something by itself alone. As a consequence, either the
perception has to enter by itself into a net of relations to other
cognitions (which goes against the Buddhist presuppositions) or the
Buddhist has to admit that absence can only be established by means of
inference (which the Buddhist intended to reserve for the establishment
of the abhāvavyavahāra alone). But also the establishment of the
abhāvavyavahāra by means of inference would entail a regressus ad
infinitum (cf. ĪPVV I: 284, l. 25 to 285, l. 1: pradeśakaivalyavyavahāro
’py ānumānikatvād anavasthopahata iti).

80 The “causing things to appear [as ‘this’]” concerns the limited
subject (ĪPVV I: 286, l. 3: idam ity avabhāsamānā [read: avabhāsanā]
paśupramātr̥vartinī). The samarthācaraṇa component that Abhinavagupta
singles out in the causative form (“to make somebody/something able to .
. .”) is referred to the freedom of the Lord. The manifestation of the
object as external to consciousness (“this”) does not entail a real
separation from the absolute light of consciousness (ibid., ll. 10-11:
na mahāprakāśāt pr̥thakkaroti), since it presupposes the contextual
“creation” of a māyic subject, from whose limited light alone the object
appears as separate.

81 According to Abhinavagupta (cf. ĪPVV I: 287, ll. 3-9), a single thing
or being, capable of producing various effects, does not lend itself to
be indicated, or taught successfully, through a single word or concept.
Practical reality and linguistic communication (vyavahāra) require the
unitary thing to be expressed in manifold ways on the basis of its
various efficiencies: one and the same fire can be indicated as
“burner”, “cooker” or “illuminator”. When the manifoldness of aspects is
borne in mind, we speak of “power(s)”; when unity is borne in mind, we
speak of “possessor of powers”. However, none of these two approaches,
Abhinavagupta continues, can be claimed to be ultimately true, because
both of them are a creation of the Supreme Lord (ibid.: ll. 8-9:
parameśvareṇaiva tathā sr̥ṣṭatvāt). In their conception of śakti
Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta are reminiscent of what Bhartr̥hari says
about the many śaktis that any substance possesses, being the basis of
the grammatical notion of sādhana; see particularly VP III.7.2:

śaktimātrasamūhasya viśvasyānekadharmaṇaḥ ।

sarvadā sarvathā bhāvāt kvacit kiñcid vivakṣyate ।।

Cf. Helarāja’s commentary thereon (VP: 232, ll. 4-5): ghaṭādayo bhāvā
viśvaśabdavācyāḥ । te ca tattadudakāharaṇādikāryasādhikānāṁ śaktīnāṁ
samūharūpāḥ); see also kārikā 6.

82 According to Abhinavagupta, Utpaladeva here refers to ĪPK I.6.11.

83 What puzzles a hypothetical opponent in the “exclusion” process
(apohana) outlined here is the fact that the conceptual elaboration
arises only from the impression left by the former perception of the
object, and yet does not possess the same character of spatio-temporal
definiteness that belonged to its source (in fact, the conceptual
elaboration is in essence something general). The objection is made
explicit in ĪPVV I: 291, ll. 8-9: nanu deśādyavacchinne ’nubhūte tatkr̥tā
vāsanā kathaṁ tadanavacchinnaviṣayā [my correction; the edited text is
apparently corrupt: tatkr̥tayā vāsanā kathaṁ tadavacchinnaviṣayayā]
prabudhyate. According to Utpaladeva, this inexplicable fact is due to
the unfathomable (ibid.: vicitrāparyanuyojyā) will of the Lord.

84 According to Abhinavagupta (ĪPVV I: 291, ll. 13ff.), the peculiarity
of apohana-śakti with respect to the mere jñāna-śakti lies precisely in
this figuring out of possible alternatives and then excluding them. In
Dharmakīrti’s formulation of the apoha theory, the alternatives to be
rejected are in fact various erroneous superimpositions (adhyāropa).
However, Abhinavagupta replies (ibid.: 292, ll. 15-17), the object of
the superimposition is already a mental construct, which in turn had to
be established by way of the exclusion of other superimpositions, and so
on; this entails that the simple ascertainment of a patch of blue colour
could not be arrived at even in thousands of cosmic eras
(vikalpasamāropaparamparānavasthānād yugakoṭibhir api na nīlaniścayaḥ).
Next, Abhinavagupta takes into account the position of Śaṅkaranandana
(ibid., ll. 18ff.), who in the Apohasiddhi substitutes anyathā-prasaṅga
(the mere possibility that a thing be different from itself? Cf. ll.
24-25: tatrāpi viśiṣṭe ’rthe pratibhāte ko ’nyathāprasaṅgasyāvasara iti
vaktavyam) for Dharmakīrti’s adhyāropa as the cause of doubt (see above
n 3). Both samāropa and anyathā-prasaṅga, however, are seen by
Abhinavagupta as inevitably leading to a regressus ad infinitum.

85 The possibility that an object may be different from what it appears
to be usually depends on its being mixed with something else (e.g. milk
with water) or on its having the same features as something else.
Utpaladeva’s following explanation of the apoha process is intended to
cover all possible cases, including the one most difficult to account
for: the case of a distinctly characterized object which is not mixed
with anything else.

86 According to Abhinavagupta, this peculiar variation on the theme of
apoha, which, though not being at all incompatible with the Buddhists’
position, has, to the best of my knowledge, never been explicitly put
forth by them, is to be traced back to some ācāryapāda, presumably a
Śaiva teacher (Utpaladeva himself?); cf. ĪPVV I: 295, ll. 18-20: tad
uktam ācāryapādair eva yāvatyo ’rthakriyās tāvatsaṁkhyo ’tatkāriṇāṁ
gaṇaḥ । tāvantas tatsamāropās tanniṣedhāś ca tatsamāḥ, etc.

87 The unexpressed question that Utpaladeva is answering is highlighted
by Abhinavagupta (ĪPVV I: 294, ll. 6-7): How can a particular object be
a strictly individualized entity and at the same time the occasion for a
number of hypothetical alternatives?

88 That is, the objects existing on the level of māyā. To sum up, they
are primarily anyonyabhedamaya, and secondarily anyonyātma.

89 In conclusion, the process of apoha can be successfully explained
only in a Śaiva context. Particularly, it presupposes that both the
knowing subject and the object are ultimately identified with īśvara and
are viśvātmā — even at the level of māyā, although in a more virtual and
concealed form. In the Buddhist explanation the defect of anavasthā,
etc., is unescapable because vikalpana, samāropaṇa, etc. are separate
and incapable of relating to each other by their own capacity alone
(ĪPVV I: 296, l. 22: yena [referring to the Śaiva position]
pr̥thagvikalpanasamāropaṇānavasthādoṣāprasaṅgaḥ). This potential
“openness” of the object (and the subject) is at the root of the
subject’s “doubt” about it. Of this “openness”, i.e. of the
viśvātmā-nature of the object, the subject maintains some kind of
subliminal, inner awareness, even on the level of māyā. To sum up:
unlike the Buddhists who view the “doubt” (i.e. the first step in the
apoha process) as deriving from the object alone, the Śaivas have it
arise from the “greatness” of the subject as well (ibid.: 296, ll.
18-19: māyāpade ’pi ca tatprakāśasaṁskārasyeśvarasyānativr̥tter āśaṅkā
pramātr̥māhātmyād evottiṣṭhati). The solution of the problem of objective
and subjective disparateness involved in the Buddhist theory as proposed
by Dharmakīrti, who maintains that the objects, though being essentially
differentiated, can be ascertained by the subject as unified owing to
their production of a single effect, e.g. a single cognition (PVSV: 60,
ll. 16-17: bhāvāḥ prakr̥tibhedino ’pi jñānādikam ekaṁ kāryaṁ kecit
kurvanti nānya iti), does not seem satisfactory to Abhinavagupta. In
fact, after quoting PV I.119 he refers to his subsequent indication of
its shortcomings (ĪPVV I: 297, l. 1: tatra sphuritam api vastu
duḥsamartham ity agre [to be added: sphuṭaṁ] bhaviṣyati).

90 It is precisely for this reason, Abhinavagupta says (ĪPVV I: 297, ll.
2-8), that the power of exclusion has been given a separate status,
though exclusion is the very body of conceptual cognition and of the
special case of conceptual cognition which is memory.

91 Bhagavad-Gītā (BhG) XV.15b: “From me derive memory, knowledge and
exclusion.” This passage sounds somewhat cryptic. For Śaṅkara
(Gītābhāṣya [BhGŚ]: 627, l. 4), apohana stands for “turning away from,
departing from” (apāyanam apagamanam), i.e. the loss of knowledge and
memory due to evil karma (the objects of apohana are jñāna and smr̥ti:
tadapohanam). According to Ānandagiri’s Vyākhyā thereon (p. 626, ll.
14-15), “knowledge” is the supernatural power to perceive what is beyond
the normal reach of the senses; “memory” is the capacity to recollect
what has been experienced in past lives. The commentary of Rājānaka
Rāmakaṇṭha (possibly identical with Utpaladeva’s disciple) is the one
that seems closer to the interpretation given by Utpaladeva. According
to Rāmakaṇṭha (Sarvatobhadra [BhGS]: 330, ll. 3ff.), memory, perceptual
cognition and exclusion are the outcome of the outflowing of Power
(śaktiprasara) in human beings. This Power, or more precisely this
Consciousness-Power (saṁvedana-śakti) acts in two ways, in that it
defines the being and the non-being of the various realities
(tattatpadārthabhāvābhāvaparicchedakatva). While the “non-being” of
realities is defined by means of apohana alone, their “being” is defined
by means of perceptual cognition (which makes something which was not
there before manifest) and by means of memory (which brings something
that has already been perceived in the past again to the mind). In both
processes apohana acts as prakāśanābhāva (absence of manifestation).
Though these powers act in limited subjects, they ultimately flow from
the one and absolutely real knowing subject (paramārthasaṁveditur
ekasmāt). According to Abhinavagupta’s Bhagavad-Gītārtha-Saṁgraha (BhGA)
(p. 231, ll. 10-16), jñāna is the manifestation of something new and
corresponds to the “great” creation (mahāsr̥ṣṭi) of the universe;
apohana, which represents the creation of the limited soul, is a
conceptual thought, which acts by fragmenting all-inclusive reality;
smr̥ti has the function to make manifest again what, subsequent to the
original cognition, has been reduced to the status of a latent
impression.

Appendix II*

Studies on Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vivr̥ti

