Part II: What Is Memory?1

Raffaele Torella

The present paper is the second of a series of papers in which I have
been presenting the critical edition and English translation of the
fragmentary codex unicus of the Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vivr̥ti, the long
commentary that Utpaladeva composed on his own Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Kārikā
(ĪPK) and Svavr̥tti, a work of outstanding importance for the philosophy
of Kashmirian Śaivādvaita, and for Indian philosophy as a whole. I need
not repeat here what I have already said elsewhere on the nature of the
Vivr̥ti and its relation to the other commentaries.2 Suffice it to recall
that Utpaladeva is said to have composed the ĪPK and the concise Vr̥tti
at the same time, and later on to have devoted an analytic commentary to
the complex Kārikā-Vr̥tti, i.e. our Vivr̥ti (or Ṭīkā), in which he
discussed possible alternative views and rejected them, also making
occasionally quite long digressions on particular subjects. Of this
lengthy work) corresponding to the extent of 8,000 ślokas (hence the
traditional denomination of Aṣṭasāhasrī) — only a comparatively small
fragment has come down to us, covering the section ĪPK 1.3.6 through
1.5.3. A detailed exposition of my discovery of the original manuscript
— after a cursory consultation, some fifteen years ago, of a transcript
of the same made by K.C. Pandey can be found in the first study that I
have devoted to this text (Torella forthcoming), which also contains a
description of the manuscript (National Archives, Delhi, Skt. Mss no.
30).

The present paper deals with the Vivr̥ti on ĪPK 1.4.1-2. In the previous
chapter Utpaladeva, referring to an enigmatic statement in the
Bhagavad-Gītā (BhG),3 had identified three powers (śakti) in the Lord:
Cognition, Memory and Exclusion. After making some preliminary remarks
concerning them as a whole, he starts now a detailed inquiry into each
of them. His aim is to show that cognition, memory and exclusion, which
constitute the very basis of the knowledge process in human mind, are
indirectly also a proof of the coinciding of the individual subject with
universal Consciousness. None of these phenomena can be really explained
and their complex functioning accounted for satisfactorily in merely
“mechanic” terms, as first of all the Buddhists do. The individual
subject can cognize, remember and exclude only if it is conceived of as
inscribed within an eternal and, at the same time, dynamic universal
I-ness, i.e. Śiva.

If Utpaladeva’s investigation starts with memory, by infringing the
above-stated order, it is “because in a very clear manner (suspaṣṭam)
memory can serve as a logical reason for the establishment of the
identity of the self with the Lord”.4 The starting point is the
classical definition of memory given in Yoga-Sūtra (YS) I.11: “Memory is
the non-extinction of the object formerly perceived”
(anubhūtaviṣayāsampramoṣaḥ smr̥tiḥ). The sustained analysis of Utpaladeva
singles out a few crucial points contained in such an apparently simple
process: how is it possible to attribute temporal differentiation to a
cognizer that is permanent in his essential nature? What is the
relationship between the cognitive act of the original perception and
the cognitive act of the subsequent memory? How can the latter bring the
former to light again without objectifying it? On this point, in fact,
the Śaiva and his principal opponent, the Buddhist epistemologist, are
in full agreement: a cognition is self-luminous and cannot be the object
of another cognition. The standard Buddhist explanation is far from
being satisfactory: saying that the perception produces a saṁskāra,
which in turn will produce the phenomenon of memory, only accounts for
the fact that memory has a certain objective content but leaves out the
“subjective” component represented by the fact that the object has been
“coloured” by the previous perception, or, to be more precise, by its
having been “already” perceived in a certain past moment. Memory, in
fact, is indeed the memory of the past object but also of the past
perception of it. Instead, as Abhinavagupta says,5 what the saṁskāra is
able to convey (or resurrect) is neither the original perception nor the
object in so far as it was cognized by such past perception. This
presupposes a living organism at work, a dynamic and unitary
consciousness able to freely move between different moments of time.6
Having this in mind, Utpaladeva deliberately introduces an apparently
little but in fact quite significant change in the YS definition, by
reading asampramoṣaṇam in the place of asampramoṣaḥ.7 Due to the very
nature of the phenomenon of memory, consciousness is expected to work at
the level of individual subject, fully within the world of māyā. As
Utpaladeva puts it:8

For this function belongs to the Lord alone, identical with
consciousness, and takes place due to His freedom, in these terms: it is
the Lord that, having assumed the form of the [limited] knower,
identified with the puryaṣṭaka and other planes onto which freedom is
superimposed, cognizes, remembers or ascertains.

But how, analytically, does the process of memory work? Both the act of
ascertainment (niścaya, adhyavasāya) and memory belong to the category
of vikalpa, being the māyic form of vimarśa. The main difference between
adhyavasāya, immediately following the original manifestation (or
“shining”) of the object — i.e. its perception — and smr̥ti, which is
instead more or less distant from it, is that in the former case we have
the reflective awareness (parāmarśa) “this”, while in the latter we have
the reflective awareness “that”. However, according to the Pratyabhijñā
philosophy, only a parāmarśa of a presently “shining” object is
possible. So memory cannot have as its object something which only
“shone” in the past (Vr̥tti: prakāśitasya parāmarśo na kr̥taḥ syāt).9 Once
the matter has been put in these terms (the possibility that memory
might have as its “object” the former perception had been discarded at
the outset), Utpaladeva is able to point to the centrality of a dynamic
I as the only way to get out of the impasse. It is the I that ensures
the possibility of unifying the various cognitions occurring at
different times, thus resolving the apparent inconsistency between a
(present) vimarśa and a (past) anubhava. The one and same svasaṁvedana
of both cognitions creates that necessary bridge between them which the
Buddhist epistemologist fails to account for.10 A further clarification
is provided by Abhinavagupta in the ĪPVV (II: 32, ll. 10-13): the
prakāśa concerning the part-object (arthāṁśe) belongs to the past; but
the prakāśa as grasped by the vimarśa, concerning the part-self
(svātmāṁśe), is not limited by time. Thus the vimarśa in the memory can
connect itself with the vimarśa in the perception and, through it, with
the former light of the object — in this way meeting both requirements:
taking place in the present and not being divorced from prakāśa (Torella
2002: 106f., n 12).

In the course of the exploration of the mechanism of memory, Utpaladeva
has to explain his position with regard to the object of memory. The
object of memory is, in principle, the same as the object of perception:
the unique particular, the svalakṣaṇa of the Buddhists, belonging to a
specific time and space and having a specific form. But just as the
original perception had catched with definiteness only some aspects of
the svalakṣaṇa, so the memory usually resurrects only some aspects of
it, and not necessarily the same. The starting point of this long
digression, which will turn into an investigation into the nature of the
universal, the particular and their relationship, is the degree of
vividness of the remembered object. Vividness (sphuṭatva) depends on how
many aspects or components of the thing are manifested in memory. In
fact, the apparently unitary svalakṣaṇa is composed of a number of
“manifestations” (ābhāsa), each of them having the nature of
universal.11 But if it is true that the more numerous sāmānyas unite,
the more individualized is the object, and the more vivid is its
manifestation in memory, it is also true that sāmānyas are not on the
same plane. Even a single sāmānya can as well be manifested vividly,
when it comprises a multiplicity of broader universals (this is the
case, Utpaladeva says, of the universal dhava [Grislea tomentosa] with
respect, e.g. to the universal ‘treeness’). In referring to a hierarchy
of sāmānyas, Utpaladeva is likely to have in mind Bhartr̥hari’s
conception, as expressed in Jātisamuddeśa, v. 33 sambandhibhedāt
sattaiva bhidyamānā gavādiṣu । jātir ity ucyate [. . .] (cf. Helārāja’s
commentary, p. 41 bhidyamānā upacaritabhedā gavāśvādiṣu sattaiva
mahāsāmānyam eva jātiḥ gotvāśvatvādikā, aparasāmānyam). Bhartr̥hari, in
his turn, seems to derive this conception from the Vaiṣeśika-Sūtra
(I.21ff.),12 where the term sāmānyaviśeṣa appears for the first time.
Sāmānyaviśeṣa can be taken in a double meaning: “specific sāmānya” (vs.
the highest sāmānya: bhāva) and “being at the same time sāmānya and
viśeṣa”. Praśastapāda calls them para and apara sāmānya: the former
causes the notion of continuity, the latter that of distinction.13

Text14

[9v13] 15vivr̥tau16 smr̥tyādīnām idānīṁ jñānaprakaraṇenānena svarūpaṁ
nirūpayiṣyann aśeṣakālānugatasvatantrāvabodhalakṣa-
ṇātmatattvasvabhāveśvaraśaktirūpatāṁ pratipipādayiṣuḥ smr̥ter eva tāvat
suspaṣṭam īśvarātmasiddhihetuta[10r]yā prathamaṁ sambhavam āha ।।

sa hi pūrvānubhūtārthopalabdhā parato ’pi san ।

vimr̥śan sa iti svairī smaratīty apadiśyate ।। <1.4.1>

[. . .]17 ।। [11r10] vr̥ttiḥ ।। paścād api pūrvānubhūtārthānubhavitr̥tvāt
pūrvānubhūtārthaprakāśāsampramoṣaṇaṁ tasyaikasya vibhoḥ kartuḥ sa ity
atra pūrvānubhūtatvena pratyavamarśaḥ smr̥tir nāma vyāpāraḥ ।। vivr̥tiḥ ।।
bodhātmano nityatvenaitadavibhaktāyāḥ boddhr̥tāyāḥ nityatve ’pi18
tattattathānirmitavibhinnadeśakālopasarja- nārthoparāgeṇa
bodhaikarūpasyā[11v]rthānubhavasyāpi ca bhinnakālatvena
pūrvapaścādvyavahāraḥ । tad āha “paścād api” iti । ata eva
prakāśamānārthādhīnatvād asya kālavyavahārasya sūtre vr̥ttau
cārthaśabdopādānaḥ19 । viṣayopalabdhr̥tāpy arthasya pr̥thagbhāve
nopapannety antararthānupraveśadarśanārtham arthākāro ’nubhavitety
evamarthatātparyeṇa sūtravr̥ttyor arthaśabdaṣaṣṭhyās tr̥cāpi kr̥taḥ
samāsaḥ, sa ca jñāpakāt kvacid iṣṭaḥ, tr̥nnantena vā sādhanaṁ kr̥teti
dvitīyāsamāsaḥ । nanv arthasyānubhavamukhenaiva kālasaṁsparśo vakṣyate
viśeṣato ’nubhūtatānubhūyamānatādirūpeṇa । satyam etat, kintv
anādinidhanasyaivāsya sarvaśakteś cittattvasya māyā yat20
kālakramāvabhāsanavyāpārā kartr̥śaktiḥ saiva ca 21tadānīṁ kālaśaktisaṁjñā
tattadvividhāvabhāsanīyādikakarmavastu-saṁlagnatayā
kālakramopasarjanavicitrāvabhāsanādikriyārūpatayā prathate । 22eṣaiva hi
sā 23parameśvarasyāvabhāsanākhyā
kriyāntastattatpadārthāvavibhāyiṣātmakecchā[12r]prārambhā
bahistadavabhāsanaparyantā nānyat kiñcid iti vakṣyate । smr̥tikriyā24py
25asyaivaiṣaivāntaḥsthitānubhūtapūrvārthavimar- śecchopakramā bahiḥ sa
iti tatpūrvakāloparaktānubhūtabhāvā-vamarśanavasānā । tad āha
“anubhūtārthaprakāśa” iti । sampramoṣaṇam iti lyuḍantena
kartr̥vyāpāratāsphuṭīkaraṇāya nirdeśaḥ ghaṭādivailakṣaṇyena
sādhyamānatāprādhānyasya rūḍheḥ । cinmayasyeśvarasyaiva hi svātantryād
vyāpāro ’yaṁ yad eṣa samāropitasvātantrya26puryaṣṭakādipramātr̥rūpo
jānāti smaraty avasyati 27vā na tu svasāmarthyena pr̥thagbhūtānāṁ
jñānasmr̥tyādivastūnāṁ kāryakāraṇabhāvaḥ svatantrāṇāṁ yena viṣayabhedaś
codyate । ata eva “svairī” ity upāttaṁ vivr̥taṁ ca “kartur” iti,
anubhavasmaraṇakālavyāpitvaṁ “sa parato ’pi sann” iti sūtre nirdiṣṭaṁ
vivr̥taṁ ca “paścād api pūrvānubhūtārthānubhavitr̥tvād” iti । tathā
“ekasya” iti kartr̥taiva ca aiśvaryam uktam “vibhor” iti । kevalam
28anubhavo ’rthasya pravr̥ttatadarthāvabhā[12v]sapramātrantaraikībhā-
vanirmāṇamukhena tadānīṁ tadanubhavitr̥pratyagātmani
vakṣyamāṇanayenānupraveśo nirmāṇam ivāsyābhāsanād । avabhāty api tasminn
29atatsamāropāpohanātmanā niścayena vinā vyavahāro na pravartate, sa ca
niścayo ’nubhavakāla eva vā bhāvyate ’yam iti, anyadā vā sa iti,
ubhayathāpi vā । kālāntare tu sa niścayaḥ pratyavamarśātmā smr̥tir ity
ucyate । tad uktam “prakāśāsampramoṣaṇaṁ pratyavamarśa” iti ।
anugatadeśakā- lānavacchinnatattadābhāsamātrapratyavamarśe tu
vikalpamātram etac cottaratra vakṣyate <।। I.4.1 ।।>30

<Vivr̥ti> smr̥tivikalparūpaparāmarśasamaye deśakāl-ādyavacchedāt
tathāntaḥsthitasya bahir api tad idam
ityādisarvanāma31nirdeśyasyārthasya32 sāmarthyād eva prakāśo bhavatīty
āha ।।33 [. . .]

[13r6] bhāsayec ca svakāle ’rthāt pūrvābhāsitam āmr̥śan ।

svalakṣaṇaṁ ghaṭābhāsamātreṇāthākhilātmanā ।। <I.4.2>

[. . .]34 [14r8] Vr̥ttiḥ ।। smr̥tiśaktyā sa iti pūrvānubhūtaṁ svalakṣaṇaṁ
parāmr̥śan 35bhāsayaty evānyathā prakāśitasya parāmarśo na kr̥taḥ syāt
svasattākāla eva36 ca । tena smaraṇakāle naṣṭasyāpy ābhāso na duṣyati ।
kadācit tv arthitāvaśād ghaṭakā-
ñcanadravyasattādyanyatamaikābhāsarūpeṇaivāsyāsphuṭā-37 vabhāsaḥ, anyadā
tu sarvātmanārthitvena 38sphuṭa eva, atiśayanirantarāvahitacetasas tu
dr̥ṣṭārthapratyakṣīkāra eva ।।

Vivr̥tiḥ ।। smr̥tau deśakālādyavacchedena pūrvatayānubhūtaṁ parāmr̥śan
niyatarūpatayā svalakṣaṇātmānam arthaṁ parāmr̥śati । tad āha “smr̥tiśaktyā
” iti “svalakṣaṇam” iti ca । prakāśasvabhā[14v]vaś ca parāmarśo
yathāsau39 tasyāvaśyaṁ prakāśanena tathā bhāvyam, anyathā parāmarśanam
eva nopapadyeta,40 ato ’tra nāsti vivādaḥ। ata eva “bhāsayaty eva” ity
avadhāraṇaṁ tena ca sūtre liṅartho niyogakaraṇalakṣaṇe vivr̥taḥ । kevalaṁ
yad yathā parāmr̥śyate tat tathaivāvabhāsyate smr̥tau ca pūrvaprakāśitasya
parāmarśāt pūrvaprakāśita41tvenaivābhāsaḥ42 । tad āha “anyathā
prakāśitasya parāmarśo na kr̥taḥ syād” iti । eṣa eva ca
anubhūtaviṣayāsampramoṣaḥ । pūrvaprakāśitatvaṁ ca
pūrvātītadeśakālapramātrākāraviśeṣāvacchedenaiva prakāśanād bhavati ।
tad āha “svasattākāla eva ca” iti । tad evam anyathā
parāmarśanābhāvaprasaṅgāt paurvakālikasyārthābhāsasya samarthanāt
smaraṇakālayogānupayogāt pūrvāvabhāsasya smaraṇakāle nāśānāśavicāro
niṣphala eva । tad āha “smaraṇakāle naṣṭasyāpi” iti । etāvatā ca
smr̥titvam upapadyate ’nyathā pūrvārthāvabhāsānunmeṣe tad abhinavam eva
jñānāntaraṁ syāt pūrvārthamātraviṣayaṁ yogina iva । yogino hi yasya
prathamaḥ kālabhedaḥ sarvathā na vigalito māyāmaye [15r] puryaṣṭakādau
pramātary avasthānāparityāgāt tasya smaryamāṇair aparair atītaiḥ
sahacārī kaścid artho ’bhiyogavaśād adr̥ṣṭapūrvo ’pi tāvaty aṁśe
labdhasvarūponmeṣasya sākṣātkāreṇāvabhāti, pūrvānubhavāsaṁsparśenaiva vā
pramātur vikalpa eva kaścid atītaviṣayaḥ svecchayā kiṁ notpadyate rājā
mama pitābhavad ityādiḥ । atrātīte ’py arthe ’tītadeśādisahacāriṇi
jñānābhāsas tadānīntanas tadānīntanapramātr̥saṁlagnatvāt, smaraṇe tu
pūrvapramātr̥mayaḥ43 । tasmāt pūrvāvabhāsonmeṣaḥ smr̥tāv
avaśyābhyupagamanīyaḥ ।44 arthitvāc ca45 ābhogavaśena smr̥tāv upajātāyāṁ
ghaṭādyābhāsasyaiva kāñcanādyābhāsā- 46sambhinnasyāpi yathopayogaṁ
pūrvadeśakālābhāsādya-vacchedoparāgāt svalakṣaṇarūpasya smaraṇād asphuṭo
’sāv avabhāso bhavati । tad āha “kadācit tu” iti ।
pūrvadeśakālādyavacchedavirahe tu svatantravikalpeṣu
sāmānyākārasyaivāsyāsphuṭasyāvabhāsaḥ । sāmānyāny eva hi prabhūtāni
saṁbhūyānyonyāvacchedena vyavasthitāni sphuṭābhāsatām āsādya
deśādisāmānyābhāsā-vacchedena svalakṣaṇatāṁ bhajante । 47eka[15v]m api
ca sāmānyarūpaṁ śākhādimattvamātraṁ vr̥kṣatvaṁ
dhavakha-dirādivarṇasaṁsthānasāmānyavaicitryābhāsasaṁmiśraṁ
deśakālābhāsasāmānyasahasrasambhedabheditaṁ cānekātmatām āpadyate ।
svayam adeśakālabhedatve ’pi parasparaṁ bhedaḥ parasparaṁ
paryāyāvacchedaś ca sāmānyānām anekasvalakṣaṇatā-pattihetuḥ, teṣāṁ
cānuguṇyenaivānyonyāvacchedo bhavati śītasāmānyāgnisāmānyayos
tathātvābhāvāt । 48kiṁcic ca sāmānyam 49anyasāmānyānavacchede ’pi svata
evāneka- sāmānyamayaikasāmānyātmatayā svalakṣaṇatām anāpannam api
sphuṭaṁ bhavati yathā vr̥kṣatvāpekṣayā dhavatvādi । svabhāvatvena 50hy
aviśeṣitam api tadantapraviṣṭavr̥kṣatvādi sāmānyatāṁ na tu jāhāty eva,
deśakālabhedāvacchedenaiva hi svalakṣaṇībhāvaḥ । yadā punar
arthitāvaśenaiva sadghaṭakāñcanalohitatvādyābhāsasaṁvedanenaiva
pūrvadikkālābhāsasaṁbhedina evārthasya smaraṇaṁ tadā sphuṭa evābhāsaḥ ।
tad āha “anyadā tu” iti । 51kadācit punar atyantaikarasā-
52vadhānodyuktasya niravaśeṣaviśeṣaṇāvabhāsasāmānādhikara-
ṇyāpattiviśadīkr̥taḥ53 smaryamā[16r]ṇo ’rthaḥ sākṣātkāramaya eva sphuṭaṁ
puraḥ sphurati । tad āha “atiśayanirantara” iti । nairantaryam
avadhānasya 54vijātīyacittavyavahārābhāvo nairmalyam । 55tadā ca
pratyakṣībhāve ’pi pūrvadr̥ṣṭatayaiva pratyakṣībhāvād
anubhūtaviṣayāsampramoṣaḥ sutarām iti smr̥tibhedamadhyagaṇanāyāṁ na
kṣatiḥ । 56svatantro ’pi vikalpas
tattatpramāṇapariśuddhānekaviśeṣaṇaviśiṣṭāvabhāsonmukho yadā bhavati,
tadā sphuṭībhavaty eva so ’rthaḥ । tad uktaṁ
brahmādibhāṣaṇākarṇanaunmukhyād iti । 57tadā ca 58vikalpatā syān
nirvikalpatā 59veti nāsmākaṁ grahaḥ । parāmarśaśūnyatā tu na kvācid api
vidyate tādātmyāt sarvaprakāśānāṁ । sarvatrānusmaraṇādau ca
cittattvasyaiva svātantryaṁ, na tu svakāraṇasāmarthyād udbhavatīti
pratipādayituṁ “pūrvābhāsitam” iti “ābhāsayati” iti ca ṇicā nirdeśaḥ
kr̥taḥ “prakāśitasya” iti ca <I.IV.2>60

Translation

Vivr̥ti: The author, who, with the present section on knowledge, is going
now to describe the specific nature of memory, etc.61 — with the aim to
demonstrate that memory is formed by the power of the Lord, constituting
the very nature of the self as characterized by a free dynamic awareness
running through all times — starts in fact his proving argument
precisely with respect to memory, since in a very clear manner memory
can serve as a logical reason for the establishment of the identity of
the self with the Lord.62

I.4.1. The Free One (svairī), the perceiver of the object formerly
perceived, continuing also to exist later, has the reflective awareness:
“that”: this is what is called “remembering”.

Vr̥tti: The light-perception of the object formerly perceived is not
extinguished (asaṁpramoṣaṇam) [at the moment of memory],63 since he [the
knowing subject, the Lord] also continues to exist later as the
perceiver of the object formerly perceived. To have here a reflective
awareness of an object in terms of “that” — as formerly perceived — on
the part of him who is one, the Lord, the agent: this is the function
called “memory”.

Vivr̥ti: Although the cognizer is permanent in his essential nature,
since permanent is the consciousness from which his nature is never
divided, the notions of “before” and “after” can be applied [to the self
and his cognitive activity] in common experience on account of the
temporal differentiation of the object perceptions,64 whose essence is
in fact solely consciousness: this [seeming] temporal differentiation is
due to the influence of the objects, which are various (tattatº),
created [by the Lord’s freedom] in such a modality (ºtathānirmitaº),65
separated [from the consciousness and among themselves] (ºvibhinnaº) and
qualified by time and space (ºdeśakālopasarjanaº).66 This is said [in
the Vr̥tti] with the phrase “also later”.

Precisely because of this — i.e. the fact that the use in common
experience of the notion of time depends on the objects in so far as
they are manifested — the Sūtra and the Vr̥tti have the word “object”
(arthaº). But also the condition of perceiver of any content of
perception (viṣayaº) would be inadmissible were the object separated
[from the perceiver]. Therefore, in order to indicate that there is an
inner interpenetration with the object, [both the Sūtra and the Vr̥tti
intend to state that:] “the perceiver has the form of the object”.67 It
is having this intention in mind that both in the Sūtra and the Vr̥tti
the author compounds artha, which would have the genitive ending in the
analytic sentence, with anubhavitr̥ ending with the agent suffix tr̥c.
Such a compound is to be accepted as correct in some particular cases68
due to a jñāpaka.69 Or else, we can take it as composed by the words
artha and anubhavitr̥ with the latter interpreted as ending with the
agent suffix tr̥n (tr̥nnantena). In this manner, the compound comes to be
a dvitīyāsamāsa, allowed on the basis of [the vārttika] “a factor [can
be compounded] with a word ending with a primary suffix” (sādhanaṁ
kr̥tā).70

[Objection:] But later on71 the text will put the matter in a different
way, i.e. that it is instead through the perception that the contact of
the object with time occurs, in the form of “[the object] has been
perceived, is being perceived, and so on”. [Reply:] This is true.
However, to this Consciousness-principle, which is indeed in itself
without beginning or end and possesses all powers, belongs māyā, i.e.
the power of the agent subject whose activity is the manifestation of
the temporal succession, and then this very power, with the denomination
of “power of Time”, appears in the form of various and multiform
activities like “making manifest” and so on, qualified by temporal
succession in so far as they depend on their objects, i.e. the various
and multiform things to be manifested, and so on. This is the action
named “manifestation” (ābhāsanaº), belonging to Parameśvara; it begins
with the will, consisting of the internal manifestation of the various
things, and ends with their external manifestation. It is this and
nothing else, as we shall see.72

Also the act of memory ultimately belongs to Him. In fact, memory starts
with the wish to regain the reflective awareness of an object perceived
in the past and currently stored internally (antaḥ),73 and ends
externally74 with the [present] reflective awareness [of the object] in
terms of “that” — i.e. the reflective awareness of the object as
formerly perceived (ºanubhūtabhāvaº),75 “coloured” by [the reflective
awareness belonging to] that former time.76 He means this when he says
[in the Vr̥tti]: “the light of the object perceived”.

By using the lyuḍanta word [a]sampramoṣaṇa77 he means to clarify the
fact that memory is a function of the agent subject, since [in such
words]78 the aspect of “being brought about” is conventionally deemed as
predominant, whereas it not so with words like “jar” and so on.79 For
this function belongs to the Lord alone, identical with consciousness,
and takes place due to His freedom, in these terms: it is the Lord that,
having assumed the form of the [limited] knower,80 identified with the
puryaṣṭaka and other planes to which freedom is superimposed
(samāropitasvā- tantryaº), cognizes, remembers or ascertains.81 And it
is not that by their own power (svasāmarthyena) cognition, memory and so
on, conceived of as entities (ºvastūnām), separated from [any agent
subject], establish among themselves a cause–effect relationship
independently,82 so that this thesis would lend itself to the criticism
that there is a different object (viṣayabhedaḥ).83

For this very reason, the Kārikā says ‘the Free One’ (svairī) glossed by
the Vr̥tti with ‘[of] the agent’ (kartuḥ). The capacity of the agent
subject to embrace both the time of perception and the time of memory is
stated in the Kārikā by the phrase “continuing also to exist later” (sa
parato ’pi san), commented on by the Vr̥tti with “since he also continues
to exist later as the perceiver of the object formerly perceived”
(paścād api pūrvānubhūtārthānubhavitr̥tvād). Then, “of Him who is one”
(ekasya) sovereignty, i.e. his being the agent subject is indicated with
the word “of the Lord” (vibhoḥ).84

But there is a difference to specify (kevalam):85 the object perception
consists in the entrance [of the knower] — through the “creation” of his
unification with other knowing subjects in whom the appearance of a
certain object is taking place — into the dimension of individual
subject, namely, of the perceiver of that same object at that very time
(how this can happen we will explain later on); this perception is in a
sense also a creation, since that object is made manifest.86 Even if
that object shines in perception (avabhāty api), it cannot enter worldy
transactions without an act of ascertainment (niścayena), consisting in
the exclusion of different objects which might be wrongly superimposed
on to it. And such ascertainment may occur at the very moment of
perception, thus producing the notion “this”, or in a different moment,
thus producing the notion “that”, or with a combination of the two
times.87 But if this ascertainment takes place subsequently (kālāntare),
having the [former] reflective awareness as its very essence, then we
call it “memory”.88 This has been said [in the Vr̥tti, with the phrase]:
“the non-extinction of the light [. . .] the reflective awareness”.
Instead, if there is a reflective awareness of this or that
manifestation as not delimited by the space and time that were
originally connected with them, we have a generic vikalpa
(vikalpamātram).89 This topic will be dealt with later on.90 – I.4.1.

Vivr̥ti: When reflective awarenesses in the form of that particular
mental construct, i.e. memory occurs, there is, as a matter of fact
(sāmarthyād eva), the manifestation of the object as being internal, and
external as well,91 with the delimitation by place, time, etc. The
object may be indicated through various pronouns like “that”, “this” and
so on. The Kārikā says:

I.4.2. As a matter of fact (arthāt), [he who remembers] must
necessarily, having a reflective awareness (āmr̥śan) of the particular
entity (svalakṣaṇam) formerly made manifest, make it manifest at the
actual moment of the memory (svakāle), either as a single manifestation
“jar” or as the totality of its components (akhilātmanā).

Vr̥tti: Thanks to the power of memory, the subject, when having a
reflective awareness as “that” of the particular entity formerly
perceived, does make it manifest [in the present] (bhāsayaty eva).
Otherwise, with regard to an object made manifest [only in the past] no
reflective awareness could take place (prakāśitasya parāmarśo na kr̥taḥ
syāt);92 and this manifestation occurs at the very moment of the act of
remembering. Therefore, the manifestation at the time of the memory also
of an object that has disappeared does not create any shortcoming [for
the explanation of the phenomenon of memory].93 At certain times, then,
the object appears in the form of a single manifestation, i.e. limited
to one of the many manifestations that constitute it, such as — in the
case of a jar — “jar [in general]” “golden”, “individual substance”
“existence” etc. depending on the subject’s intentions. In these cases,
its manifestation [in memory] is dim (asphuṭaº).94 At other times,
instead, the object appears in its totality, since this is the subject’s
intention: its manifestation is indeed vivid. And, finally, the subject
whose mind is intensely concentrated without interruption even directly
visualizes the object formerly perceived.

Vivr̥ti: In memory, when the subject has a reflective awareness of the
object as formerly perceived, endowed with a spatial, temporal, etc.
delimitation, he is aware of the object as a particular entity in so far
as it has a well defined nature.95 This is said [by the Vr̥tti] with the
words “thanks to the power of memory” (smr̥tiśaktyā) and “the particular
entity” (svalakṣaṇam). Just as the reflective awareness is the essential
nature of the light of manifestation,96 so it must necessarily be
accompanied by the becoming manifest of the object, without which the
act of reflective awareness itself would become impossible.97 Therefore,
on this point there is no possible disagreement. Precisely for this
reason there is [in the Vr̥tti] the emphatic statement “it does make it
manifest” (bhāsayaty eva), by which the meaning of the optative form
(liṅ) in the Sūtra [ābhāsayet] is commented on in the sense of being
characterized by “obligation” (niyogakaraṇaº).98 But we should introduce
a specification (kevalam):99 the manifestation of the object depends
directly on the modality of the reflective awareness concerning it, and
in memory the object appears as something made manifest in the past,
since the reflective awareness of it is precisely that of something
which has been made manifest in the past.100 This is said [in the
Vr̥tti]: “Otherwise, with regard to an object made manifest [only in the
past] no reflective awareness could take place”. And it is precisely in
this that the “non-extinction of the object formerly perceived”
consists.101And we can speak of something “made manifest in the past” in
the sense that the manifestation of that object was delimited by [the
association with] a specific previous past place and time, a specific
subject, a specific form. This is said [in the Vr̥tti]: “and [this
manifestation occurs] at the very moment of the act of remembering”.
This is how the matter stands, for otherwise any discussion whether the
past manifestation of the object is extinguished or not at the time of
memory would turn out to be vain: it would be so since there would be no
point in stating its connection with the time of memory once it has been
established that the manifestation of the object has occurred in the
past [only], for in this case the impossibility of the reflective
awareness concerning it would necessarily ensue. This is said [in the
Vr̥tti]: “[the manifestation], at the time of the memory, also of the
object that has disappeared”.102 Only the above description, taken en
bloc (etāvatā), can account correctly for the phenomenon of memory, for
otherwise — i.e. in the case that the previous manifestation of the
object does not come into play — we would have just yet another specific
cognition, a new one, concerning the previous object in its generic
form,103

as in the case of the yogin. In fact,104 in the yogin the original
full-fledged temporal differentiation has not yet totally disappeared,
due to his still residing in a condition where the māyic subjectivity is
identified with the puryaṣṭaka, etc.: to him, thanks to the power of a
most intense application (abhiyogavaśāt), a certain [past] object, being
associated with other past objects currently being remembered, though
not having been itself perceived previously (apūrvadr̥ṣṭo ’pi), is
manifested through direct perception, since the yogin has experienced a
disclosion of his own essential nature with regard to some definite part
[of the content of his cognition] (tāvaty aṁśe).105 Or else, why not
speak of a mere conceptual construct whatsoever concerning some past
object, which arises at will in the subject without any contact with a
previous perception, as for example “my father was a king”? In these
cases, the manifestation of the cognition with respect to an object
which belongs itself to the past and is associated with a past place,
etc. belongs to that [past] time, since it resides in subjects of that
[past] time, while in the case of memory the cognition is manifested [in
the present] as related to previous subjects.106 Therefore, it is
necessarily to be admitted that in memory the past manifestation emerges
again. And once the memory has arisen thanks to an intense mental
application depending on the requirements of the subject, we may have
the recollection of a single manifestation only, like “jar [in
general]”, etc. even not combined with other manifestations like “made
of gold”, etc. depending on what may serve [on that occasion] the
subject’s need; such single manifestation (“jar”, etc.) has the form of
unique particular (svalakṣaṇarūpasya) due to its being “coloured” by the
delimitation by a previous space and time, etc. As a consequence, the
manifestation of the object recollected will be a dim one (asphuṭaḥ).107
This is said [in the Vr̥tti] with “at certain times, then [. . .]”. Then,
in autonomous mental constructs, the manifestation of the object, taken
solely in its universal form, without being “coloured” by the
delimitation by a previous space, time, etc. is [also] not vivid. In
fact (hi),108 [a group formed by] many universals, when combined among
themselves and set in a relationship of mutual delimitation, become
vivid, and, in the end, once delimited by the universals of space, etc.
they attain the status of particular realities (svalakṣaṇatāṁ bhajante).
Treeness (vr̥kṣatvam), which yet is one (ekam api) in its universal form
consisting exclusively of being endowed with branches, etc. once it is
combined with a full variety of universals of colour and shape, such as
those of the dhava or khadira trees, and differentiated by myriads of
combinations with the universals of the manifestions of space and time,
becomes many (anekātmatām āpadyate). Even if in themselves they are
exempt from spatio-temporal differentiations, universals give rise to a
multiplicity of particular realities by virtue of their being
differentiated from one another and of their mutually delimiting one
another now in one way, now in another.109 This mutual delimitation must
comply with a criterion of compatibility, and, therefore, cannot take
place, for instance, in the case of the universals “cold” and “fire”,
which do not possess such compatibility. Then there are certain
universals which, even without entering into relations of delimitation
with other universals, are by themselves (svata eva) manifested in a
vivid manner without this entailing their assuming the status of
particular realities, but only thanks to the multiplicity of universals
that they, in their unity, encompass. For example, this is the case of
the universal dhava with respect to the universal “tree”, since the
former, though not being particularized as regards its own nature,
contains within itself other universals such as “tree”, etc. But this
does not mean that it ceases to be an universal, because to become a
particular the universal must be delimited by spatio-temporal
differentiation.

When, however, depending on the subject’s requirement, the object is
remembered as associated with the manifestation of a previous space and
time along with the perception of many manifestations such as
“existent”, “golden” and “red”, its appearance [in memory] will be
indeed vivid (sphuṭa eva). This is said [in the Vr̥tti] with “at other
times, instead [. . .]”. Sometimes, then, when one is intent on
remembering something with an especially intense concentration, the
object being remembered, rendered clear and limpid by referring to it
all its attributes — excluding none — vividly appears before him,
amounting in fact to something directly perceived (sākṣātkāramaya eva).
This is said in the Vr̥tti with “intensely [concentrated], without
interruption”. The absence of interruptions in the concentration is the
absence in it of the flowing of extraneous thoughts, its being pure. And
in this case, although there is an immediate perception [i.e. a direct
visualization] of the object, the object comes to be immediately
perceived [not as present but] as having been experienced in the past.
Thus, even more appropriately (sutarām), one is allowed to speak of
non-extinction of the object perceived [in the past]
(anubhūtaviṣayāsampramoṣaḥ):110 therefore, there is no incongruity in
including this type of experience among the various forms of memory.

Also when the autonomous mental construct111 turns to the manifestation
of something that has been proved beyond doubt by various means of right
knowledge and is distinguished by many attributes, then the concerned
object becomes indeed vivid (sphuṭībhavaty eva). This has been said:112
“Due to the fact of being intent in listening or speaking to Brahmā or
other deities”.113 We are not interested here in settling whether this
experience is to be considered a mental construct or not. On the other
hand, at no moment may we speak of the absence of reflective awareness,
because this is the very essence of all lights [of cognition]. And in
every cognitive experience, such as memory and so on, it is the freedom
precisely of this consciousness-principle to be at work: it is not
simply produced thanks to the power of its specific immediate cause. It
is in order to show this that [in the Sūtra and the Vr̥tti] causative
forms are used, like “formerly made manifest” (pūrvābhāsitam), “makes it
manifest” (ābhāsayati), “[of an object] made manifest [only in the
past]” (prakāśitasya).114

* Originally published in: Indica et Tibetica. Festschrift für Michael
Hahn zum 65. Geburtstag von Freunden und Schülern überreicht,
herausgegeben von Konrad Klaus und Jens-Uwe Hartmann, Wien 2007, pp.
539-63.

Bibliography

Texts

Bhāskarī of Bhāskarakaṣṭha, A Commentary on the
Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vimarśinī of Abhinavagupta, 2 vols., ed. K.A.S. Iyer
and K.C. Pandey (The Princess of Wales Sarasvati Bhavana Texts 70, 83),
Allahabad, 1938-50.

ĪPK = Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikā of Utpaladeva with Svavr̥tti (see Torella
2002).

ĪPV = Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vimarśinī of Abhinavagupta, ed. by Mukund Rām
Shastri, 2 vols., KSTS 22, 33, Bombay, 1918-21.

ĪPVV = Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vivr̥ti-Vimarśinī of Abhinavagupta, ed. by
Madhusudan Kaul Shastri, 3 vols., KSTS 60, 62, 65, Bombay, 1938-43.

Kāśikā-Vr̥tti of Vāmana-Jayāditya with Nyāsa or Pañcikā Commentary of
Jinendrabuddhi and Padamañjarī of Haradatta Miśra, ed. Swami Dwarika Das
Shastri and Kalika Prasad Shukla, 6 vols., Varanasi, 1983.

Laghu-Paribhāṣā-Vr̥tti of Puruṣottamadeva (see Paribhāṣā-Saṁgraha).

Padārthadharmasaṁgraha of Praśāstapāda with Śrīdharabhaṭṭa’s
Nyāyakandalī, ed. Durgādhara Jhā Śarmā (Gaṅgānāthajhā-Granthamālā 1),
Varanasi, 1977.

Paribhāṣāsaṁgraha, ed. K.V. Abhyankar, Poona, 1967.

PV = Pramāṇa-Vārttika of Dharmakīrti with the Commentary ‘Vr̥tti’ of
Acharya Manorathanandin, critically ed. Swami Dwarikadas Shastri,
Varanasi, 1968.

PV = Pramāṇavārttikam of Dharmakīrti, The First Chapter with the
Autocommentary, text and critical notes by R. Gnoli (Serie Orientale
Roma 23), Roma, 1960.

Vaiśeṣikasūtra of Kaṇāda with the Commentary of Candrānanda, critically
ed. Muni Śrī Jambuvijaya-Ji, Baroda, 1982.

VP = Vākyapadīya of Bhartr̥hari with the Commentary of Helārāja, Kāṇḍa
III, part 1, critically ed. K.A.S. Iyer (Deccan College Monograph Series
21), Poona, 1963.

VP = Vākyapadīya (mūlakārikās) of Bhartr̥hari, ed. W. Rau (Abhandlungen
für die Kunde des Morgenlandes 42,4), Wiesbaden, 1977.

Vyākaraṇa-Mahābhāṣya of Patañjali, ed. F. Kielhorn, 3rd edn., rev. and
furnished with additional readings, references and select critical notes
by K.V. Abhyankar, 3 vols., Poona, 1962-72.

Vyākaraṇa-Mahābhāṣya of Patañjali with Nāgojibhaṭṭa’s Uddyota and
Kaiyaṭa’s Pradīpa [. . .], ed. with footnotes [. . .] by Guru Prasad
Shastri (rev. by Bal Shastri), 5 vols., Varanasi, 1987-88.

Translations and studies

Lazzeroni, R., 1997, “L’espressione dell’agente come categoria
linguistica. I nomi indoeuropei in -Tér / -Tor”, in T. Bolelli and S.
Sani (eds.) Scritti scelti di Romano Lazzeroni, Pisa, pp. 85-95
[originally published in: Studi e saggi linguistici (1992), 32: 233ff.].

Sharma, R.N., 1995, The Aṣṭādhyāyī of Pāṇini, vol. 3: English
Translation of Adhyāyas Two and Three [. . .], New Delhi.

Torella, R., 1987, “Examples of the Influence of Sanskrit Grammar on
Indian Philosophy”, East and West, 37: 151-64.

———, 1988, “A Fragment of Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vivr̥ti”, East
and West, 38: 137-74.

———, 1992, “The Pratyabhijñā and the Logical–Epistemological School of
Buddhism”, in T. Goudriaan (ed.) Ritual and Speculation in Early
Tantrism: Studies in Honor of André Padoux, Albany (NY), pp. 327-45.

———, 2002, The Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Kārikā of Utpaladeva with the Author’s
Vr̥tti, Critical Edition and Annotated Translation, 2nd edn., Delhi [1st
edn., Roma 1994 (Serie Orientale Roma 71)].

———, 2012, “Observations on Yogipratyakṣa” in Ch. Watanabe et al. (eds.)
Saṁskr̥ta-sādhutā — Goodness of Sanskrit Studies in Honour of Professor
Ashok N. Aklujkar, New Delhi: D.K. Printworld, pp. 470-87.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 This paper that I have dedicated to Prof. Michael Hahn as a token of
appreciation to the scholar and of affection to the old friend is
perhaps a bit far away from his preferred field of research, but I
remember what once he told me during my stay at his house at Odendorf:
that the fact that we both liked to work on unpublished sources created
a stronger link between us than the mere sharing the same subject. . . .

2 Torella 2002: xl-xlv.

3 BhG XV.15b: mattaḥ smr̥tir jñānam apohanaṁ ca (From Me derive memory,
knowledge and exclusion).

4 So we read at the very beginning of the Vivr̥ti on 1.4.1; see below, p.
409.

5 See below, n 83.

6 The point has been explicitly touched, in a different context, by
Utpaladeva in ĪPK 1.3.2cd [. . .] saṁskārajatvaṁ tu tattulyatvaṁ na
tadgatiḥ “The fact that [memory] arises from latent impressions implies
its similarity to the former perception, but not its cognition of that.”
The saṁskāra of the former perception is awakened by a present
perception — similar to the other — which gives rise to the memory. The
saṁskāra, therefore, ensures this “similarity” in the memory, but the
memory itself has no direct access to (cannot “know”) the former
perception, nor can it, strictly speaking, establish the similarity
between the latter and the present perception which has been reawakened
by the saṁskāra (Torella 2002: 99f. n 4). Vr̥tti thereon: “Since memory
arises from the latent impression left by the former perception, it only
bears a similarity to that perception but does not have direct cognition
of the latter; and, moreover, as there is no cognition of the former
perception not even the similarity to it can be maintained.”

7 A lyuḍanta word like asampramoṣaṇam is more inclined to express a
process than the ghañanta word asampramoṣaḥ. See below, n 78.

8 See below, p. 410.

9 See below, p. 411.

10 Cf. ĪPVV II: 17, ll. 22f.: anubhavasmr̥tyor ekaṁ svasaṁvedanarūpam
ekaviṣayatopalambhāt.

11 Utpaladeva’s concept of svalakṣaṇa seems (and, in a sense, indeed is)
just the opposite of the Buddhist’s (for a detailed discussion see
Torella 1992: 332-36). For the Buddhist epistemologist the starting
point is the particular; perception grasps it in its entirety but is
also inexpressible and uncommunicable; many different niścayas may stem
from this single perceptual content, each of them captures a part of it
and connects it with a word, which therefore denotes a certain sāmānya
(or rather the negation of what is other than that feature). For
Utpaladeva, each pramāṇa grasps an individual ābhāsa (which is a
sāmānya), expressed by a determinate word, depending on a determinate
reflective awareness, or grasps — in the perception itself and not in a
later cognitive act — a group of ābhāsas coordinated by the Lord’s power
of necessity around a dominant ābhāsa, which allows the perception to
remain unitary. The group of ābhāsas taken in its totality ultimately
corresponds to the Buddhist svalakṣaṇa. The two conceptions are after
all not so opposed to each other: Utpaladeva’s svalakṣaṇa clearly
derives from the svalakṣaṇa of the Buddhists, only with a significantly
inverted perspective.

12 See in particular I.2.3 (Candrānanda) sāmānyaṁ viśeṣa iti
buddhyapekṣam, I.2.4 bhāvaḥ sāmānyam eva, I.2.5 dravyatvaṁ guṇatvaṁ
karmatvaṁ ca sāmānyani viśeṣāś ca, etc.

13 Cf. p. 741: sāmānyaṁ dvividhaṁ — param aparaṁ ca; p. 743: tatra
sattāsāmānyaṁ param anuvr̥ttikāraṇam eva; p. 746: aparaṁ [. . .]
anuvr̥ttivyāvr̥ttihetutvāt sāmānyaṁ viśeṣaś ca bhavati. See also
Bhartr̥hari, Jātisamuddeśa, v. 14 anupravr̥ttidharmo vā jātis syāt
sarvajātiṣu । vyāvr̥ttidharmasāmānyaṁ viśeṣe jātir iṣyate.

14 The words underlined in the text are those literally cited in the
ĪPVV. Punctuation is mine (that found in the MS is often misleading). In
the edition, <. . .> means “addition with respect to the transmitted
text”; [. . .], means “elimination of portions of the transmitted text”
(also the indications “folio” and “line” are between square brackets).
The sandhi has been “normalized”. The establishing of the text has
resulted from the delicate balance of sometimes divergent factors: the
text as transmitted by the codex unicus, internal coherence, literal
citations in the ĪPVV, paraphrases in the ĪPVV, parallel texts. A few
literal citations from the Vivr̥ti can be found in the footnotes of the
KSTS edn. of the ĪPV, which have been derived from the marginal notes of
an important ms of ĪPV, that indicated as Gh in the edition of the ĪPV
(the ms is now at the National Archives, Delhi, where I have consulted
it). When the transmitted text has been modified, this has been pointed
out by using three different expressions: correction, conjectural
emendation and tentative restoration. The first is felt as virtually
certain, the second as highly probable, the third as a mere attempt.

15 The MS regularly reads vivr̥tti- instead of vivr̥ti-.

16 The avataraṇikā of the Vivr̥ti is cited in ĪPV I: 115f., n 17.

17 The Kārikā is followed by the text of the ĪPV thereon.

18 Abhinavagupta seems to have a partly different text: ĪPVV II: 5, ll.
10f. ‘tena’ iti bodhena । ‘te’ iti anubhūyamānāḥ [. . .]. But neither
tena nor te fit the context of the transmitted text, which on the other
hand is confirmed by the paraphrase found in ĪPVV immediately after the
above passage: p. 5, ll. 11-14 ‘tathā’ iti svarūpād avibhaktā api
bodhasvātantryaprakāreṇa nirmitavibhaktatām iva āpāditāḥ, ata eva
vicitraṁ kr̥tvā bhinnā bodhāc ca anyonyaṁ ca, tata eva deśakālaviśeṣaṇā
ye arthāḥ, taiḥ prakāśamāṇair yaḥ uparāgaḥ, tena hetunā [. . .]. The
reading ºviśeṣaṇaº would seem preferable to ºupasarjanaº MS, but cf. p.
8, ll. 24f. kevalam apradhānatayā tasya prathanam iti viśeṣaṇatvam
upasarjanatvāt.

19 ºupādānaḥ, my conjectural emendation, ºupādānāt MS (cf. ibid. p. 5,
ll. 21f. ‘ata eva’ śaṅkitaṁ pūrvapakṣam arthaśabdopādāne hetutvena
upajīvati).

20 kālaº, my correction for akālaº MS (cf. p. 8, l. 9 kartr̥śakteḥ
kālakramāvabhāsanaṁ nāma vyāpāraḥ).

21 Apparently in the text that Abhinavagupta had before him there was
tatra in the place of tadānīṁ (p. 8, l. 8 ‘tatra’ iti māyāviṣaye).

22 eṣaiva, my correction for eṣava MS.

23 parameśvarasyāº, my correction for parameśvarāº MS.

24 yā added above the line.

25 asyaivaiṣaivāntaḥº, my conjectural emendation for asyaivaiṣavāntaḥº
MS.

26 ºsvātantryaº cit. p. 11, l. 14, incorrectly, as ºsvātantrye.

27 vā na tu, my correction for vā ’nantaº MS (na tu, strictly required
by meaning, is cit. p. 11, l. 25).

28 anubhavo ’rthasya pravr̥ttaº, my conjectural emendation for anubhavam
arthasya pravr̥ttam MS. In emending the transmitted text, I have taken
into account the long and complex explanation of the passage given by
Abhinavagupta (p. 14, l. 23 and p. 15, l. 17).

29 atatº, my correction for ataḥ MS.

30 MS has: ।। 25 ।। 1 ।।

31 ºnirdeśyasya, my correction for ºnirdeśasya MS.

32 Here MS adds syād eva, then deleted.

33 The avataraṇikā of the ĪPV follows.

34 The text of ĪPV follows.

35 All the mss of the Vr̥tti (and, accordingly, my edition) have
ābhāsayati.

36 I add ca, omitted in MS (and also in one of the mss I used for my
edition of the Vr̥tti) but explicitly cited by Abhinavagupta (p. 12, ll.
19-21 [. . .] “svasattākāla eva ca” ity anena vr̥ttau sphuṭīkr̥taḥ । tena
smr̥tikāle eva ca ābhāsayatīti vr̥ttiyojanā).

37 The evidence of the Vivr̥ti induces me to accept the reading
asphuṭāvabhāsaḥ instead of sphuṭāvabhāsaḥ, as found in my edition of the
Vr̥tti (both readings had been transmitted by the mss). I read ºavabhāsaḥ
instead of ºābhāsaḥ MS (all the mss of the Vr̥tti read ºāvabhāsaḥ, which
is also confirmed p. 25, l. 19 yā vr̥ttiḥ “avabhāsa” ity antā).

38 MS reads tathaiva sphuṭa eva; the same reading can be found in three
mss of the Vr̥tti (J, T; Ch; in Ch sphuṭa eva is added in the margin),
while the rest of the mss read tathaiva only. In my edition of the Vr̥tti
I had accepted tathaiva and considered sphuṭa eva an old gloss
interpolated into the text. Now, if, as I believe after taking into
consideration the arguments of the Vivr̥ti, in the previous line we must
read asphuṭāvabhāsaḥ, it is instead tathaiva to be deleted and only
sphuṭa eva to be left.

39 See below n 42.

40 MS has ºdyate then corrected to ºdyeta.

41 ºtaº added above the line.

42 What may appear in p. 22, ll. 12-14 as a quotation is in fact a
paraphrase: ‘anubhūtasyāvaśyaṁ prakāśaḥ’ iti ‘pūrvābhāsitatvenaiva
prakāśaḥ’ iti ca vyākhyātam [. . .].

43 I would be tempted to add here something like idānīntanaḥ making
contrast with the previous tadānīntanaḥ; idānīntanaḥ is in any case to
be implicitly understood, if we want to obtain the expected meaning.

44 N 62 of ĪPV I: 124 reads as follows: yathoktaṁ madhyapratyabhijñāyāṁ)
arthitāvaśāt smr̥tāv upajāyamānāyāṁ ghaṭādyābhāsasyaiva
kāñcanādyābhāsasaṁbhinnasyāpi yathopayogaṁ
pūrvadeśakālābhāsādyavacchedoparāgāt svalakṣaṇarūpasya smaraṇād asāv
avabhāso bhavati iti. The quotation shows some significant divergence
from the text I have established, also confirmed by Abhinavagupta’s
comments. Some substantial doubt remains only with regard to
upajātāyāṁ/upajāyamānāyāṁ, the latter fitting the context better.

45 ābhogaº, my correction for bhogaº MS. The detailed comments of
Abhinavagupta refer to the reading ābhogaº (ĪPVV II: 25, ll. 20-23: ā
samantāt bhogaḥ saṁvedanāntarbruḍitā- nantabhāvasaṁskāramadhyanimagnasya
cidbhāvasya unmeṣaṇātmakapālanacarvaṇavyāpāro ’nveṣaṇātmā, ābhogaś
cintāsantatilakṣaṇaṁ prā[read: pra]ṇidhāṇam).

46 With some hesitation I correct ºsambhinnasyāpi MS to
ºasambhinnasyāpi. The latter is the reading that Abhinavagupta’s remarks
(p. 25, l. 23 – p. 24, l. 4) seem to presuppose.

47 ekam api ca, my conjectural emendation for ekam api tat MS (the
pratīka p. 26, l. 25 reads evam api ca, but see the objection which
immediately precedes it: [. . .] tatra vr̥kṣa iti ekabuddhiḥ katham).

48 I have accepted the reading kiṁcic ca, quoted by Abhinavagupta, which
better fits the context; kiñca MS.

49 anyasāmānyānavacchede, my correction for atyasāmānyāvacchede MS.
anyasāmānyānavacchede is what the sense requires and is also confirmed
by Abhinavagupta’s paraphrase (p. 28, ll. 5f.): anyena vyatiriktatayā
parāmr̥ṣṭena ābhāsāntareṇa aviṣeśitatve ’pi.

50 The original reading of MS was hi, then corrected to hy aº.

51 The passage kadācit punar [. . .] na kṣatiḥ is quoted in ĪPV I: 125,
n 67: yathoktam aṣṭasahasryām — kadācit punar
atyantaikarasādhānodyuktasya niravaśeṣaviśeṣaṇāvabhāsasā-
mānādhikaraṇyāpattiviśadīkr̥taḥ smaryamāṇo ’rthaḥ sākṣātkāramaya eva
sphuṭaṁ puraḥ sphurati, tathā ca pratyakṣībhāve ’pi pūrva dr̥ṣṭatayaiva
pratyakṣībhāvād anubhūtaviṣayāsampramoṣaḥ sutarām iti
smr̥tibhedamadhyagaṇanāyāṁ na kṣatiḥ. The text is the same as in MS,
apart from tathā instead of tadā MS and the omission of the passage tad
āha [. . .] nairmalyam.

52 ºavadhānaº, my conjectural emendation for ºādhānaº MS. Cf. the
following avadhānasya.

53 ºkr̥tāḥ MS, then corrected to ºkr̥taḥ.

54 vijātīyacittavyavahārābhāvo nairmalyam, my tentative restoration for
vijātīyacittayāvyavahārābhāvanairmalyam MS, evidently corrupt.

55 ĪPVV II: 30, l. 2 quotes, incorrectly, tadā na.

56 P. 30, ll. 14-15 quotes, incorrectly, svatantre ’pi.

57 tadā hi MS, for which I substitute the more congruous tadā ca, quoted
ibid.: l. 23.

58 vikalpatā, my correction for vikalpaḥ MS. The expected reading
vikalpatā, required by the following nirvikalpatā, is indirectly
confirmed ibid., l. 23 tat kathaṁ vikalpatā ukteti.

59 P. 31, l. 1, vāśabdo ’tra na saṁśaye, api tu sambhavavikalpe.

60 MS has: ।। 25 ।। 2 ।।

61 See n 3.

62 If Utpaladeva decides to start with memory (out of the three śaktis
under consideration: the above-mentioned Knowledge (in general), Memory
and Exclusion), it is because the analysis of the phenomenon of memory
makes immediately and easily evident that the latter presupposes a
knowing subject assumed as identical to the Lord (ĪPVV II: 2, ll. 18-21:
tāvadgrahaṇaṁ jñānāpohanāder api anantaraṁ nirūpayiṣyate svarūpam iti
kramaṁ dyotayati । nanu kuto ’yam evaṁbhūtaḥ kramaḥ । āha suspaṣṭaṁ
kr̥tvā īśvarasvabhāvasya ātmanaḥ siddhau hetutā smr̥ter yato ’sti, tato
’yaṁ kramaḥ).

63 Utpaladeva has in mind the classical definition of memory in YS I.11:
anubhūtaviṣayāsampramoṣaḥ smr̥tiḥ.

64 It is the differentiated content of cognition to project a
corresponding differentiation onto the cognizer and the cognition (p. 5,
ll. 19f.: tataś ca arthoparāgād arthagatau deśakālau pramātāraṁ ca
anubhavaṁ ca āviśantau lakṣyete).

65 That is, as if they were separated from their essential nature as
consciousness.

66 My translation follows Abhinavagupta’s paraphrase (see n 18 to the
edition).

67 According to Abhinavagupta (ibid.: 6, ll. 5f.), this is meant to
exclude the alternative view: the object has the form of the perceiver.

68 That is, in some particular cases used by cultivated persons, but it
is not to be taken as generally valid as this would entail the complete
non-applicability of explicitly stated general rules, like, in this
case, Pāṇini II.2.15 tr̥jakābhyāṁ kartari (p. 6, l. 12 ‘kvacit’
śiṣṭaprayukte । ‘sārvatrika’ iti jñāpake ‘tr̥jakābhyām kartari’ niṣedho
’navakāśaḥ syāt; apparently sārvatrika is a citation from the Vivr̥ti,
but it is not found in the MS). The issue whether a jñāpaka can be
applied to the generality of cases has often been debated among the
grammarians and usually answered in the negative (cf. the well-known
paribhāṣā “jñāpakasiddhaṁ na sarvatra”). See e.g. Puruṣottamadeva’s
explanation in his Laghu-Paribhāṣā-Vr̥tti (p. 160, ll. 8-10), which is
also quite close to the wording of Utpaladeva’s text: jñāpakaṁ hi nāma
na vācakaṁ kiṁ tarhi iṅgitena sūcakaṁ kvacid eva iṣṭasiddhav āśrīyate na
sarvatrety yujyate jñāpakasiddhaṁ na sārvatrikam iti । [. . .] kiṁtu
viśiṣṭa[read: śiṣṭaº?]prayogadarśanāt kvacid eva). In other words, as we
can read in a marginal note found in the ms indicated as Gh in the KSTS
edn. of the ĪPV and included in the n 44 of the same edition (p. 120),
this grammatical “mistake” is not to be imputed to the carelessness of
the author, disregarding the prohibition for compounding a kartr̥- or
karma-ṣaṣṭhī with an agent noun in -tr̥ or -aka stated in Pāṇini II.2.15,
but to his specific intention (yatnataḥ in the Vimarśinī) to point out
one of the cardinal tenets of the Pratyabhijñā (tr̥jakābhyām kartari’ iti
sūtreṇa hi samāsaḥ atra pratiṣiddhaḥ iti parasya pramādakathitam etat
iti vyāmohaṁ nivārayitum āha ‘yatnataḥ’ iti samāsas tv atra
vaktavyavastuśraddhayā kr̥taḥ).

69 In this case the jñāpaka is to be found in the intention of the
sūtrakāra himself, then restated by the vr̥ttikāra, to underline through
the model of what happens in nominal composition (the ekārthībhāva of
its components) the essential non-separateness of the three elements at
issue: artha-anubhava-anubhavitr̥ (cf. ĪPV I: 120, l. 7 to 121, l. 3). In
the synthetic expression of nominal composition (vr̥tti) the meanings of
the single words merge into the overall meaning of the vr̥tti just as
dust mixes with water, so that in the end the water/vr̥tti does not show
any more the “troubling” presence in itself of the dust/single words:
ibid.: 6, ll. 7-9 samāse hi vr̥ttipadārtho vr̥ttyarthe pāṁsur iva udake
miśrībhavan tatkāluṣyarūṣaṇaṁ tatra avabhāsayati (read: nāvabhasayati;
the correct reading is also found in the above-cited n 44 of the KSTS
edn. of the ĪPV I, which is based on the ĪPVV). The above remark, which
might be also taken, as I did, as referring to the close interconnection
of the terms in a samāsa and their merging into the overall meaning of
the synthetic expression (vr̥ttyarthe) is given a much more specific
connotation in Abhinavagupta’s discourse in the ĪPVV: in spite of the
fact that such a compound goes against the grammatical rules, none the
less it is provided with a sort of “correctness” by the urge of the
author to express what he aims to express (p. 6, ll. 6f. ‘tr̥cāpi’ iti
pratiṣiddho ’pi samāso ’tra vaktavyavastuśraddhayā kr̥taḥ). The “force”
of the overall intended meaning of the compound has the capacity to make
the imperfection or unfitness of its single components (tatkāluṣyarū-
ṣaṇaṁ) unnoticeable.

70 The suffix tr̥n produces agent nouns identical to those ending with
tr̥c except for having a verbal regime and shifting the udātta onto the
root; see Lazzeroni 1997. The vigraha form would be: artham anubhávitā.
The possibility for the two words to form a dvitīyāsamāsa is, however,
not allowed, unless (Bhāskarakaṇṭha says in his Vyākhyā I: 149, ll. 2f.)
we resort to the yogavibhāga device and divide Pāṇini II.1.24 dvitīyā
śritātītapatitagatātyastaprāptāpannaiḥ into two parts. According to
Bhāskarakaṇṭha, yatnataḥ in the ĪPV refers precisely to the use of the
yogavibhāga; this interpretation can also be found in a marginal note of
the ms. Gh of the ĪPV, then reproduced in n 43 of the KSTS edn. of the
ĪPV (I: 120). For his part, Utpaladeva refers to vārttika 2 under Pāṇini
II.1.33 (Mahābhāṣya I: 386, l. 13) sādhanaṁ kr̥teti vā
pādahārakādyartham, which, in order to justify compounds like
pādahāraka, states that a factor [whatsoever] can be compounded with a
kr̥danta (we may add: in the absence of a specific Pāṇinian rule to
exclude it). Through Kātyāyana’s more allowing interpretation of
Pāṇinian rules concerning the kr̥danta compounds, also the dvitīyāsamāsa
with a tr̥nnanta as uttarapada comes to be accepted. Interpreting
anubhavitr̥ as a tr̥nnanta instead of a tr̥janta, says Abhinavagupta in the
ĪPVV (p. 6, l. 15), would have a further implication: a restatement of
the fact that the whole discussion on memory presupposes a “māyic”
scenario (tācchīlyādinā hi māyāpadam avadyotitataraṁ syāt; tācchīla,
taddharma and sādhukāri are the three possible meanings of tr̥n according
to Pāṇini III.2.134f.). In conclusion, either as ṣaṣṭhīsamāsa
(incorrect, but allowed due to jñāpaka) or dvitīyāsamāsa (allowed, but
only after applying Kātyāyana’s Vārttika or an ad hoc yogavibhāga
operation), the compounds pūrvānubhūtārthopalabdhr̥- in the Sūtra and
pūrvānubhū- tārthānubhavitr̥- in the Vr̥tti point to a bhedābheda view of
the object, its perception and the perceiving subject. More
analytically, Abhinavagupta says (ĪPV I: 120, l. 6 to 121, l. 3), they
show that perception comes to be (apparently) qualified by time through
its object, i.e. it “rests” on the object, while both the perception and
the object rest on the knowing subject. Grammatically, pūrvānubhūta- in
so far as it is a viśeṣaṇa of -artha rests on it (the past participle
suffix kta gives it a temporal qualification); in their turn, they rest
on the perceiver, who is the central element, the pradhāna as the
uttarapada in the tatpuruṣa compound (Bhāskarī I: 155, ll. 8-10).

71 According to Abhinavagupta (p. 6, l. 19), the reference is to
II.1.4ab 71: kramo bhedāśrayo bhedo ’py ābhāsasadasattvataḥ “Succession
is based on differentiation and this in turn derives from the existence
or non-existence of a certain manifestation” (Torella 2002: 154).

72 According to Abhinavagupta (p. 9, ll. 17f.), the reference is to
II.4.21: itthaṁ tathā ghaṭapaṭādyābhāsajagadātmanā । tiṣṭhāsor evam
icchaiva hetutā kartr̥tā kriyā “Therefore causality, agency, action are
nothing but the will of Him who whishes to appear in the form of the
universe, in the various manifestations of jar, cloth and so on.”
(Torella 2002: 187)

73 In the limited subject (p. 10, l. 1).

74 That is, in terms of separation from the limited subject (p. 10, ll.
5f.: bahir iti tata eva saṁkucitasaṁvidrūpāt vedakāt pr̥thagbhāvena).

75 I take anubhūtabhāva in the sense of [arthasya] anubhūtatva (but the
easier interpretation as anubhūto bhāvaḥ is also possible).

76 The additions between brackets come from the thorough gloss and
elucidation of this very concise passage furnished by Abhinavagupta (p.
10, ll. 1-9: antar iti pratyagātmarūpe
dehaprāṇapuryaṣṭakaśūnyāvacchedini saṁvittattve yaḥ sthitaḥ
pūrvānubhūtaḥ prāktanaprakāśaparāmarśarūpayā idantayā upalakṣito ’rthas
tasya yo vimarśas tamo’pasāraṇena sphuṭīkaraṇam, tatra yā icchā saiva
upakramaḥ prārambho yasyā bahir iti, tata eva saṁkucitasaṁvidrūpāt
vedakāt pr̥thagbhāvena sphuṭavedyatvena yo ’dhunā vimarśaḥ, sa yataḥ
prākkālabhāvinā vimarśena prakhyā[read:
prācyā]nubhavasvabhāvaprakāśajīvitena militaḥ, sa ity evaṁrūpeṇa śabdena
āviṣṭaḥ ubhayakālasparśitāyām api pūrvakālasparśapradhānaḥ prakāśate [.
. .]).

77 Instead of the ghañanta word sampramoṣa, as found in the classical
definition of memory in YS I.11.

78 While the nominal stems are generally considered “established”
(siddha), namely frozen items with respect to verbs, whose core is an
action in progress (sādhya), instead the action nouns belong,
so-to-speak, to an intermediate sphere (cf. Mahābhāṣya ad Pāṇini V.4.19,
vol. II, p. 432, l. 18: kr̥dabhihito bhāvo dravyavad bhavati).
Utpaladeva, and then Abhinavagupta, seem to introduce a further
distinction of their own (or, at least, I have failed to find their
vaiyākaraṇa source): the verbal action expressed by a kr̥danta word may
have a higher “dose” of sādhyatā when expressed by a lyuḍanta with
respect to a ghañanta. To this topic, and more in general to the very
interesting siddha-sādhyatā issue in Indian grammatical thought, I am
devoting a separate study.

79 Abhinavagupta in ĪPVV (p. 10, ll. 19-21) adds that the neuter gender
of a lyuḍanta word is also significant with respect to the masculine
gender of the ghañanta word: the word in the neuter, though possessing
the qualification of being siddha, does not dismiss its also being
sādhya, just like adverbs do.

80 This is an implicit reply to the opponent who might object (p. 11,
ll. 11-14) to the attribution to the Lord of an activity which obviously
points to a state of spatio-temporal limitedness: how could the Lord,
whose knowledge perpetually embraces everything (sarvataḥ prakāśarūpaṁ
sarvārthakroḍīkāri) perceive a particular thing, then keep it in a sort
of dark deposit, then resurrect it?

81 According to Abhinavagupta, in saying puryaṣṭakādiº Utpaladeva means
to totally exclude the śūnyapramātr̥, who is not involved in vyavahāra
activities, like memory (p. 11, ll. 16f. śūnyasyāpi vyavahārātītasya
smartr̥tā na bhāti); the body, though not mentioned directly, is not to
be excluded, due to its close association with the puryaṣṭaka. The
latter also includes prāṇa from which it cannot be separated. The
mention of their autonomy as samāropita means that svātantrya naturally
belongs to the Lord only, and only through him it is, as it were,
extended to other levels of subjectivity; the point is clearly stated in
ĪPK IV.2.

82 In this case, memory as an independent “event” (vastu) would be
simply the effect of the impression left by the former perception,
itself also an independent vastu. This is the Buddhist position, clearly
summarized by Abhinavagupta (p. 11, ll. 23-25: anubhavaḥ saṁskāraḥ
smr̥tir iti tu jñānamālaiva upādānopādeyabhāvena bhaviṣyati).

83 According to Abhinavagupta, this unacceptable (to the Śaivas)
position has been criticized by Utpaladeva in ĪPK 1.3.2. In this Kārikā
it is strongly underlined that a cognition cannot be the object of
another cognition: this applies also to memory. Also the Buddhists agree
on this, but their alternative explanation of memory is far from being
convincing. What the saṁskāra can cause is the mere fact that memory has
a content, but this content cannot be either the original perception nor
the content as having been the object of a former perception (ĪPV I: 97,
ll. 5-8: saṁskārāt paraṁ saviṣayatāmātraṁ smr̥ter siddham, na tu
anubhavaviṣayatvam, nāpi asya viṣayasya pūrvānubhavaviṣayīkr̥tatvam). See
above, n 6.

84 As Abhinavagupta specifies (ĪPVV II: 13, ll. 22-24), here vibhu means
“the One who exists in various modalities” (vividhaṁ kr̥tvā bhavati), and
is not to be taken in the usual sense of “pervader” (vyāpaka) because,
strictly speaking, this would presuppos the existence of spatial
differentiation.

85 That is, the difference between fresh perception and memory. Here
Utpaladeva is apparently replying to the opponent who might say that, if
memory is defined as anubhavāsampramoṣaṇa, it is after all itself a
perception, or, to be more precise, the “coming forth again of that very
perception” (p. 14, l. 22: anubhavasyaiva punarunmeṣaḥ). But, if this is
how things stand, then, when we experience this coming forth again of
the perception, why do we not say in common usage that we are just
“perceiving” (ll. 22f.: tat punarunmeṣe ’pi anubhavāmīty eva na kiṁ
vyavahāraḥ)? Having this possible objection in mind, Utpaladeva proceeds
to clarify what is the specific nature of anubhava (I follow
Abhinavagupta’s understanding of the passage).

86 The fresh perception is felt by the perceiver as the appearance of
something totally new, as a “creation”. But in fact this is not a
creation proper (of something that was not before), since other subjects
have already experienced it previously (p. 15, ll. 15f. nirmāṇatayā
cakāsad api na nirmāṇarūpaḥ pūrvaṁ pramātrantararūpatayā bhāvāt ।
iha[read: iva]śabdo ’nubhavitur abhimāno ’yam iti dyotayati).

87 Generally speaking, this act of ascertainment (niścaya) — or, to use
a broader term, of conceptual elaboration (vikalpa) — operates on the
content of perception, which would be destined by its very nature to
remain in the reign of nirvikalpa, i.e over and above the sphere of
ordinary reality (vyavahāra). To resort to the nice simile of
Abhinavagupta, the vikalpa is just like the doorkeeper of the dancing
hall who helps the poor villager in his desire to come out from this too
lofty place where he has incidentally found himself and come back to the
more modest reality, the world of māyā, where he is accostumed to live
(p. 15, ll. 21-23: tad ayaṁ grāmya iva lāsyamandirāt nirjigamiṣan
dvārapālena vikalpena anugr̥hyate māyāprāṅgaṇe nikṣipatā); likewise, the
vikalpa helps the human subject leave the very “uncomfortable” plane of
pure perception and come back to ordinary life where he could make use
of the wealth (less shining, of course . . .) of nirvikalpa perception.
This mental act will result in the awareness “this”, when it follows
immediately the perception and is closely linked to it; in the awareness
“that”, when it is more or less disconnected from perception (see
below); or else, in a combined awareness (this–that), which
characterizes the act of recognition.

88 Both the general vikalpa and memory take place after some time from
perception and produce the awareness “that”. But there is a significant
difference between them. While the former totally disregards the time of
any original perception (it can even ignore any definite perceptual
content), the latter is characterized by its connecting itself, through
its present reflective awareness, with the reflective awareness which
immediately followed the original perception: the smartr̥ resurrects in
the present the original perception, leaving intact its having occurred
originally in the past. As Abhinavagupta puts it, idānīntanāvabhāsanakā-
laparāmarśo ’pi na nimīlati — iti etatparāmarśabhittiprādhānyena
pūrvakālaparāmarśaḥ iti viruddhapūrvāparaparāmarśasvabhāva eva ‘sa’ iti
parāmarśa ucyate (ĪPV I: 119, ll. 8-12).

89 Cf. ĪPVV II: 17, ll. 11-15: yadi tu sa ity etat svīkr̥tau pūrvau
deśakālau na asya parāmr̥śati, api tu nīlaṁ pītam ity etāvanmātram tat
niścayanasmaraṇapratyabhijñānādiviśeṣavyapadeśanibandhanāyogād
apūrvatānavābhāsāc ca śuddham eva vikalpanam ity ucyate.

90 ĪPK II.3.4, etc.

91 “Internal” in so far as the object is no more in the range of
sensorial perception; “external” in the sense that it appears as
separated from the I (p. 19, ll. 8-10: antar iti indriyabhūmim atikramya
sthito ’pi bahir iti saṁvidbhāgāt vyatiriktatvena ahantāvibhaktena).

92 This obvious remark (obvious in the context of the Pratyabhijñā
philosophy) is the explicitation of arthāt “as a matter of fact” in the
Kārikā (p. 18, l. 14: arthāt sāmarthyāt parāmarśānyathānupapattyā).

93 See below, n 102.

94 Having modified the text of the Vr̥tti with respect to my edition of
it (Torella 2002: 15, l. 9), I have modified my translation accordingly.
See above nn 37 and 38 to the text.

95 My translation agrees only with the latter part of Abhinavagupta’s
explanation (p. 19, ll. 6-8: ‘niyatarūpatayā’ avaśyambhāvenety arthaḥ ।
smr̥tau hi prāgdeśakālayogo ’vaśyam sphurati । anyathā vikalpamātraṁ tat
bhavet, na tu smr̥tiḥ).

96 Cf. p. 19, l. 24 – p. 20, l. 1: sa hi parāmarśaḥ prakāśanasya
svabhāvabhūto dharmaḥ prakāśanābhāve niravalambhana eva kathaṁ syāt.

97 If the entity characterized by a certain essential property is
absent, how can its essential property be present (p. 20, ll. 3f.
svabhāvino hi abhāve asya ayaṁ svabhāva iti katham)?

98 Utpaladeva is here probably reminiscent of the passage of the
Kāśikā-Vr̥tti (vol. III, p. 128, l. 6: nimantraṇaṁ niyogakaraṇam) on
Pāṇini III.3.161: vidhinimantraṇāmantraṇādhīṣṭasampraśnaprārthaneṣu liṅ,
which lists the possible meanings of liṅ. The slightly ambiguous
niyogakaraṇam by which the Kāśikā-Vr̥tti explains nimantraṇa (vol. III,
p. 128) is glossed by the Padamañjarī with niyogato ’vaśyambhāvena yat
karaṇam anuṣṭhānam (cf. Mahābhāṣya on Pāṇini III.3.161, vol. III, p.
327: yan niyogataḥ kartavyaṁ tan nimantraṇam); in sum, nimantraṇam means
“inciting one to do something that has to be obligatorily done, like an
obligatory ritual” (Padamañjarī ibid.: avaśyakartavye śraddhābhojanādau
dauhitrādeḥ pravartaneti yāvat). Abhinavagupta glosses niyogakaraṇa as
follows: (ĪPVV II: 20, ll. 20f.: niyogena niyamena yat karaṇaṁ
sādhyamānatvaṁ, tat lakṣaṇaṁ svarūpaṁ yasya). The possibility that the
remembering subject might not make the former object manifest is to be
excluded; on the contrary, it “does” make it manifest (ĪPV I: 126 ll.
3-6: bhāsayet’ iti vidhirūpeṇa niyogena niyamo lakṣyate, na bhāsayati
ity etat na, api tu bhāsayaty eva iti). The above explicitation given by
Abhinavagupta in the ĪPVV shows incidentally that Utpaladeva, in the
long debated issue of the meaning of liṅ, favours the thesis of the
optative expressing first of all the verbal action denoted by the verbal
root, with an accessory qualification represented by vidhi, etc. (l. 19:
vidhyupādhikadhātvarthasādhyamānatodrecanaṁ liṅartha iti). This
corresponds to the third of the four theses examined by grammarians
(e.g. Padamañjarī, vol. III, p. 129 ayaṁ vidhyādiḥ prakr̥tyarthaḥ,
pratyayārthaḥ, prakr̥tyarthaviśeṣaṇam, pratyayārthaviśeṣaṇaṁ ceti
catvāraḥ pakṣāḥ), who instead generally favour the fourth one; cf.
Sharma 1995: 577f.

99 The possible objection that Abhinavagupta has in mind is made
explicit in ĪPVV II: 21, ll. 17f.: If you say that the object shines in
the memory, it means that there is no difference between memory and
perception (since in both of them the object “shines”).

100 Though in the absolute sense prakāśa has no connection with time,
none the less in the world of māyā it comes to be associated to the past
or the present of the experiencer (in that he identifies himself with
his bodily dimension): the shining of the object in memory is associated
through vimarśa to the shining that occurred in the “past” experiencer.

101 What has been said so far proves to be only an explication and
reformulation of Patañjali’s definition: the “non-extinction” of the
object is reached through the “conservation” of its former perception
within the present reflective awareness (p. 22, l. 24 – p. 23, l. 1:
anubhavo ’tīto hi atra prakāśabhāvena viṣayasya uktaḥ, asampramoṣaś ca
vārtamānikaṁ tathāparāmarśanam).

102 In other words, if the manifestation of the (past) object does not
occur in the present, also the question about the persistence or the
total loss of the object becomes irrelevant, because the “manifestation”
of the object at the actual time of memory is the very pre-condition for
the phenomenon of memory to exist. There is no “loss” for the memory
from the disappearance of the object, just as there is no “gain” if the
object continues to exist (p. 23, ll. 10f.: nāśe arthena smr̥ter na
doṣaḥ, sadbhāve na poṣaḥ iti tātparyaṁ vr̥ttiṭīkayoḥ). This definitely
being what Utpaladeva had in mind, as confirmed now by the Vivr̥ti, my
previous translation of the corresponding Vr̥tti passage (Torella 2002:
105: “Therefore it is not erroneous to state that there is the
manifestation, at the time of the memory, of an object, which, however,
is no longer present at that moment.”) has to be revised accordingly
(see the translation above, p. 427).

103 That is, it would be only a past object, not a past object qualified
by a past experience, actualized at the time of memory (cf. p. 25, ll.
14-16: pūrvasya arthāvabhāsasya anunmeṣe, pūrvaprakāśitvena aparāmarśe,
anubhavena atītena avacchinne [read: anavacchinne] ’rthamātre yo
jñānaviśeṣaḥ, so ’bhinava eva anubhava evety arthaḥ).

104 Abhinavagupta’s comments (p. 23, l. 16 – p. 24, l. 19) give us
useful clues for clarifying this dense passage. A yogin, according to
Utpaladeva, can experience an object belonging to the past independently
from its having actually been the object of a past perception. This is
possible because of the “intermediate” nature of the yogin that has
overcome the stage in which he identified himself with the body but,
being still involved with the mayic world, has not yet reached a full
identification with consciousness and still identifies himself with the
stages between the body and pure consciousness, namely, the puryaṣṭaka,
the prāṇa, the mind or the void. This enables him still to have a notion
of temporal succession: if the latter is full-fledged (ātyantika) only
for the deha-pramātr̥, none the less it affects, more or less dimly, also
the puryaṣṭaka, etc. But, at the same time, the yogin also has a (still
limited and sporadic) access to the identification with the supreme
consciousness, “that immaculate consciousness which, though different
from the presumptive identification with the thickest veil represented
by the body, is however intimately present in all levels of subjectivity
(body, puryaṣṭaka, etc.), just like the autumnal sun obscured by clouds”
(p. 24, ll. 13-15). This immaculate consciousness, once occasionally
freed of the veils dimming it by virtue of the intense application of
the yogin, enables him to have direct access to past events. The
events/objects are perceived as past but not through the intermediation
of a past perception; this can happen because these past but essentially
“new” objects are associated with other past objects which instead are
actually remembered (cf. ll. 17-19: tam [read: taṁ tam] artham
apūrvāvabhāsam eva tata eva smaraṇāyogyam api pūrvasmaryamāṇasāhityāt
pūrvatayā anubhavaty eva). A similar case is the yogin’s cognition of
the past lives.

105 That is, if I understand well, with regard to the object, which,
though not having been previously perceived, is associated with other
objects which have instead been perceived in the past and are now being
remembered.

106 Lit.: “made of previous subjects” (pūrvapramātr̥mayaḥ). It is not
easy to derive the expected meaning from the very laconic transmitted
text (see n 43 to the text). Memory is in fact a combination of a past
object shared by past subjects, a past perception experienced by the
(presently) remembering subject and a present memory act concerning the
synthesis of both. This is what also Abhinavagupta’s comments would
suggest: p. 25, ll. 11f.: smaraṇe tu pūrvapramātr̥̄ṇāṁ yo jñānābhāsas
tasya smartuḥ pūrvānubhavena saha mīlito ’bhūt, sa eva idānīm
evonmiṣatīti viśeṣaḥ.

107 The content of memory is necessarily a svalakṣaṇa in so far as it is
“localized” in a certain time and space. Even if the object of memory is
a single ābhāsa, i.e. a single universal, like “jar” (in general), this
is seen as a svalakṣaṇa in that what would make it a sāmānya proper,
namely its embracing a multiplicity of particulars and its permanence,
are “contracted” by the very fact that it is “remembered” (p. 29, ll.
3-6: atra adhuneti gr̥hīto ya ekaiko ’pi ābhāsaḥ, sa
vyāpakatvanityatvātmasāmānyalakṣaṇatiraskarāt saṁkucitaḥ svalakṣaṇam
ucyate atredaṁ sad iti). This however is not enough to make it sphuṭa in
cases like the one at issue, where the object is a single ābhāsa; its
manifestation lacks “vividness”, Abhinavagupta says, because, due to its
not being combined with other ābhāsas, it does not possess a full
efficiency (p. 26, ll. 7f.: ābhāsāntarasaṁparkavirahāt
pūrṇārthakriyāsampādanavaikalyena). This apparently conflicts with what
Utpaladeva will say some lines later: even a single sāmānya may be
sphuṭa, when it includes a multiplicity of sāmānyas of a progressively
broader extension. But, if I understand correctly, in memory we have a
deliberate act of “isolation” of the single ābhāsa depending on the
subject’s requirements.

108 The novelty of this criterion for establishing the distinction
between sāmānya and svalakṣaṇa (p. 26, l. 14: na anyatra prasiddhaḥ)
requires an adequate explanation by Utpaladeva.

109 The individual ābhāsas do not possess a status of avacchedaka or
avacchedya of their own, but they can assume either according to the
circumstances. They are not associated — Abhinavagupta says (p. 26, ll.
15-18) — remaining on the same plane, like the members of a dvandva
compound, but in a relationship of principal/secondary or
qualifying/qualified. The ābhāsa “cloth”, in a piece of white cloth, may
appear predominant to a subject who, at that particular moment, is
interested in the object as something to cover himself with; on the
contrary, the ābhāsa “white” will appear predominant, if he is thinking
of the capacity the colour white has to confer serenity to the soul (cf.
Pramāṇa-Vārttika I.58 and Svavr̥tti).

110 It is again the YS definition of memory, which had been the starting
point of Utpaladeva’s discussion.

111 The above considerations apply not only to the “dependent” vikalpas,
like ascertainment or memory, but also to those called “autonomous”
(svatantra), like imagination. In this passage Utpaladeva is alluding to
the treatment of bhāvanā/yogipratyakṣa by Dharmakīrti and his followers
(cf. Torella 2012: 479-80).

112 The source of this quotation, according to Abhinavagupta (p. 30, ll.
19f.), are two commentaries on the Śivasūtra, the Madhuvāhinī and the
Tattvārtha-Cintāmaṇi, both ascribed to Bhaṭṭa Kallaṭa and now lost.

113 The visualization of deities is a case of memory-like experience, in
the sense that previous cognitions gained through various means of
knowledge, like revelation or inference, enable the devotee to “see” or
evoke a chosen deity so vividly as to entertain direct relations with
it, such as talking to it. But, as Abhinavagupta clarifies, this is a
“novel” manifestation (ĪPV I: 126: navam eva ābhāsanam), though
depending on previous cognitive experiences.

114 The use of the causative shows that the shining of the object in
memory is not to be viewed as a mechanical or autonomous fact but is to
be inscribed within the wider context represented by the free agency of
an unitary, supreme consciousness. As Abhinavagupta puts it (p. 31, ll.
17-19), it is only to the consciousness-principle, manifesting itself as
the inner self-consciousness of all cognitive acts, that pertains the
power to freely obscure one form and highlight another, to connect them
or separate them. To express this in grammatical terms: the supreme I as
the causal agent (hetu, prayojaka) is the ultimate responsible for the
shining of the object, “causes” it to shine. Due to its complex nature
(in fact, one can induce a certain action in another only on condition
that the induced subject has the intrinsic capacity to perform such
action), the model of the causative form is also applied to account for
the paradoxical status of limited subjects in their delicate balance
between autonomy and heteronomy with respect to supreme consciousness
(Torella 1987: 157f.).

Contributors

Dr Bettina Bäumer, an Indologist from Austria and Professor of Religious
Studies (Visiting Professor at several universities), living and working
in Varanasi since 1967, is the author and editor of a number of books
and over 50 research articles. Her main fields of research are
non-dualistic Kashmir Śaivism, Indian aesthetics, temple architecture
and religious traditions of Odisha, and comparative mysticism. She has
been Coordinator of the Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts,
Varanasi, and Fellow, Indian Institute of Advanced Study, Shimla. She
has translated important Sanskrit texts into German and English [e-mail:
<bettina.baeumer@utpaladeva.in>].

Daniele Cuneo, Faculty of Asian and Middle Eastern Studies, Cambridge,
obtained his PhD in Sanskrit from the University of Rome “La Sapienza”
under the supervision of Prof. Raffaele Torella. After working in Vienna
on the Nyāya Project and in Cambridge on the Sanskrit Manuscripts
Project, Cuneo is currently working in the Leiden University as Lecturer
in Sanskrit and Ancient Cultures of South Asia
(d.cuneo@hum.leidenuniv.nl). His main publications include several
articles on Abhinavagupta’s aesthetic theory, a co-authored Italian
translation of the Mānavadharmaśāstra and more than 500 entries in the
Online Catalogue of the Sanskrit Manuscript Holdings of the Cambridge
University Library (http://cudl.lib.cam.ac.uk/collections/sanskrit)
[e-mail: <dc470@cam.ac.uk>].

Yohei Kawajiri received his PhD from Hiroshima University. He is
research associate in the Humanities Research Institute at Chikushi
Jogakuen University [e-mail:
<ykawa1227@yahoo.co.jp>, <y-kawajiri@chikushi-u.ac.jp>].

Navjivan Rastogi, Formerly Professor & Head, Department of Sanskrit as
well as Hony. Director, Abhinavagupta Institute of Aesthetics & Śaiva
Philosophy, University of Lucknow, he comes in the direct lineage of
K.C. Pandey. His main publications include:  Krama Tantricism of Kashmir
(1979); Introduction to the Tantrāloka: A Study in Structure (1987);
Kaśmīra Śivādvayavāda kī Mūla Avadhāraṇāyeṅ (2002) and Kaśmīra
Śivādvayavāda meṁ Pramāṇa-cintana (2013); an anonymous sub-commentary
of  Īśvarapratyabhijñāvimarśinī  (jointly edited with K.C. Pandey) is
still awaiting publication. He is currently co-editing (with Karl H.
Potter) the EIP (Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies) volume on Kashmir
Śaivism [e-mail: <nr2508@gmail.com>, Website:
http://www.svabhinava.org/abhinava/].

Isabelle Ratié, is Professor of Sanskrit language and literatures,
University “Sorbonne Nouvelle” – Paris 3. Her publications on the
Pratyabhijñā system include various articles in English and a French
monograph (Le Soi et l’Autre. Identité, différence et altérité dans la
philosophie de la Pratyabhijñā, Leiden-Boston: Brill, 2011). She has
also co-authored with Vincent Eltschinger a book on the Buddhist
philosopher Dharmakīrti (Self, No-Self, and Salvation: Dharmakīrti’s
Critique of the Notions of Self and Person, Vienna: VÖAW, 2013) and she
has recently published a study of the criticism of Mīmāṃsā by the
Buddhist philosopher Śāntarakṣita (Une Critique bouddhique du Soi selon
la Mīmāṃsā. Présentation, édi­­­tion critique et traduction de la
Mīmāṃsakaparikalpitātmaparīkṣā de Śāntarakṣita, Vienna: VÖAW, 2014). She
is currently co-editing with Eli Franco a collective volume on the
intellectual history of Medieval Kashmir [e-mail:
<isabelle.ratie@univ-paris3.fr>].

Raffaele Torella is Professor of Sanskrit at University of Rome
“Sapienza”, where he has also taught for long Indian Philosophy and
Religion, and Indology. His main publications are: The
Īśvarapratyabhijñā-kārikā of Utpaladeva’s with the Author’s Vr̥tti.
Critical Edition and Annotated Translation (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass
2002; repr. Delhi 2014); Śivasūtra with Kṣemarāja’s Vimarśinī (Milan:
Adelphi, 2013; in Italian); The Philosophical Traditions of India: An
Appraisal, Varanasi: Indica Books, 2011; with G. Boccali Eros and
Emotions in India and Tibet (Turin: Einaudi, 2007, in Italian) [e-mail:
<raffaele.torella@uniroma1.it>].

Prof. Radhavallabh Tripathi has served as Vice-Chancellor of Rashtriya
Sanskrit Sansthan and retired as Professor from Dr. Harisingh Gour
University, Sagar (M.P., India). He is known for his  contributions to
the study of Nāṭyaśāstra and Sāhityaśāstra. He is also known for his
creative writings and translations in Sanskrit and Hindi [e-mail:
<radhavallabh2002@gmail.com>].

Aleksandra Wenta is currently pursuing a degree in Tibetan and Himalayan
Studies at Wolfson College, University of Oxford, UK She has co-edited
Emotions in Indian Thought-Systems (Routledge; with Purushottama
Bilimoria, 2015) [e-mail: <alexandrawenta@gmail.com>].

Index*

Abhijñāna-Śākuntala, 148n, 149n

Abhinavagupta, 2-3, 8-9, 27, 32, 37, 45-46, 54, 61, 62n, 77, 79, 80n,
82, 83n, 84n, 90n, 92n, 93n, 108n, 110, 114, 116, 119, 136n, 204-06,
210-11, 214-15, 225

as Utpaladeva’s commentator, 4, 102, 104-05, 116, 119, 123, 123n, 127n,
128, 130, 131n, 132-71, 176-88, 191-204, 216-17, 225, 225n

his art theory, 31-32, 34, 37-41, 49-53, 57-58, 59n, 64n, 66, 67, 67n,
68, 111-13, 115, 117

his Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vimarśinī, 3, 15, 78, 225

his Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vivr̥ti-Vimarśinī, 3, 78, 107, 112n, 225

his Locana, 37, 51n, 62, 67-68, 104, 123-25n, 127n, 189-91

his rejection of sphoṭa, 6n, 63, 63n

his theorization of camatkāra, 10, 33, 103, 133n, 132-71, 176-88

ābhāsa, 174n, 175-76, 176n, 180-82, 182n, 183, 188, 196, 198, 198n,
199n, 200, 201n, 226n, 229n, 239-40, 241n, 242n, 243n, 245n, 247n, 250n,
251n, 252n, 381, 382, 384, 392n, 409, 414, 414n, 415, 417, 435n, 436n

Abhinavabhāratī, 32, 37, 50, 53, 60-63, 67-68, 103, 105, 105n, 117, 205

adhyavasāya, 98n, 99n, 117, 177, 178n, 286, 286n, 288n, 319, 319n, 376,
407

Advaita Vedānta, 1, 2, 63n, 65, 67n, 306n, 344, 345, 348

aesthetics, 10, 31, 36, 38, 38n, 39, 39n, 41, 45-46, 49, 53, 56-57, 59n,
60n, 62, 67-68, 102-217, 350

as a discourse on sense perception, 31, 39, 49, 53

of devotion, 35, 45

aesthetic experience, 33, 37, 50n, 51n, 59, 59n, 64n, 117, 121, 132-33,
138-39, 163, 176-85, 187, 217

aesthetic savouring, 33, 33n, 35, 53, 59n, 106, 108, 113, 122, 132-63,
136, see also camatkāra, carvaṇā

aesthetic susceptibility, see sahr̥dayatā

Āgama, 8-9, 17, 118, 131n, 192, 192n

agency, see kartr̥tā

ālayavijñāna, 234, 237

Alaṁkāraśāstra, 36, 38-40, 50n, 58, 67, 176

āmoda, 132n, 135, 135n, 136, 136n, 137, 137n, 151

Ānandavardhana, 32, 39, 50, 59n, 123n, 124-25, 127n, 190, 360n

āṇavamala, 148

anugraha, 15, 107, 119, 212n, 216, 309, 343, 384, 435n

anupalabdhi, 374-75, 388n, 390n, 392n

anupāya, 15

anusaṁdhāna, 81, 87, 94, 99, 123, 123n, 173n, 175-76, 285, 287n, 288n,
373, 379, 383, 396

anuvyavasāya, 177-78

apoha, 275, 275n, 374-78, 379n, 398n, 399n

arthakriyā, 98, 99n, 127-28, 171n, 173n, 181n, 182n, 183, 223n, 270,
273n, 274, 384, 435n

āsvāda, 23, 33, 36n, 48n, 49, 51n, 59n, 106n, 108n, 112n, 113, 113n,
119, 129n, 135, 135n, 137n, 150, 150n, 154, 158n, 163, 164, 164n, 187,
350

as Parā Vāk, 150

avadhāna, 120n, 131n, 417, 417n

Avantivarman, 47, 125,

Aviddhakarṇa, 260, 261n, 262n

Bhairava Tantras, 2,

bhakti, 14, 16, 20-22, 25-27, 29, 36, 36n, 41n, 49, 108-13, 119n, 135,
137n, 138n, 344-46, 348, 360, 360n

as dāsya-bhakti, 110-13

as love, 21, 23-25, 29, 45

as pūrṇāhaṁtā-camatkāra, 112

as rasa, 25-26, 49n, 113, 344, 346, 348

as śānta-bhakti, 110-13

the two stages of, 110-13

Bhartr̥hari, 6, 6n, 66n, 106, 106n, 161n, 192, 387n, 396n, 409, 410n

Bhāskarakaṇṭha, 174n, 304, 421n

Bhāsarvajña, 263, 292-94, 306

Bhaṭṭa Nārāyaṇa, 15n, 46-47, 110, 143n

bimba, 204n, 234, 248-49, 252, 366

brahmāsvāda, 108n, 177

Buddhist epistemology, 5, 313

Buddhists, 4, 6, 271-72, 272n, 273-75, 306n, 314n, 315, 315n, 316n, 322,
374n, 375-76, 387n, 389n, 399n, 405, 408, 409n, 425n

camatkāra, 10, 26-27, 32n, 33, 33n, 34, 34n, 37, 39, 49n, 59, 59n, 103,
112, 122n, 128n, 132-63, 170n, 171, 181, 187

as akhaṇḍāmarśa,154-55

as rasa-experience, 163-71

its connection with āsvāda, 49, 59, 135, 150, 163-71

its connection with nirvr̥ti, 142n, 143n, 155, 158, 159n

its connection with viśrānti, 32n, 34, 59, 59n, 128n, 148n

camatkr̥ti, 33-35, 36n, 138, 138n, 139, 140n, 153, 153n, 164, 366

carvaṇā, 26-27, 33, 39, 84n, 126, 137n, 138, 142n, 151n, 178n, 186,
186n, 187, 187n, 359-61

causality, 152, 232-33, 270n, 295n, 304, 310n, 315, 423n

citta, 120n, 142n, 164n, 165n, 171, 198n, 378-79, 383-85, 412, 417,
417n, 418

cognition, 9, 33, 41, 51, 60n, 64n, 65n, 106, 126n, 166, 167n, 170n,
173, 176, 198n, 199-200, 230-31, 235n, 241, 244-45, 249, 250n, 296n,
297n, 356, 359, 362, 372-78, 382n, 385-97, 400-01, 405-06, 407n, 408,
419n, 425, 432, 433n, 434, 438, 438n

desire, 31-69, 144n, 146, 148, 171, 230-31, 244n, 252n, 260n, 272n,
285-86, 289n, 294, 303n, 323n, 324n, 325, 330, 365

in the Śivastotrāvalī, 44-45

the maculation of, 148, 187

determinative ascertainment, see adhyavasāya

devotion, see bhakti

Dharmakīrti, 4n, 196n, 198, 230, 230n, 234n, 235n, 236n, 237n, 238,
262n, 266, 266n, 270, 270n, 271n, 274, 296n, 305n, 307, 314, 376, 391,
391n, 398n, 400n

Dharmottara, 4n, 238, 298n, 387n

dhvani, 34, 34n, 49n, 102n, 123n, 125n, 127

Dhvanyāloka, 32, 39n, 50, 60, 67, 68, 104, 342n, 360n

Dignāga, 4n

doubt, 187, 236n, 261n, 270n, 320n, 376-78, 398n, 399n

elimination of delusion (mohāpasāraṇa), 118, 121, 122n, 126, 132

emotions, 20-21, 24, 29, 40n, 51, 52n, 110, 148-49, 165-66, 190n

erroneous superimposition, see samāropa

expansion, see vikāsa

externality, 165-67, 167n, 177, 177n

two types of, 165

freedom, 7, 14, 29, 45, 50, 118, 141, 144, 146, 149, 157, 162, 187, 233,
302, 356, 366, 396, 407, 419, 424-25, 438

doctrine of (svatantryavāda), 2

power of, 2

freedom-from-impurity, 115, 119-20

generality, see sāmānya

ghūrṇana, 136, 136n

grace, see anugraha, prasāda

heart, 24, 29, 122, 122n, 127, 127n, 128n, 130, 171, 301, 35

its connection with reflective awareness, 151-53, 161

see also hr̥dayasaṁgamatva

hr̥dayasaṁgamatva,132-63

icchā, 54n, 106n, 139, 145, 145n, 146, 146n, 147, 147n, 148, 149, 149n,
150n, 164n, 285, 287n, 288n, 302n, 309n, 317n, 322, 323n, 324n, 325,
325n, 327, 365, 423n

imagination, 164n, 173, 175, 177n, 178, 238, 437n

imaginative construction, 179, 189

inference, 194, 230-31, 233, 242n, 244, 248n, 249, 259, 260n, 261, 262n,
263n, 265, 266n, 267, 267n, 268, 269, 271n, 274, 275n, 276-80, 283n,
294n, 298-300, 309-10, 321, 328, 331n, 376, 390n, 391, 392n, 395n, 438n

Sadyojyotis’s inference of īśvara, 312-17

internality, 128n, 163, 166, 167n

intersubjectivity, 232, 245n

invariable concomitance, 230, 231-32, 241n, 244n, 269n, 270, 271n, 274,
278n, 279n, 305n, 314, 390, 393

Jayanta Bhaṭṭa, 263, 274

Jayaratha, 32, 41n, 173, 173n, 175, 352n

jñāna, 55n, 79-82, 87-89, 94-95, 97-98, 122, 132n, 147n, 152n, 195,
196n, 260n, 263n, 293n, 296n, 301n, 378, 378n, 379-83, 385, 387, 389n,
390n, 398n, 400n, 401n, 405n, 410n, 412n, 415n, 418n, 425n, 433n, 434n

Kālīkrama, 352-53, 354n, 355-56, 358, 361-62, 364, 366-67

Kallaṭa, 125n, 134, 438n

kartr̥tā, 146, 152, 152n, 153n, 202n, 269n, 273n, 312n, 379, 412, 423

Kṣemarāja, 15, 19-20, 25, 32, 36n, 41n, 43n, 44n, 45n, 46n, 47n, 48n,
49n, 78, 110, 113n, 137, 137n, 138n, 190n, 203n, 384n, 353, 353n, 358,
360

kriyā, 23, 94-95, 98-99, 120n, 132, 139-41, 144n, 145-47, 147n, 149,
151, 152n, 153n, 160n, 247n, 303-04, 313n, 314n, 319n, 324n, 332n, 412,
423

Kumārila, 13, 66, 165, 309, 316, 325n

his criticism of the proof, 266-76

light of consciousness, see prakāśa

Mahāyāna, 1, 306n

Maheśvarānanda, 353, 363

Mammaṭa, 67n, 112, 121, 193, 304, 345

Māyā, 2, 48n, 65n, 114, 117n, 307, 312n, 326, 326n, 327, 327n, 377, 378,
399n, 407, 423, 427n, 431n

as svatantryaśakti, 2

memory, 377-78, 393, 393n, 394, 396-97, 400, 400n, 401n

mental construct, see vikalpa

mental episode, 142, 148, 161, 163-65, 168-69, 179

mental representation, 167n, 168n, 169, 173

metasentiment (mahārasa), 109, 112

Mīmāṁsā, 5, 8-9, 65, 66n, 265, 267, 270n, 273-74, 296n, 312, 217

mind, see citta

Naiyāyikas as Śaivas, 6, 306-08, 321

Nāṭyaśāstra, 32, 38, 39n, 40, 48n, 49n, 50, 50n, 56, 58, 67, 102n, 103,
164, 205n, 210, 343n

niścaya, 98-99, 122n, 132n, 247n, 407, 409n, 427n

nirvikalpa, 22, 26, 170n, 355, 359, 365, 417n, 418n, 427n

Nyāya, 5, 65n, 258-60, 263, 279, 280n, 289, 294, 294n, 306, 306n,
307-08, 312n, 313, 321-22, 325n, 328

Pāñcarātra, 9

paramādvaita, 2, 14, 16, 23, 25, 29, 58, 60n, 137, 308, 357

paramabhoga, 143, 153-54

particularity, see svalakṣaṇa

Pāśupatas, 326n

perception, 7, 46, 51, 52n, 53, 57, 65n, 110, 112, 116, 122, 125n, 126n,
128n, 130, 147-48, 170n, 175, 177, 243-44, 260n, 271n, 283n, 284n, 286n,
290n, 305n, 314, 314n, 315, 323, 346-48, 357, 362, 367, 389n, 391, 393,
395, 397n, 406, 406n, 407n, 408, 409n, 418-19, 422, 425n, 426, 426n,
427n, 428n, 431n, 433n, 434, 437

immediacy of, 32, 168n, 169, 184, 198, 332, 385, 391-92, 434, 437

sensory perception, 31, 38-40, 49-50, 53, 68, 164-68, 170-71, 286n,
290n, 291n, 332, 355, 358, 366

power of necessity (niyatiśakti), 183, 305, 409

prakāśa, 93, 118-20, 122n, 130, 132n, 141-42, 146-47, 153n, 156-57, 161,
168, 187, 191, 195, 302n, 306, 354, 357, 372, 379, 380, 408, 414n, 425n,
431n

prasāda, 119, 121

prasaṅga-viparyaya, 374

Pratyabhijñā, pratyabhijñā, 1-6, 8, 26-27, 32, 34, 57, 59n, 62, 77, 94,
100, 104-05, 110, 118, 121-22, 123n, 125n, 126, 127n, 128n, 132, 138,
173, 175, 201n, 225, 233, 236n, 258, 288n, 295-96, 298-300, 302, 304,
313, 322, 323n, 328-29, 353-55, 357, 365, 370, 372, 384n, 407

as aesthetics, 113-32

as eradication of delusion, 118, 120, 121n, 122, 132

as firm ascertainment (dr̥ḍhaniścaya), 122n, 132

as full or complete knowledge (parijñāna), 122

as infinitization (aparimitīkaraṇa), 122

as reveling (prakāśana),123, 126, 156

as specific consideration (viśeṣataḥ nirūpaṇa), 123

as the theoretical basis for all Hindu Tantrism, 2

as the ultimate realization, 110

in dialogue with Buddhism, 4-6, 7, 9n

in dialogue with Indian philosophy, 2, 10

in the Sarva-Darśana-Saṁgraha, 4n

prasaṅga, 275n, 278n, 316n, 377, 398n

prasiddhi, 8-9

pratibhā, 8-9, 32n, 34, 37, 49n, 59, 103, 116n, 121, 189-204, 209n

pratibimba, 3, 204, 234, 240n, 249, 250n, 251n, 252n, 204, 366

pratyakṣa, 38n, 91-93, 175n, 177, 177n, 183n, 208n, 227, 240, 244n,
245n, 259n, 263n, 275n, 278n, 298n, 315n, 316n, 332n, 347, 391

Praśastapāda, 258n, 263, 264n, 304n, 325n, 326n, 410

projection, 165, 168-69, 171n, 175, 248, 252n

pūrṇa, 42, 112, 119n, 127n, 129n, 133n, 153, 160n, 171n, 343, 359,
364-66

Ratnakīrti, 236n, 237n

rasa, 32, 33n, 34, 36-37, 39, 44, 49n, 51, 59n, 60n, 61, 64-67, 107,
108n, 109-13, 117, 121, 126, 138-39, 143, 146-48, 163-64, 171n, 176-93,
213, 346, 351, 360-61, 365

as an aesthetic object, 133-34, 142, 154

as pūrṇāhaṁtā-camatkāra, 112

as rasa-niṣpatti,146-47

rasanā, 34, 59n, 126, 142, 142n, 143, 145n, 146, 154, 163, 164n, 176n,
186, 360-61, 367

recognition, see pratyabhijñā,

reflected object, see bimba

reflection, see pratibimba

repose, see viśrānti

Ruyyaka, 172, 172n, 173n, 174, 174n, 347

sādhāraṇīkaraṇa, 51, 126, 148, 188

Sadyojyotis, 312-32

sahr̥daya, 52n, 64, 127n, 133

sahr̥dayatā, 133, 142, 142n, 160, 160n, 161, 161n

Śaiva Siddhānta, 308-22

sāmānya, 64-65, 117n, 125n, 148n, 169n, 180, 181n, 182n, 188n, 263,
264n, 267n, 268n, 270n, 271, 275n, 276n, 278n, 279n, 288n, 289n, 310n,
409-10, 416, 435, 435n

samāropa, 376-77, 398-99, 413

samāveśa, 20, 110, 113n, 360

Sāṁkhya, 5, 63n, 268n, 280-94, 295n, 301, 302n, 317-21

saṁvedana, 212, 127n, 129n, 143n, 151, 160n, 176n, 186n, 187, 196n,
283n, 296, 329, 331n, 332n, 376, 379n, 387, 391n, 401n, 408, 408n, 415n

Śaṅkaranandana, 4n, 294n, 376, 377n, 398n

satkāryavāda, 63, 64n, 292

Sarvadarśanasaṁgraha, 4n

saṅkalpa, 170n, 177, 178n, 323n

santāna, 230, 234n

Sautrāntika, 229-39, 241, 246-48, 251n

savouring, 33, 35, 53, 59n, 106, 108, 113, 122, 132-33, 136, 137n,
138-39, 140n, 141-43, 145-46, 148-50, 153-55, 157, 160-62, 361

self-reflective awareness, see vimarśa

senses, 38n, 40, 41n, 43, 46, 55, 60n, 106, 122, 124, 136, 167, 186,
232, 234, 354-67, 392, 400n

sense-perception, 38-40, 49, 164n, 165-68, 170n, 366

Somānanda, 2-4, 6-7, 20, 32, 35n, 62n, 77, 107, 132n, 139, 143n, 147,
151, 155, 158, 323, 325n, 326-27, 332, 352-53

as inspiration behind Utpala’s camatkāra, 134-36, 159n, 160n, 161-62,
171n

his attack on Bhartr̥hari, 6

Spanda-Kārikā, 3, 20, 106

sphoṭa, 6n, 63, 64n, 66, 66n

sphuṭa, 85-86, 125n, 159n, 169n, 178n, 182n, 193n, 194n, 201n, 226n,
313n, 400, 408, 414n, 416-17, 424n, 435n, 437

sphuṭatva, 408

suggested meaning, see dhvani

svātantryaśakti, 2, 193n

śabdana, 8, 192n

śānta rasa, 59n, 60n, 111-12, 112n

Siddhitrayī, 36, 333

Śivadr̥ṣṭi, 3, 7, 7n, 35n, 60n, 62n, 77n, 96, 98, 352, 352n

Śiva-Stotrāvalī, 7n, 14-16, 19-20, 27, 35, 36n, 41, 42n, 43, 43n, 44,
44n, 49n, 344n, 346n, 348n, 349-50, 350n, 353, 353n

solipsism, 229-30, 238

state of equality (samatā), 19, 20, 21

Sthiramati, 234n, 235n

streams of consciousness, 230, 231, 234, 234n, 235-36, 237n, 241n, 247,
248n, 249n, 250, 252n

svalakṣaṇa, 163, 180-82, 183n, 185-88, 270n, 271n, 272-73, 315, 376,
408-09, 428, 430, 435

Tantrāloka, 8-9, 15, 41n, 61n, 205, 330n

Tantrasāra, 8

Tantric Śaiva sects, 1

Tantrism, 1, 10, 18

Tasting, see rasanā

time, 20, 24-25, 52, 64n, 65n, 182, 188, 190n, 211, 247, 264n, 287,
291n, 306n, 348, 352, 354n, 355, 392-94, 408, 419, 422-23, 426, 428n,
435n, 432, 439

transgressive practices, 1, 57

Trika, 2, 110, 113-14, 134, 189, 192, 308, 322, 352-53

as triad, 26

Twelve Kālīs, 352-67

Uddyotakara, 260, 261n, 262n, 290-91, 291n, 292, 300, 318

ullekha, 103, 165-66, 167n, 169, 172-76

universalization, see sādhāraṇīkaraṇa

universals, 182, 188, 272, 315, 409, 435-36

universality of revelation, 8

Utpaladeva, 2-8, 10, 14-15, 18-23, 25-27, 29, 31-32, 34-46, 47n, 49n,
52-53, 56-57, 62n, 68, 77, 92n, 102-23, 127-29, 131-40, 141n, 143-45,
147-48, 150-58, 159n, 160n, 162-66, 168, 170n, 171n, 172-78, 180-98,
201-10, 212, 214, 216-17, 225-26, 228-29, 232-33, 235, 237-39, 242n,
244n, 251n, 252n, 258-59, 263, 265-67, 268n, 270, 274, 276-77, 279n,
280-81, 284-85, 287, 288n, 289-90, 292, 294-96, 298n, 300-02, 304-08,
312-15, 317, 319, 321-22, 323n, 325n, 326-29, 330n, 332, 344-45, 348,
350, 352-57, 359-60, 362-64, 366, 370-74, 376-78, 404-09

and Bharata, 103, 179-80

and Brahmanical opponents, 2

as a musicologist, 103

as Abhinavagupta’s grand-teacher in dramaturgy, 104

as an authority on musicology, 103, 105, 105n, 204-17

as the teacher of Bhaṭṭendurāja, 104

as the transmitter of the Doctrine of the Twelve Kālīs, 352-53

his ‘drink metaphor’, 49n

his adoption of Bhartr̥hari’s doctrine, 6, 106

his analogy of the pānaka, 172-75

his bhakti, 7, 18-29, 35-3

his bhakti as rasa, 107, 108-13

his borrowings from Jayanta Bhaṭṭa, 263, 274-79, 306n

his concept of camatkāra, 34, 35, 37, 39, 132-72

his concept of grace, 119

his concept of nirmala (vimala) vyavahāra, 113-18, 204

his concept of saṁsāra, 18-19

his connection with the Saiddhāntikas, 321-33

his criticism of the Vijñānavāda, 229-52

his disciples, 15

his discourse on pratibhā, 189-204

his ecstatic aesthetics, 34, 45, 53, 56, 68

his influence on the figure of speech ullekha, 103, 172-76

his linguistic philosophy, 10

his mystical poetry, 18-29

his notion of the heart, 127-32

his objection against Sāṁkhya position, 164, 280-02

his perception of beauty, 35, 39, 41-42, 46, 108-13

his prayatna-viśeṣa doctrine, 177-78

his proof of God (Īśvarasiddhi), 257-33

his rejection of sphoṭa,6n

his usage of alaukika rasa, 37

his Vivr̥ti or Ṭīkā, 4, 225, 228-29, 370-71

in dialogue with the Buddhists, 4-6, 373-76

in dialogue with the Mīmāṁsaka, 265-17

on sense-perception, 43-45, 57, 68

the import of the Vivr̥ti, 4, 225, 228-29, 370-73

the three hymns composed by him, 15

vāc, 61n, 150, 189-90, 195, 205

Vācaspatimiśra, 263-64, 277n, 278-79, 282

Vaiṣṇava, 9, 67n, 109n

Vaiśeṣikas, 263, 301, 302n, 303n, 304n, 324, 326, 326n, 409

vāsanā, 229, 229n, 236, 251-52, 397n, 398n

Vasubandhu, 233-34, 234n, 235n, 247n

Veda, 8-9, 17, 293n

Vijñāna-Bhairava, 20-21, 45, 48, 53, 106, 116, 125n

Vijñānavādin, 229-50

vijñapti, 234n, 247n

vikalpa, 26, 169, 169n, 170n, 188, 198n, 377, 381, 381n, 382, 392n, 394,
394n, 398n, 407, 413, 417, 427n, 428, 435, 437n, 438

vikalpa-saṁskāra, 355

vikāsa, 34, 126, 136n, 158, 159n, 160n, 169, 171n, 172, 188, 200

vimarśa, its connection with freedom, its connection with the heart,
parāmarśa

virodhābhāsa, 343-44

viśrānti, 32, 34, 59, 59n, 128n, 129n, 140, 147, 148n, 235n, 251n, 365,
379, 383, 387

as hr̥daya-viśrānti, 131, 132n, 133

as pramātr̥tā-viśrānti, 142

vyutpatti, 173n, 174n, 241

Voice, see vāc

vyāpti, 135n, 231, 237n, 278n, 361

Yogācāra, 63n, 64n, 65n, 234

[]
