Importance of Utpaladeva

An Introduction

Raffaele Torella

The Pratyabhijñā provides non-dual Śaivism of Kashmir with a
“philosophy”. A presentation of the Pratyabhijñā doctrines involves,
first and foremost, giving voice to one of the most original and
peculiar components of India’s philosophical and religious scenario from
medieval times down to our own: what is known in the West as “Tantrism”.
It will be necessary to stretch a discreet veil over the incautious
remarks of a well-known scholar like Georg Feuerstein:1

Tantrism’s contribution to philosophy is negligible. Its unicity lies
wholly within the practical sphere, the sādhana. From a philosophical
point of view, there is no hiatus between Tantrism and previous
traditions. Buddhist Tantrism rests substantially on the foundations of
the Mādhyamika school of Mahāyāna, and its Hindu counterpart on those of
the cognate Advaita-Vedānta.

In actual fact, Pratyabhijñā, which provides the theoretical basis for
all Hindu Tantrism, constitutes one of the highest and most original
moments of Indian thought (it has, moreover, very little to do with
Vedānta). The principal aim of the Pratyabhijñā philosophers was to
allow the Tantric Śaiva sects to emer­ge from the dimen­sion of
restricted circles, often devoted to transgressive practices, and
establish themselves in the stratum of so­cial nor­mality, by
internalizing, or in any case cir­cumscrib­ing, their own specific
dif­ferences. Their main addressees were no more the ascetics, but,
typically, the householders. As a consequence, the Pratyabhijñā engages
in a far-reaching dialogue with Indian philosophy of its time, accepting
its modalities and rules. The initial nucleus comprises non-dualistic
Śaivite scriptures, the Bhairava Tantras — Bhairava being the terrible
form of the God Śiva, in whom cruelty and violence are metaphors for
rampant energy, far distant from the unmoving and bloodless deities of
Vedānta. Bhairava coincides with the “I” of every creature. In first
addressing the notion of “I”, so much disliked by Brāhmanic thought,
non-dualist Śaivism and in primis Utpaladeva implicitly state the
centrality of free movement as against the always lurking reification
connected to the notion of ātman, the I as substance. As compared to the
I — the Supreme Consciousness — the flow of the phenomenal world is not
a (bad) dream from which one must awake as soon as possible, but the
spontaneous manifestation of the Absolute itself. The concept of māyā,
central to Vedānta, is not eliminated: māyā is taken to be the power of
the Lord, even his highest power, otherwise known as svātantryaśakti
(power of freedom), and svātantryavāda (doctrine of freedom) becomes one
of the favourite names for this school.

Utpaladeva inaugu­rates what was to be­come a salient fea­ture of the
whole Trika in Abhinavagupta’s syn­thesis: name­ly, the ten­den­cy not
to con­stitute a monolithic doctrine and a world of religious
ex­perience to op­pose en bloc everyth­ing that does not coin­cide with
it (as in the ekāntin “absolutistic” trends) but to dis­tin­guish
planes, which are hierarchi­cal­ly or­dered but in which the “higher”
does not automati­cal­ly can­cel the “lower” (as Somānanda had al­ready
said, Śiva is everywhere, even in dif­feren­tia­tion, pain and hell).
This is the perspec­tive of the Paramādvaita “Supreme Non-Duality”, such
an elevated view­point that it does not fear what is dif­ferent from
it­self, is not put in a criti­cal posi­tion by it, is not forced to
make a choice.

While Somānanda is considered the founder of the Pratyabhijñā, its
full-fledged elaboration is due to Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta.
Somānanda’s Śivadr̥ṣṭi is to be considered the first philosophical work
of Kashmirian Śaiva Advaita,2 its only predecessor being the
Spanda-Kārikā, in which however the experiential and scriptural approach
largely prevails over philosophical elaboration. The Śivadr̥ṣṭi is
unanimously recognized as the first work of the Pratyabhijñā school,
despite the fact that the word pratyabhijñā does not even occur in it
(at least in its pregnant meaning). Abhinavagupta at the beginning of
his Vimarśinī on the Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Kārikā does not hesitate to say
that Utpaladeva’s masterwork is in fact only a “reflected image” of the
Śivadr̥ṣṭi.3 This is, of course, not to be taken literally, for, although
the Śivadr̥ṣṭi was a powerful source of inspiration for Utpaladeva, it is
only with the Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Kārikā that the Pratyabhijñā becomes a
very original and elaborate philosophical system. In the
Somānanda–Utpaladeva –(Lakṣmaṇagupta)–Abhinavagupta triad it was the
latter who largely overshadowed his predecessors. Among the Pratyabhijñā
texts, Abhinavagupta’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vimarśinī became by far the
most “popular” — if I may use this adjective for one of the profoundest
and most sophisticated worldviews that India has ever produced. The main
victim of the success of the Vimarśinī was the extraordinarily important
Vivr̥ti or Ṭīkā by Utpaladeva, of which only fragments have survived.

The works of Abhinavagupta are well known, and his
Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vimarśinī and the Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vivr̥ti-Vimarśinī
(a commentary on Utpaladeva’s Vivr̥ti on his own
Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Kārikā and Vr̥tti) are generally considered the
standard works of the Pratyabhijñā.4 However, the role of Utpaladeva’s
Vivr̥ti as the real centre of gravity of Pratyabhijñā philosophy has
become more and more evident, since my discovery of a long fragment of
the Vivr̥ti, which I have edited and translated in a series of articles
(Torella 2007a-d, 2012). Now that it is possible to look, however
partially, into the Vivr̥ti, we realize that most of Abhinavagupta’s
ideas are just the development of what Utpaladeva had already expounded
there. As a consequence, we are no longer allowed to consider Utpaladeva
a mere predecessor of Abhinavagupta, as being the latter the great
master of Pratyabhijñā, but we must rather take Utpaladeva, particularly
with his Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vivr̥ti, as the real centre of gravity of the
system (see Torella 2014a) and Abhinavagupta mainly as his brilliant
commentator.

Highly interesting is Utpaladeva’s philosophical strategy, which the
later Pratyabhijñā authors will simply continue. Instead of dispersing
Pratyabhijñā’s philosophical energies against an undifferentiated
multiplicity of opponents, he very lucidly selects one, the most
prestigious philosophical and religious tradition of the Kashmir of that
time. For various reasons (the principal one probably being the will to
present the new Pratyabhijñā philosophers as the champions of the entire
Śaiva tradition against the main common antagonist), these privileged
opponents are the Buddhists, especially those belonging to the so-called
logical–epistemological school.5 While for Somānanda the Buddhists are
opponents just like many others, they are given a special status in the
work of Utpaladeva, for whom they, admired and attacked in an equally
strong way, are so to speak the most intimate enemies. The criticism of
their positions is to Utpaladeva of a substantial help in building and
refining the Pratyabhijñā philosophy.

The Buddhist epistemologists and Pratyabhijnā start from presuppositions
that appear — and are — absolutely irreconcilable: an impersonal world
of events on the one hand and, on the other, a world permeated and
vivified even in its seemingly most inert crannies by the dynamism of
the I (Śiva or Consciousness). Despite this, an undoubted fascination is
exerted by the rigour of the Buddhist epistemologists’ argumentation and
their dauntless critical capacity that uses its sharp and original
instruments on the doctrines of the most diverse opponents. The very air
of superiority that may sometimes be glimpsed in their opposition to all
others, though it does not fail occasionally to provoke a note of
sarcasm in the Śaiva masters, ends up by further enhancing their image.
This contributes toward causing them to be adopted by the Pratyabhijnā
authors, partly, so to speak, as a touchstone to test the soundness of
their theses, and partly as a whetstone to sharpen their dialectic arms.

Buddhist epistemology, in its struggle against realism (particularly of
Nyāya, but also of Mīmāṁsā and Sāṁkhya), is constantly concerned with
showing the fundamental importance of the mind in structuring reality,
in contrast to those who, with the aim of underlining the independent
nature of the external reality confronted by human experience, move in
the opposite direction — reducing the creative and formative role of
knowledge as far as possible and making it into a mere mirror that
records readymade realities outside itself, resulting in an unending
entification even of relations, qualities, etc. This reference to the
centrality of the mind must have been felt by Utpaladeva to be a strong
element of affinity, even though it was destined to have quite divergent
developments. After letting the Buddhist philosophers demolish the Nyāya
categories, he shows how the Buddhist alternative is in fact equally
inadequate. It does overcome Nyāya, but remains as though suspended in
mid-air, since it is proved — in the Buddhist fragmented and isolated
universe — to be incapable of accounting for the network and circularity
of human experience. The only way to save the Buddhist view from its
theoretical failure is to include it in a different field of reference,
represented by the omnipervasive dynamism of a free and “personal”
consciousness that coincides with the Supreme Lord, Śiva. In this way,
Utpaladeva achieves the result of both showing the superiority of
Pratyabhijñā to Buddhism and warning the Naiyāyikas (among whom the
Śaiva faith was most prevalent) not to count too much on their forces
alone, detached from those of the new Śaiva philosophers.

Through this subtle play of a declared basic disagreement with the
doctrines of Buddhist philosophers, a limited acceptance and purely
instrumental (or thought to be such) use of them, the masters of the
Pratyabhijñā end up being somehow drawn into their orbit. The
architecture of the Pratyabhijñā feels the effect of this. The very fact
that many problems are posed, more or less unwittingly, in Buddhist
terms to a certain extent prefigures their development and reduces
possible alternatives as regards solutions.

Also very interesting is Utpaladeva’s choice of the main ally, the
grammarian-philosopher Bhartr̥hari, though the latter had been fiercely
attacked precisely by Utpaladeva’s guru Somānanda (cf. Torella 2009).
Such a change of attitude, which in a broader sense is also a paradigm
change proper, does invest the problematic aspects of taking distance
from one’s own guru, and, at the same time, shows how the choice of the
opponents and allies may be the outcome of a definite plan rather than a
fact of mere liking or disliking some worldview.6 In order to undermine
the discontinuous universe of the Buddhists, Utpaladeva decides to avail
himself precisely of Bhartr̥hari’s doctrine, the language-imbued nature
of knowledge, which is meant to demolish Buddhism’s main foundation
stone, i.e. the unsurpassable gulf between the moment of sensation and
that of conceptual elaboration, representing, as it were, the very
archetype of the Buddhist segmented reality.

As far as the metaphysical background is concerned, there is nothing
essentially new in this doctrine — the scriptural sarvaśaktivilolatā
“effervescence of all powers (in any reality)” of the Śivadr̥ṣṭi (I.11b)
implicitly already contained it. But what Utpaladeva wanted to resort to
was not scriptural authority but an argument belonging to the shared
philosophical debate. Thus, the omnipervasiveness of language is the
epistemological version of the omnipervasiveness of Śiva, and at the
same time calls for integration into the spiritually dynamic Śaiva
universe.

Thus, some of the most famous, and crucial, verses of the
Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Kārikā originate.

The essential nature of light is reflective awareness; otherwise light,
though ‘coloured’ by objects, would be similar to an insentient reality,
such as the crystal and so on. — I.V.11; cf. Torella 2002: 118

Consciousness has as its essential nature reflective awareness; it is
the supreme Word that arises freely. It is freedom in the absolute
sense, the sovereignty of the supreme Self. — I.V.13; cf. Torella 2002:
120

Even at the moment of direct perception there is a reflective awareness.
How otherwise could one account for such actions as running and so on,
if they were thought of as being devoid of determinate awareness? —
I.V.19; cf. Torella 2002: 125

Un­like what oc­curs here and there in Somānanda’s Śivadr̥ṣṭi, in the
Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Kārikā any emo­tion­al colour­ing is banished. This
does not mean that Utpaladeva was sole­ly a philosopher: the
ex­traordi­nary in­ten­sity of his hymns, which were later to be
col­lected in the Śiva-Stotrāvalī and are still re­cited daily by the
Śaivas of Kash­mir, proves it.

The Shimla seminar has duly emphasized the universalistic approach of
the Pratyabhijñā philosophy: the Śaiva Āgama is just the culmination
peak of the universal Āgama, which, unlike the Veda, is not separated
from mankind by an unsurpassable gulf, but inhabits in the very heart of
any creature. The idea of the universality of revelation as the
interplay of four closely related concepts
prasiddhi–āgama–pratibhā–śabdana is developed by Abhinavagupta in the
Tantrāloka, Tantrasāra and Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vivr̥ti-Vimarśinī (cf.
Torella 2013a). But once again this may be considered merely the
development of what Utpaladeva says in his Vivr̥ti, while commenting upon
two ślokas (we might even surmise Utpaladeva’s authorship of them). It
is worthwhile to delve at some length into this important, if
comparatively less studied, aspect of Utpala’s thought.

prasiddhir āgamo loke yuktimān athavetaraḥ ।

vidyāyām apy avidyāyāṁ pramāṇam avigānataḥ ।।

prasiddhir avigītā hi satyā vāg aiśvarī matā ।

tayā yatra yadā siddhaṁ yat tad grāhyam aśaṅkitaiḥ ।।

Prasiddhi is what we commonly call āgama, which may be either congruent
with reason or not; it is a source of valid knowledge in the domain both
of vidyā and avidyā, provided that it is not contradicted. For the
non-contradicted prasiddhi is to be considered the true Voice of the
Lord. What is established by virtue of this Voice, within a certain
spatial/temporal condition, is to be accepted by those who are
trustful.7

In order to express such a concept, Utpaladeva needed a broader term
than pratibhā and less connoted than pratibhā by typically “mysterious”
overtones: prasiddhi, perhaps also because it furnished the occasion for
critically addressing the Mīmāṁsā, was indeed the ideal candidate. A
continuous line runs from the individually oriented prasiddhis which are
at work in the everyday experience of living beings and the
progressively higher prasiddhis, which give shape to the various
world-views, i.e. the various Āgamas — from the Veda to the Bauddha, the
Pāñcarātra, the Śaiva — culminating in the all-encompassing eka āgama
(Tantrāloka XXXV.24a, 30a, 35a, 37a). Prasiddhi (in Abhinava’s
elaboration, based on the Vivr̥ti) is the paradox of something both
coming from outside (ā-gama) and abiding in the depths of men’s
interiority. It is a content of our individuality for which we are not
responsible, since it is already present in the new-born creature. It is
not a fixed content, but a varying one, due to its interaction with the
other factors of individuality. In a sense, then, prasiddhi is not even
a content, being instead more akin in its essence to a “container”. At
the same time, rather than belonging to the “cognition” side it belongs
to the “action” side; it is the object of belief and the belief itself.
Again, it is not bound to remain an inner belief, but enacts specific
practical behaviours (Tantrāloka XXXV.15cd lokān vyavahārayet). In the
background lies the common Indian awareness that cognition alone is
insufficient to set humans in motion. Prasiddhi is belief in something,
adhesion to something; its most recurrent qualifications are dr̥ḍha
(firm), nirūḍha (deeply rooted). However, this “firmness” does not
derive from a conscious effort, but is innate, spontaneous, just as
spontaneous as the insightful intuition (pratibhā) that plays such a
great part in driving most of our actions. However, even this
spontaneity does not belong to the creature individually, but to its
shared background. Such a “background” of the creature is its being
ultimately rooted in universal consciousness, Śiva. This active divine
presence is what may also be called āgama, and has the form of the
innate language principle which imbues all cognitions and actions. It is
the divine Voice (vāc) of the Lord that speaks in living beings.

From Utpaladeva–Abhinavagupta’s conception of āgama, any parochial bias
is banned as it comprises all the existing āgamas, from the Vaiṣṇava to
the Buddhist (the Śaiva included). The immensely distant and
undecipherable āgama of Mīmāṁsā, the Veda, leaves here the place to the
internal and variegated āgamas of the Śaivas. Along with advaitācāra
(non-dual behaviour), such a far-reaching universalistic approach to
revelation constitutes the most insidious attack by Śaiva Tantrism to
Brāhmanical hegemony.

The work of Utpaladeva can be viewed as the very icon of the integration
of the rational and emotional sides of man: his extremely sophisticated
philosophical arguments are to be viewed side by side with his
passionate mystical poetry. His philosophy is characterized by this
unique blend of epistemology, metaphysics, religious experience,
linguistic philosophy and aesthetic speculation. Precisely to Utpaladeva
we do owe the entrance of aesthetics into philosophical–religious
speculation. His concept of camatkāra (wondrous enjoyment) marks a
higher level of experience, which leaves the reality and beauty of the
manifested world intact, but at same time projects it into a totality
whose centre is Supreme Consciousness. This will be later developed by
Abhinavagupta into a full-fledged aesthetic system, destined to become
the main stream of aesthetical speculation of pre-modern India as a
whole.

Lastly, Utpala’s work is a most conspicuous example of an essential
feature of Indian philosophy as a whole, which, however, has hardly been
duly highlighted: ceaseless interchange among the different schools,
lively confrontation with the opposite theories, tireless capacity of
self-reshaping accordingly.

References

Texts

Abhinavagupta, Īśvarapratyabhijñāvimarśinī, ed. Mukund Ram Sha­stri,
vols. I-II, KSTS XXII, XXXIII, Bombay, 1918-21.

Abhinavagupta, Īśvarapratyabhijñāvivr̥tivimarśinī, ed. Madhusudan Kaul
Sha­stri, vols. I-III, KSTS LX, LXII, LXV, Bombay 1938-43.

Abhinavagupta, Tantrāloka with Commentary by Rājānaka Jayaratha, edited
with notes by Madhusudan Kaul Shastri, vols. I-XII, KSTS XXIII, XXVIII,
XXX, XXXVI, XXXV, XXIX, XLI, XLVII, LIX, LII, LVII, LVIII,
Allahabad-Srinagar-Bombay 1918-38.

Bhartṛhari, Vākyapadīya (mūlakārikās), Bhartr̥haris Vākyapadīya, ed. W.
Rau, Abhandlungen für die Kunde des Morgenlandes, 42, Wiesbaden 1977.

Dignāga, Pramāṇasamuccaya, see Steinkellner 2005 and Jinendrabuddhi,
Viśālāmalavatī Pramāṇasamuccayaṭīkā.

Jinendrabuddhi, Viśālāmalavatī Pramāṇasamuccayaṭīkā, Chapter I. Part I:
Critical Edition, by E. Steinkellner, H. Krasser, H. Lasic, China
Tibetology Research Centre – Austrian Academy of Sciences,
Beijing-Vienna 2005.

Somānanda, Śivadr̥ṣṭi with the vr̥tti by Utpaladeva, ed. Pandit Madhusudan
Kaul Shastri, KSTS LIV, Srinagar 1934.

Utpaladeva, Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikā with svavr̥tti (see Torella 2002).

Translations and Studies

Bühnemann, Gudrun, 1980 “Identifizierung von Sanskrittexten
Śaṅkaranandanas”, Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens 24: 191-98.

Eltschinger, Vincent, 2006, “Les oeuvres de Śaṅkaranandana: nouvelles
ressources manuscrites, chronologie relative et identité
confessionnelle”, Annali dell’Università degli studi di Napoli
“L’Orientale”. Rivista del Dipartimento di Studi Asiatici e del
Dipartimento di Studi e Ricerche su Africa e Paesi Arabi, 66: 83-122.

Feuerstein, George, 1974, The Essence of Yoga: A Contribution to the
Psychohistory of Indian Civilization. Delhi.

Krasser, Helmut, 2001, “On the Date and Works of Śaṅkaranandana”. In
Raffaele Torella (ed.) Le Parole e i Marmi: Studi in Onore di Raniero
Gnoli nel suo 70° compleanno (Serie Orientale Roma 92), pp. 489-508.

Nemec, John, 2011, The Ubiquitous Śiva: Somānanda’s Śivadr̥ṣṭi and his
Tantric Intelocutors, AAR Religion in Translation, New York: Oxford
University Press.

Ratié, Isabelle, 2011, Le Soi et l’Autre. Identité, différence et
altérité dans la philosophie de la Pratyabhijñā, Jerusalem Studies in
Religion and Culture 13, Leiden: Brill.

Torella, Raffaele, 1992, “The Pratyabhijñā and the
Logical-Epistemological School of Buddhism”. In: Teun Goudriaan (ed.)
Ritual and Speculation in Early Tantrism: Studies in Honor of André
Padoux, Albany: SUNY Press, pp. 327-45.

———, 2002, The Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikā of Utpaladeva with the Author’s
Vr̥tti. Critical Edition and Annotated Translation, Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass (Ist edn. Serie Orientale Roma 71, IsMEO, Roma, 1994), repr.
2014.

———, 2004 “How is Verbal Signification Possible: understanding
Abhinavagupta’s Reply”, Journal of Indian Philosophy 32(2-3): 173-88.

———, 2007a, “Studies in Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti. Part I.
Anupalabdhi and apoha and in a Śaiva Garb”. In: Karin Preisendanz (ed.)
Expanding and Merging Horizons: Contributions to South Asian and
Cross-cultural Studies in Commemoration of Wilhelm Halbfass, Vienna, pp.
473-90.

———, 2007b, “Studies in Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti. Part II.
What is Memory”, In: Indica et Tibetica. Festschrift für Michael Hahn
zum 65. Geburtstag von Freunden und Schülern überreicht, herausgegeben
von Konrad Klaus und Jens-Uwe Hartmann, Wien, pp. 539-63.

———, 2007c,“Studies in Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti. Part III.
Can a Cognition become the Object of another Cognition?”. In: Dominic
Goodall, André Padoux (eds.) Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d’Hélène
Brunner, Pondichéry, pp. 475-84.

———, 2007d,“Studies in Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti. Part IV.
Light of the Subject-light of the Object”. In: Birgit Kellner et al.
(eds.) Pramāṇakīrtiḥ: Papers Dedicated to Ernst Steinkellner on the
Occasion of his 70th Birthday, Wiener Studien zur Tibetologie und
Buddhismuskunde, Heft 70.1-2, Wien, pp. 925-39.

———, 2009, “From an Adversary to the Main Ally: The Place of Bhartr̥hari
in the Kashmirian Śaivādvaita”. In: M. Chaturvedi (ed.) Bhartr̥hari:
Language, Thought and Reality, Delhi, pp. 343-54.

———, 2011, The Philosophical Traditions of India: An Appraisal,
Varanasi: Indica Books.

———, 2012, “Studies in Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti. Part V.
Self-awareness and Yogic Perception”. In: François Voegeli et al. (eds.)
Devadattīyam: Johannes Bronkhorst Felicitation Volume. Worlds of South
and Inner Asia 5, Berne: Peter Lang, pp. 275-300.

———, 2013a, Inherited Cognitions: Prasiddhi, Āgama, Pratibhā, Śabdana
(Bhartr̥hari, Utpaladeva, Abhinavagupta, Kumārila and Dharmakīrti in
Dialogue). In: Vincent Eltschinger and Helmut Krasser (eds.) Scriptural
Authority, Reason and Action: Proceedings of a Panel at the XIV World
Sanskrit Conference, Kyoto, September 1st-5th 2009, Wien:
Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften, Philosophisch-Historische
Klasse, Sitzungsberichte, 847. Band, Wien, pp. 455-480.

———, 2013b, “Pratyabhijñā and Philology”, Journal of the American
Oriental Society, 133(4): 705-13.

———, 2014a, “Utpaladeva’s Lost Vivr̥ti on the Īśvarapratya-bhijñākārikā”,
Journal of Indian Philosophy, 42: 115-26.

———, 2014b, “Notes on the Śivadr̥ṣṭi by Somānanda and its Commentary”,
Journal of Indian Philosophy, 43: 551-601.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Feuerstein 1974: 176-77. A very similar position is also maintained by
Mircea Eliade. For a detailed presentation of Pratyabhijñā philosophy,
cf. Torella 1992; 2002: ix-xlv; 2009; Ratié 2011.

2 A somewhat problematic book has recently been devoted to this
important work (Nemec 2011; on it, see a review article in Torella
2013b). A survey of the textual and translation problems of the
Śivadr̥ṣṭi can be found in Torella 2014b.

3 Vol. I, p. 2: śrīsomānandanāthasya vijñānapratibimbakam.

4 Just to give an example, we can see that when Mādhava describes the
Pratyabhijñā-Darśana in the Sarva-Darśana-Saṁgraha he presents passages
coming only from Abhinava’s Vimarśinī.

5 The main reference point for Utpaladeva is Dharmakīrti (then Dignāga
and Dharmottara). Abhinavagupta gives a prominent place also to
Śaṅkaranandana, a very interesting and peculiar post-Utpala thinker (see
Bühnemann 1980; Krasser 2001; Eltschinger 2006; Torella 2011: 19 n. 12).

6 Interestingly, though showing on all occasions to Bhartr̥hari the
highest respect and appreciation, Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta do not
accept the theory of sphoṭa, indeed one of the cardinal points of his
doctrine. The reasons for this denial are investigated in Torella 2004.

7 For an assessing of the correct text of the two ślokas and elaborate
explanation of their import, see Torella 2013a: 458-62.

2

