Viṣam apy amr̥tāyate . . .

Paramādvaita in the Mystical Hymns

of the Śivastotrāvalī

Bettina Bäumer

Utpaladeva’s Śivastotrāvalī or collection of verses (muktaka) and hymns
(stotra) is one of the most outstanding documents of mystical
literature, not only in Sanskrit, but even in the context of mysticism
in any tradition. If Utpaladeva is the disciplined philosopher in his
Kārikās and Siddhis, in these verses he enjoys the freedom of
spontaneous expression of his most intimate experience and of his
intense longing to be one with his Lord. If his bhakti is defined by his
advaita, we could call the Stotrāvalī the laboratory of Recognition, a
laboratory in which he experiments with all the possible states of
separation, union and the ever-achieved state of non-duality
(satatodita). The experiences he expresses in the Stotrāvalī are the
precondition for his philosophy of Recognition:

kathaṁcid āsādya maheśvarasya dāsyam . . . — ĪPK I.1

The purposeful vagueness and understatement of kathaṁcid undergoes all
kinds of variations in the Stotrāvalī. The humility expressed in dāsyam
(“state of servanthood”) already shows the creative tension between
bhakti and advaita that is so characteristic of Utpaladeva. And, as
Torella has pointed out, it is not only the recognition of the Lord
which is “the cause of the achievement of all spiritual wealth”
(samastasaṁpatsamavāptihetu), but also the state of servanthood of the
Lord (according to Abhinavagupta’s Vimarśinī). The other aspect of
kathaṁcid pointing to the importance of grace is already expressed in
the Vr̥tti. All these aspects implied in the first kārikā will be fully
unfolded in the Stotrāvalī.

As mentioned by Kṣemarāja in his Vivr̥ti, the collection of verses and
the arrangement in twenty stotras is not the work of Utpaladeva but of
his disciples, Śrī Rāma, ādityarāja and Śrī Viśvāvartta, who provided
titles to the twenty stotras. He also mentions that only three hymns
have been composed by Utpala in the way they are handed down by
tradition: the Saṁgrahastotra, Jayastotra and Bhaktistotra (13, 14 and
15). Kṣemarāja mentions the same altruistic motif for their composition
in the first kārikā:

in order to bestow grace on those people who are eager to recognize
their own true nature (svaṁ rūpaṁ tathātvena parāmraṣṭum
arthijanānujighr̥kṣayā . . . , introductory part).

And he calls Utpaladevācārya one who “has always the direct realization
of the supreme Lord as his own Self” (satatasākṣātkr̥ta svātma
maheśvaraḥ).

If the verses or hymns are called stotras, most of them do not conform
to the traditional style of stotra,1 and if they do, they not only
praise the Lord, but, as in the very first verse of the entire text,
they also praise the bhaktas who have already achieved union with the
Lord and who do not need to practise meditation, japa, etc. (I.1). No
wonder, Kṣemarāja identifies their state with anupāya, the no-means, as
expounded in the Tantrāloka (II). A similar praise is expressed to the
devotees “who in every state worship you always as having assumed the
nature of all things — they indeed are my chosen deities”.2

But the intention of this paper is not the literary form of the
Stotrāvalī, nor a general survey, but an analysis of its content in
regard to the topic of the overcoming of dualities and opposites in the
light of the experience of paramādvaita. Instead of finding a
contradiction between bhakti and advaita, it is, in the words of
Torella,

the perspective of the paramādvaita, such an elevated viewpoint that it
does not fear what is different from itself, and where the “higher” does
not automatically cancel the “lower”. — ĪPK, Introduction, p. XXI

First I want to analyse a number of verses which describe opposites and
their overcoming in the mystical experience, belonging to different
contexts. We may start with a more philosophical verse:

sadasattvena bhāvānāṁ yuktā yā dvitayī gatiḥ ।

tām ullaṅghya tr̥tīyasmai namaś citrāya śambhave ।। — 2.1

There are two ways associated with existing things:

being and non-being.

I offer my homage to the wonderful Śambhu

who transcends them, being the third.3

Śiva is praised as being beyond the duality of real and unreal, and
hence as the “third” one, and he is wonderful on account of his
transcending the two states.

In the same stotra he comes down to the level of experience from this
philosophical statement, by calling the fire of Śiva cool:

paramāmr̥tasāndrāya śītalāya śivāgnaye ।

kasmaicid viśvasaṁploṣaviṣamāya namo'stu te ।। — 2.3

May you be glorified O Mild One,

smooth and brimming with the finest nectar,

O fire of Śiva4 the cool one

who burns away the entire universe.

In fact, the tone of this second stotra is one of the overcoming of
opposites:

samastalakṣaṇāyoga eva yasyopalakṣaṇam।

tasmai namo'stu devāya kasmaicid api śambhave ।। — 2.6

May the Lord be glorified,

the mysterious Śambhu

whose only definition is that he is

devoid of all definitions. — tr. Bailly

There is a whole series of praises to Śambhu as the coincidentia
oppositorum, which leads up to verse 12:

māyāvine viśuddhāya guhyāya prakaṭātmane ।

sūkṣmāya viśvarūpāya namaś citrāya śambhave ।।

Homage to the wondrous Śambhu,

the Deluding One

who is yet pure and clear;

the Hidden One

who has yet revealed himself;

the subtle One

whose form takes the form of the whole universe. — tr. Bailly

But there are two verses which express affirmation, negation and their
transcendence, in a kind of Nāgārjunian way. The first concerns the
antinomy between Vedas and Āgamas:

vedāgamaviruddhāya vedāgamavidhāyine ।

vedāgamasatattvāya guhyāya svāmine namaḥ ।। — 2.7

Homage to the Lord, the mysterious One,

who is opposed to the Vedas and Āgamas,

who is the revealer of the Vedas and Āgamas,

and who is the true essence of the Vedas and Āgamas.

This shows both, his transcendence of all scriptures as well as their
relativity in relation to their originator, as well as the relativity of
the opposition of different schools and traditions.

The same principle applies to the different schools of Tantrism:

dakṣiṇācārasārāya vāmācārābhilāṣiṇe ।

sarvācrāya śarvāya nirācārāya te namaḥ ।। — 2.19

Homage be to Śarva,

the essence of the right-handed path

the lover of the left-handed path,

who belongs to all ways of practice

and to none at all

(or: who transcends all traditions).

The following verse concerns the opposition between saṁsāra and its
transcendence:

saṁsāraikanimittāya saṁsāraikavirodhine ।

namaḥ saṁsārarūpāya niḥsaṁsārāya śambhave । — 2.8

Glory be to Śambhu

the sole cause of the world

and its only destroyer,

who has taken the form of the world

and who transcends the world.

Here the opposites are saṁsāra and niḥsaṁsāra (unworldliness), which are
elsewhere taken as saṁsāra and mokṣa. What is a statement of Śiva being
both opposites and transcending them is expressed as a process of
transformation in one of the key verses of Utpaladeva, describing the
mystical way of Śaṅkara:

duḥkhāny api sukhāyante viṣam apy amr̥tāyate ।

mokṣāyate ca saṁsāro yatra mārgaḥ sa śāṅkaraḥ।। — 20.12

Where even suffering is transformed into joy,

where even poison becomes nectar,

where the world itself is a way of liberation:

there is the way of Śiva

(or: this is the tradition of Śaivism).

The conscious use of denominatives (sukhāyante, amr̥tāyate, mokṣāyate)
provides stress to this powerful statement, a kind of summary of the
Śaiva path. Kṣemarāja paraphrases mārga significantly by: paraṁ śāktaṁ
padam (“the supreme state of Energyˮ) because it is Śakti who exercises
her transforming power. The contrast of poison and nectar (viṣa and
amr̥ta) is one of the powerful metaphors in the Stotrāvalī, having the
mythical background of the churning of the milk ocean. This is alluded
to in a moving verse of the Saṁgrahastotra:

kaṇṭhakoṇaviniviṣṭam īśa te

kālakūṭamapi me mahāmr̥tam ।

apy upāttam amr̥taṁ bhavadvapur

bhedavr̥tti yadi rocate na me ।। — 13.17

Even the deadly poison

that rests in a corner of your throat, (O Lord,)

is supreme nectar to me.

But even if I attain nectar,

I do not want it,

if it is separate from your body.

This verse contains one way of interpreting the phrase viṣam apy
amr̥tāyate, the poison being the one associated with the Lord and hence
transformed as well as transforming (pain into joy).

The ideal is not only transforming suffering into happiness, but
reaching a state of equality, equanimity or harmony (samatā) of both. It
is not achieved automatically but by an equalizing meditation. In a
powerful metaphor Utpaladeva compares this process to a devastating
flood:

harṣāṇām atha śokānāṁ sarveṣām plāvakaḥ samam ।

bhavad-dhyānāmr̥tāpūr nimnānimnabhuvām iva ।। — 3.9

Meditation on you full of nectar

makes all joys and sorrows equal

like a flood, levelling high and low lands.

It cannot be achieved by an ordinary meditation, but, as Kṣemarāja
emphasizes, by a state of absorption (samāveśa).

The ideal of samatā is expressed by another cosmic metaphor: equinox
(viṣuvat, sometimes abhijit):

bhaktānāṁ samatāsāraviṣuvatsamayaḥ sadā ।

tvadbhāvarasapīyūṣarasenaiṣāṁ sadārcanam ।। — 17.5

The time of the equinox,

whose essence is equanimity,

is celebrated by the devotees continuously;

for always does their worship consist

of the sweet bliss of your devotion. — tr. Bailly

And yet, equanimity does not mean absence of emotions, on the contrary.
Utpaladeva’s bhakti is charged with emotions, often contrasting ones. In
this respect he is completely in the tradition of Vijñāna-Bhairava,5
Spanda-Kārikā6 and his own guru, Somānanda.

The following verse contains a hint to some of the dhāraṇās of the
Vijñāna-Bhairava:

praharṣād vātha śokād vā yadi kuḍyādghaṭād api ।

bāhyād athāntarādbhāvāt prakaṭībhava me prabho ।। — 5.10

Whether in great joy or in sorrow,

from a wall or from an earthen pot,

whether from external things or internal states —

reveal yourself, O Lord!

It is interesting to note that Kṣemarāja does not refer here to the
Vijñāna-Bhairava7 to explain the wall and the earthen pot. He only
comments on vā as meaning kutaścit sphuṭībhava (“manifest yourself from
whereverˮ). The Stotrāvalī does not show many signs of a Tantric
spirituality, but in this verse the connection is clear. As in the
Vijñāna-Bhairava, the experience of the Divine can happen either from
external things or from inner states.

The true devotees are given to strong emotions:

rudanto vā hasanto vā tvām uccaiḥ pralapanty āmī ।

bhaktāḥ stutipadoccāropacārāḥ pr̥thag eva te ।। — 15.3

Whether weeping or laughing,

they address you in loud, delirious speech.

Uttering hymns of praise, the devoted

are truly unique attendants. — tr. Bailly

The devotee does not seek to avoid the emotions with a view to a state
of equanimity, on the contrary. In some of the most powerful verses
Utpaladeva prays for experiencing the extremes.

bhaktikṣīvo 'pi kupyeyaṁ bhavāyānuśayīya ca ।

tathā haseyaṁ rudyāṁ ca raṭeyaṁ ca śivety alam ।। — 16.7

Let me be enraged and yet

compassionate toward the world.

And thus in the madness of devotion

may I laugh and weep and chant

Śiva, thunderously. — tr. Bailly

Here the contrasting emotions are anger and compassion towards the
world. Utpaladeva throws to the winds even the ideal of equanimity
(samatā) and undistracted establishment in the Self (svastha).

viṣamastho 'pi svastho 'pi rudann api hasann api ।

gambhīro 'pi vicitto 'pi bhaveyaṁ bhaktitaḥ prabho ।। — 16.8

Out of Love, O Lord,

let me be disturbed and yet at peace,

weeping or laughing,

in deep thought or distracted.

These two verses embracing the opposites are in a way summarized in the
following:

bhaktānāṁ nāsti saṁvedyaṁ tvadantar yadi vā bahiḥ ।

ciddharmā yatra na bhavān nirvikalpaḥ sthitaḥ svayam।। — 16.9

For the devotees nothing else is to be known

within you or outside.

For you are of the essence of consciousness

established in your own thought-free state.

Here lies the justification for accepting all opposite states, because
each one shares in the pure Divine consciousness. Bhakti alone is the
condition for sharing in this all-inclusive and all-transcending
consciousness.8

Śambhu is praised as the very coincidentia oppositorum:

namaḥ satatabaddhāya nityanirmuktabhāgine ।

bandhamokṣavihīnāya kasmaicid api śambhave ।। — 2.17

Homage be to Śambhu, who is ever bound,

and who is eternally liberated,

who is neither bondage nor liberation,

because he is indescribable.

Utpaladeva loves expressions of inexpressibility or indescribability,
just like kathañcit and kasmaicit.

The greatest opposition exists between the material, inert (jaḍa) and
conscious reality (cit), corresponding also to subject and object
(vedaka, vedya). But in the Lord even this pair of opposites is
embraced:

jaḍe jagati cidrūpaḥ kila vedye 'pi vedakaḥ ।

vibhur mite ca yenāsi tena sarvottamo bhavān ।। — 3.20

In this unconscious world

you are the form of consciousness.

Among the knowable you are the knower.

Among the limited you are all-pervasive,

therefore you are the highest of all.

This verse might well sum up the position of paramādvaita as defined by
Torella at the beginning. It is therefore no wonder that for the
devotees who are intoxicated by their love for the Lord, he is both,
with form and formless, internal as well as external (16.22).

If the Lord is the union of opposites, his devotees can well realize him
in any opposite state:

dharmādharmātmanor antaḥ kriyāyor jñānayos tathā ।

sukhaduḥkhātmanor bhaktāḥ kimapy āsvādayanty aho ।। — 15.6

Between activity and knowledge,

whether righteous or unrighteous,

whether full of happiness or suffering,

O, the bhaktas taste something inexpressible.9

Of course, the expression āsvādayanti is in tune with the sensible
experience of the Lord, where Utpaladeva frequently uses the sense of
taste, mostly connected with amr̥ta, sudhā, piyūṣa, etc. It is this
sensible experience which embraces as well as transcends all opposites.

However, the mystic remains conscious of the contradictions experienced,
when he uses the term virodharasika (attachment for contradictory
objects), as in the following:

kva nu rāgādiṣu rāgaḥ kva ca haracaraṇāmbujeṣu rāgitvam ।

itthaṁ virodharasikaṁ bodhaya hitam amara me hr̥dayam ।। — 5.20

What comparison is there between attachment for sense-objects

and love for the lotus feet of Hara?

Thus, O Immortal One, make me aware of contradictory tastes

and awaken my heart to what is beneficial.10

Here it seems to be a matter of choice between two loves, but there is
also a way of accepting and transforming the pair of attachment and
aversion.

niveditam upādatsva rāgādi bhagavan mayā ।

ādāya cāmr̥tīkr̥tya bhuṅkṣva bhaktajanaiḥ samam ।। — 5.13

O Lord! accept my offerings of attachment and aversion!

Having received them and transformed them into immortal nectar,

enjoy them together with your devotees.

The metaphor of ritual offerings is here applied to the very disturbing
worldly emotions which are divinized (“nectarized” in the words of Swami
Lakshman Joo) and shared between the Lord and the devotees.

The overcoming of opposites in the realm of mystical experience is also
applied to time.

na tadā na sadā na caikadety api sā yatra na kāladhīr bhavet ।

tad idaṁ bhavadīyadarśanaṁ na ca nityaṁ na ca kathyate 'nyathā ।। — 12.5

Neither “then” nor “always”

nor even “once”.

Where no awareness of time exists

that is verily your realization.

It can neither be called “eternal”

nor in any other way (i.e. temporal).

By a kind of Nāgārjunian negation of negation, any temporal category is
excluded from the realm of mystical experience. This negation is so
forceful because religious language again and again lands in the
categories of time and eternity.

The richness of mystical experience contained in the verses quoted
cannot be brought into any systematic order, but every one can
ultimately be related to paramādvaita which includes as well as
transcends all opposites. Apart from expressions related to the nature
of the Divine as containing all opposites, it is the mystical process
that engages Utpaladeva. And in the final analysis, the greatest
opposition which needs to be overcome is that between the limited ego
and the Divine aham. Here, too, advaita is not the ending point but the
starting point.

nātha lokābhimānānām apūrvaṁ tvaṁ nibandhanam ।

mahābhimānaḥ karhi syāṁ tvadbhaktirasapūritaḥ ।। — 9.13

O Lord! You are the sole cause

of all worldly egos —

when shall I attain the great Ego

filled with the bliss of your Love?

The great abhimāna is nothing but the Divine I-consciousness without
which no individual ego could exist.

Utpaladeva also gives a grammatical justification to the pre-eminence of
the first person, the Divine “I”:

uttamapuruṣo 'nyo sti yuṣmaccheṣaviśeṣitaḥ ।

tvam mahāpuruṣas tv eko niḥśeṣapuruṣāśrayaḥ ।। — 3.14

The “first person”

is distinguished from the second person,

and from the “third person” as well.

You alone are the Great Person,

the refuge of all persons.

Kṣemarāja goes into the philosophical implications of this grammatical
statement.

Some striking verses relate to the process of transformation which does
involve the participation of the mystic.

yo 'vikalpam idam arthamaṇḍalam

paśyatīśa nikhilaṁ bhavadvapuḥ ।

svātmapakṣaparipūrite jagat

yasya nityasukhinaḥ kuto bhayam ।। — 13.16

He who perceives this whole universe of objects

in a thought-free state as your divine body,

and who fills the world with his own self —

he is ever blissful. Whence the fear?

The process implied is a state of nirvikalpa which alone makes it
possible to experience the world as divine, but in a second (or third)
step to identify one’s self with this universal vision of the divine
body. The result is of course a blissful state free from fear.
Indirectly this experience contains not only advaita (between the
universal divine and the individual), but the coming together of all
three constituents of trika: śiva, śakti, nara (śakti being the
universal expansion).

This verse expresses both an experience actually undergone by Utpaladeva
and a practice of identification of the individual with the universal
Self.

The most extraordinary expression of a mystical experience — an
experience of pratyabhijñā — as total identification with the Divine
aham is found in verse 5.15:

antarbhakti-camatkāra-carvaṇāmīlitekṣaṇaḥ ।

namo mahyaṁ śivāyeti pūjayan syāṁ tr̥ṇāny api ।।

With my eyes closed

relishing within the wonder of inner devotion,

May I worship even the blades of grass thus:

“Glory to Śiva, to myself”!

The mantra namaḥ śivāya is applied to the mystic himself, as well as to
the blades of grass in an ecstatic unity of all reality, the trika. The
description of the experience is based on the aesthetic enjoyment:
camatkāra, carvaṇā, transmuted into the inner devotion, as well as on
the metaphor of worship with mantra. The philosophical implication is
that there is no jaḍa, because even the blades of grass are suffused
with consciousness. In this verse several levels of Utpaladeva’s
mysticism come together: the aesthetic, the bhakti, but all centred on
the Divine “I”: namo mahyaṁ śivāya.

From the extraordinary richness of Utpaladeva’s mystical hymns we have
considered one central aspect which finds diverse expressions. The
Stotrāvalī can in many ways be related to the philosophy of
Pratyabhijñā, bathed in a spirit of bhakti, hence very different from
Abhinavagupta. But this comparison is not my task here. At the end I
only want to throw light on the texts quoted from an analysis of
mystical language.

I am referring to two theories on mystical language which can well be
applied to Utpaladeva. One question which arises while reading and
listening to the Śivastotrāvalī is this: if these verses were expressed
by the author in a state of mystical intoxication (which he often refers
to) why do they also contain a number of stereotypes, traditional images
and metaphors? First of all, the mystic cannot help but use language
which is also conventional (sāṅketika) and in a way unfit to the
language-transcending experience.

Pierre Hadot, great interpreter of Plotinus, has analysed mystical
language and come to the following conclusion:

It is said — and rightly so — that one should not be misled by the
language of the mystics. They, too, have their common places and their
traditional images, in a word, their rhetoric . . . but the authentic
experience gives a tone to the language which cannot deceive. . . .11

The rhetoric and common places in the case of Utpaladeva are drawn from
the world of ritual worship (pūjā, arcā), and from the devotion offered
to the guru or the deity by worshipping their lotus feet. All these
accepted traditional images need to be interpreted in the light of the
original experience. But, as Hadot says, the spontaneous experience
cannot be overheard, it passes through even the conventional language
(as in the case of the last quoted verse).

The mystic cannot help but use metaphors to express the inexpressible.
These metaphors are taken from the traditional background, but are
constantly in need to be transcended and made to explode. In another
approach of interpreting mystical language, the expert on German
mysticism (Meister Eckhart in particular), Alois Haas, has taken up an
expression coined by Hans Blumenberg, namely “explosive metaphors”.12
This concept is applied mostly to the negative theology and mysticism of
Dionysius Areopagite and other neo-Platonic mystics of the Christian
tradition, but it has universal implications. Mystical language being

a combination of the observable and more than observable. . . . By
allowing the metaphor to deconstruct itself through paradox (I would
add: and negation), it allows for the possibility of perceiving oneness
and eternity. . . . (And) In the final analysis all metaphors can be
regarded as having an explosive effect.

— art. cit., p. 142

The best illustration is a quotation from Meister Eckhart:

I have often said: The shell must break and whatever is inside must come
forth; for if you want to have the nut, you must first crack the shell.
In the same way: if you want to find nature revealed, you must first
crack all its parables, and the further you penetrate, the closer you
will get to true being. When the soul finds the One in which all is one,
then it remains in this single Oneness.13

Utpaladeva uses another “explosive metaphor” where it is a question of
breaking the shell:

rāgādimayabhavāṇḍaka-

luṭhitaṁ tvadbhaktibhāvanāmbikā tais taiḥ ।

āpyāyayatu rasair māṁ

pravr̥ddhapakṣo yathā bhavāmi khagaḥ ।। — 7.4

I toss within the egg of the world

Consisting of attachment (hatred, etc.).

May the Mother, contemplative Love,

Nourish me with sweet essence,

So that I grow into a bird

With strong wings.

This is one of the most powerful metaphors implying the breaking of the
shell of worldly emotions and bondages in order to attain the freedom of
liberation. The word used for “bird” (khaga), also implies the movement
in the unlimited space of Consciousness (kha, cf. khecarī, khecara). The
condition for hatching this egg is not only bhakti, but bhakti-bhāvanā
which fulfils the role of the mother bird. A complex and multi-layered
metaphor.

The theory of the “explosive metaphors” is precisely applicable in the
case of the way Utpaladeva deals with opposites, first of all the one
given as the motto of this lecture: poison and nectar. He makes the
language explode by negating them, transcending them, including and
accepting them, and in this way revealing the inner core, the heart, the
pure consciousness, the divine body (vapus), and landing in the state of
paramādvaita.

References

Ācārya Utpaladeva viracitā Śivastotrāvalī (mūlamātra), ed. Īśvarasvarūpa
Svāmī Lakshman Joo, Srinagar: Ishvar Ashram Trust, 1997.

Bailly, Constantina Rhodes, 1987, Shaiva Devotional Songs of Kashmir, a
tr. and study of Utpaladeva’s Śivastotrāvalī, Albany: SUNY Press.

The Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikā of Utpaladeva with the Author’s Vṛtti,
critically edited and translated by Raffaele Torella, Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass, 1st edn., 1994 (3rd edn., 2013).

Śivastotrāvalī of Utpaladeva: A Mystical Hymn of Kashmīr, Exposition by
Swami Lakshman Joo, New Delhi: D.K. Printworld, 2008.

Śivastotrāvalī of Utpaladeva, Sanskrit text with Introduction, English
tr. and Glossary, N.K. Kotru, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass,1985.

The Śivastotrāvalī of Utpaladevācārya, with the Sanskrit Commentary of
Kṣemarāja, ed. with Hindi commentary by Rājānaka Lakṣmaṇa Varanasi:
Chowkhambha Sanskrit Series Office, 1964 (2nd edn. 2008).

Spandakārikās: The Divine Creative Pulsation, tr. Jaideva Singh, Delhi:
Motilal Banarsidass, 1st edn., 1980.

The Stanzas on Vibration: The Spandakārikā with Four Commentaries, tr.
Mark S.G. Dyczkowski, Varanasi: Dilip Kumar Publishers, 1st Indian edn.,
1994.

Vijñāna-Bhairava [VBh] with the Uddyota by Kṣemarāja up to verse 23 and
with the Vivr̥ti by Śivopādhyāya thereafter, ed. M.R. Shastri, KSTS VIII,
Bombay, 1918.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 The Stavacintāmaṇi of Bhaṭṭa Nārāyaṇa is more in conformity with the
hymnic style.

2 sarvadā sarvabhāveṣu yugapat-sarvarūpiṇam ।

tvām arcayanty aviśrāntaṁ ye mamaite ’dhidevatāḥ ।। — 17.3

3 A more free translation by Bailly: “Homage to the miraculous Śambhu,
who, transcending the two forms — the real and the unreal — of all that
exists, constitute the Third Form.” (p. 39)

4 Cf. śivāgnaye in 2.5.

5 E.g. VBh. v. 101.

6 SpKā 1.22.

7 VBh. 59-60.

8 Cf. also 16.10 and 11.

9 Bailly 1987: 85: “Your devotees, in the face of all this, enjoy the
bliss of your devotion.”

10 Translation combined with N.K. Kotru.

11 Pierre Hadot, Plotin ou la simplicité du regard, Paris (Gallimard)
1997, pp. 87-88 (tr. from the French).

12 “Sprengmetaphorik” in German. Cf. Alois Haas, 2005, “The Nothingness
of God and Its Explosive Metaphors”, in Void and Fullness in the
Buddhist, Hindu and Christian Traditions, ed. Bettina Bäumer and John
Dupuche, New Delhi: D.K. Printworld, pp. 121-43.

13 Meister Eckhart, 1993, Werke, ed. N. Largier, Frankfurt a.M., vol. 1,
p. 545, tr. in Haas, art. cit., p. 142.

3

