Detonating or Defusing Desire

From Utpaladeva’s Ecstatic Aesthetics to Abhinavagupta’s Ecumenical Art
Theory*

Daniele Cuneo

The present paper tries to gauge the theoretical difference between
Utpaladeva’s and Abhinavagupta’s “aesthetic” speculations. However, I
will argue that only the postulation of a conceptual divide between
aesthetics proper, i.e. a discourse on sensory perception, and art
theory, i.e. a discourse on art per se, can plausibly account for the
ratio of the textual material under scrutiny. Such a speculative
differentiation will allow for a contrast between Utpaladeva’s ecstatic
aesthetics, a discourse on sensory perception recognized as the
preferential path to rapturous identification with the consciousness of
Śiva, and Abhinavagupta’s art theory, a discourse on art per se
acknowledged as a viable way to temporarily overcome the inherent
painfulness of everyday sensory perceptions. The premises that nourish
Abhinavagupta’s art theory, that somewhat differ from his and
Utpaladeva’s śaiva Weltanschauung, will be tentatively interpreted in
light of the hypothesis of an implicit ecumenical agenda. The two
different paths, here postulated and identified, might be idiomatically
epitomized by means of their respective attitude towards desire, namely,
their respective methods for its detonation and its defusal.

Getting Started

Another quite possible and less slogan-like title of the present essay
might have been “An Instance of the Progressive Differentiation of
Tradition”. The initial input for this kind of research can be traced
back to Raffaele Torella’s list of priorities to be set in the field of
study dedicated, specifically, to Utpaladeva, and, more generally, to
so-called nondual Kashmir Śaivism. In such a list, “the progressive
differentiation of tradition” stood out as one of the main and most
urgent concerns. In general terms, the underlying idea consists of an
assessment of the subtle, and less subtle, differences in the thought of
the various authors of this celebrated tradition. Scholars have so far
concentrated their efforts almost solely on the similarities and the
unitary purport, rather than differences and conceptual revolutions,
between the philosophical speculations of a wide range of authors such
as — to name only a few of the most important thinkers — Somānanda,
Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta, his disciple Kṣemarāja and his commentator
Jayaratha, and even the late twentieth-century master Swami Lakshman
Joo.

In particular, my present concern is focused on what has been loosely
called the aesthetic thought developed in the womb of so-called non-dual
Kashmir Śaivism. As is well known, Abhinavagupta (c. ce 950–1020),
Utpaladeva’s (c. ce 925-75) celebrated disciple’s disciple, is rightly
considered one of the greatest aesthetic theorists of the Sanskrit
cosmos. His two justly-renowned works, the Locana on Ānandavardhana’s
Dhvanyāloka (DhvĀ) and the Abhinavabhāratī (ABh) on Bharata’s
Nāṭyaśāstra (NŚ), have created and established the “mainstream of
Sanskrit Literary Theory” in the broadest possible sense.

In recent years, quite a number of articles and studies have been
published with regard to the link between Abhinavagupta’s aesthetic
theories — and I would say in particular, Abhinavagupta’s aesthetic
concepts, i.e. rasa, camatkāra, pratibhā, sphurattā and viśrānti — and
the broader framework of the philosophy of Pratyabhijñā of which he is
the great systematiser.1

As a relevant instance, we can quote Torella’s words on the concept of
camatkāra, a very common term denoting the aesthetic experience in
Abhinavagupta’s works, to be analysed as a sort of aesthetic coté of the
concept of vimarśa, the reflexive self-awareness that intrinsically
characterizes and is ultimately non-different from the absolute
consciousness, i.e. Śiva himself. Commenting on a translation from
Abhinavaguta’s Īśvarapratyabhijñāvivr̥tivimarśinī (vol. II, p. 177),
Torella (2002: 118, fn. 23) states:

“Camatkr̥ti means the act of a person savouring (bhuñjānasya), that is,
the bliss constituted by the full achievement of fruition”. Bhuñjāna,
[Abhinavagupta] explains later, is he who, engaged in savouring a taste
such as sweetness, etc., unlike a voracious glutton, lets the experience
rest on the cognizing subject, that is, makes the ‘subject’ part
predominate over the ‘object’ part. Camatkāra, in its highest form, is
therefore both the act of savouring and fullness, absolute independence,
consciousness devoid of obstacles (avighnā saṁvit), a savouring which is
in the final analysis a savouring of one’s own self and of one’s own
bliss, which eludes every screen or intermediation of the world of
objects [. . .]. The terms with which it is glossed or with which it is
closely related may be grouped according to its principal components:
cognition, bliss, wonder. The first group includes, for example, vimarśa
(pratyavamarśa, etc.), carvaṇā, āsvāda, rasanā, pratīti; the second
includes ānanda, nirvr̥ti, viśrānti, laya; the third vismaya, vikāsa.

Therefore, the idea of camatkāra conveys the sense of a
quasi-aesthetical and intrinsically pleasurable wonder that strikes and
embraces the individual subject as soon as he cognizes the limitless
dimension of his own pure and absolute consciousness.2

Along very similar lines, it is possible to trace the philosophical and
metaphysical pedigree of the other aesthetic notions Abhinavagupta
employs in his works on poetics and dramaturgy, from rasa and dhvani3 up
to pratibhā4 and viśrānti5 without neglecting, obviously, the very term
saṁvid.

Furthermore, some very important essays by Bettina Bäumer have recently6
focused on the aesthetic ideas and concepts especially in so far as they
are already clearly developed in Utpaladeva’s writings and in other
early texts of non-dual Kashmir Śaivism.

On the one hand, as already pointed out by Gnoli, Utpaladeva is to be
acknowledged as the first author, in the paramparā of Pratyabhijñā, who
used the term camatkāra or camatkr̥ti.7 On the other hand, as shown by
Bäumer (2008), Utpaladeva bases his Śivastotrāvalī (ŚSĀ)8 on an almost
explicit “aesthetics of devotion” according to which the unity with Śiva
as well as the possible paths that lead to the recognition of such a
union are better characterized and fleshed out as an act of pleasurable
savouring and appreciation, especially in so far as the divine himself
is appropriately identified with the concepts of “beauty” and
“delight”.9

A very telling example of such “aesthetics of devotion” is represented
by two beautiful verses of the Śivastotrāvalī (specifically, ŚSĀ
13.14-15). In the poetic translation of Bailly, they read:

That which bestows on all objects of beauty (subhāgārthavastu)

The property of giving wonder (camatkr̥ti) at the mere touch –

By that very principle do those endowed with

Unwavering devotion (bhakti)

Worship your form.

Being self-luminous

You cause everything to shine;

Delighting in your form

You fill the universe with delight;

Rocking with your own bliss (rasa)

You make the whole world dance with joy.10

Perspectival Change

Along the lines exposed so far, the previous title for the present essay
was meant to be something like “Claiming Utpaladeva’s Share in
Abhinavagupta’s Aesthetics”. This rested on the assumption — a quite
plausible assumption in itself — that many of Abhinavagupta’s
speculations on poetry, theatre and art, in general, are rooted in
Utpaladeva’s philosophical and mystical thought, especially as it is
shaped in his Śivastostrāvalī. From this perspective, contrarily to what
happens in his Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikā and in his Siddhitrayī,
Utpaladeva is the ardent devotee who seeks the divine in every aspect of
reality, rather than relying on the “arid tools” of logical reasoning.11

However, after further research, I came to realize what I have already
hinted at above, via the idea of “progressive differentiation of
tradition”; namely, that in such a philosophical non-dualism, an
absolute non-dualism, a paramādvaita as espoused in so-called Kashmir
Śaivism, the most difficult and the most important task for a researcher
is not to interweave and highlight the connections among the different
domains of thought and among the various meanings of key concepts
recurring in these various domains — because everything cannot but be
intrinsically interrelated to everything else, especially in the grand
systematization of Abhinavagupta — but instead to explore the
differences of theory and argumentation between them. I am not claiming
that the identification of the aforementioned web of intertwined and
entangled ideas is useless. Quite the contrary: I am just stating that
spotting the differences can be equally fruitful, and even more
challenging.

Therefore, for our present concern, for building the palace of the
current discourse, we have to erect, so to speak, two theoretical
pillars: on the one hand, the clear metaphysical background of
Abhinavagupta’s aesthetic writings, namely both the Locana and the
Abhinavabhāratī,12 where terms such as saṁvid and pratibhā play a
central role; and on the other hand, the existence of a full-fledged
aesthetic thought in Utpaladeva’s writings, where terms such as
camatkāra, or even alaukika rasa13 (“extraordinary aesthetic
experience”, in Gnoli’s translation) have clearly metaphysical and
philosophical bearings too.

Among the questions that remain to be solved are the following:

1. How wide are the divergences exhibited between Utpaladeva’s and
Abhinavagupta’s “aesthetic” thought?

2. Which sources of inspiration and direct influences shaped the ideas
of these two authors?

3. Why do the actual textual embodiments of their “aesthetic”
speculations differ significantly from one another: only scattered
though quite numerous clues found in the various works of Utpaladeva, on
the one hand, and two massive commentaries on the most important texts
on Alaṁkāraśāstra and Nāṭyaśāstra written by Abhinavagupta, on the
other?

4. What were the theoretical and/or practical reasons and purposes for
developing any kind of aesthetics at all?

In my opinion, the crux of the whole discourse is precisely the very
term “aesthetics”. Etymologically, the English word is related to the
Greek word αἴσθησις, meaning “sense perception”, or “feeling”.
Therefore, literally, aesthetics is the science of, or better, the
discourse on sense perception, in the broadest possible sense. Contrary
to its original and etymological meaning, the “new” connotation of this
term as “that branch of philosophy that deals with the nature of art,
taste and beauty” is indeed extremely recent. Precisely, it goes back to
Baumgarten’s dissertation, Meditationes philosophicae de nonnullis ad
poema pertinentibus (1735) and is used commonly only after Kant and,
especially, Hegel.

In this regard, my general contention is that, in order to better
understand the materials offered by non-dual Kashmir Śaivism, one needs
to keep these two domains of theoretical thinking separate.14 On the one
hand, we have aesthetics proper, i.e. “aesthetics in its etymological
sense”, a theoretical discourse on sense perception, its ontology, its
phenomenology, its teleology and its ethics as well. On the other hand,
we have “aesthetics in its modern sense”, what we might call, in a
simpler way, “art theory”, that is a theoretical discourse on art, its
essence, purpose, phenomenology, ethics and so forth. If we staunchly
keep in mind this distinction, the questions raised above might simply
dissolve into thin air.

In particular, my specific contention is that Utpaladeva’s stray remarks
on rasa, camatkāra, carvaṇā, beauty and related ideas develop an
“aesthetics proper”. More explicitly, they provide a vivid picture of a
complex theory concerning sense perception, and — specifically — its
soteriological significance, namely the possibly positive role that
senses and sense perceptions can play on the path towards the final
identification with the absolute consciousness of Śiva. On the other
hand, Abhinavagupta’s works on Alaṁkāraśāstra and Nāṭyaśāstra develop a
full-fledged and very sophisticated theory of art — completely absent in
Utpaladeva’s writings — which has only a marginal though very telling
bearing on metaphysical and soteriological issues.

Contrasting and Interpreting Two Piles of Evidence

In order to flesh out the sketch of the theoretical subdivision that has
been so far attempted, it is necessary to pile up some evidence from the
textual material of Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta.

As it is — broadly speaking — a well-known characteristic of the Tantric
universe, one might not need to glean any evidence from the incredibly
vast array of Tantric texts in order to draw attention to the importance
of the senses, the sense perceptions and the desire that always
saturates them.15

Nevertheless, in the individual case of Utpaladeva, further quotations
from the Śivastotrāvalī might serve the purpose at hand:

Threefold is this path of [sensory]16 cognitions,

[as it is qualified] by pleasure, pain and delusion.

O all-pervading Lord, this is, for the devotees,

the entire and only cause of your attainment.17

As shown in Bäumer’s recent article (2008) on aesthetics in Kashmir
Śaivism, the whole world — according to Utpaladeva — is suffused with
the beauty of Śiva, as the universe is nothing but his own cosmic form
(viśvarūpa). Śiva himself is, therefore, the source of everything
beautiful.

O Lord, as you are the wellspring

Of each and every beauty,

[all] that is merged within you is invaluable,

be it a gem or a blade of grass.18

Therefore, from the point of view of an advanced devotee who has
realized that everything is merged in the Lord, every sense object
becomes beautiful and, as soon as it is perceived, bestows the bliss of
the union with the divine. Consequently, Utpaladeva can rapturously
sing:

Is there any state where you do not reside?

Is there anything that is not your luminous body?19

Or, again, in a surge of ecstatic elation:

I roar, O! and I dance!

My desires are fulfilled!

Now that you, O Lord,

of extraordinary beauty,

have occurred to me!20

The beauty of the world, therefore, can be either the supreme source of
bondage — if we do not recognize its identity with the absolute —, or
the royal path to the realization of the crystalline purity of our
consciousness — if we do recognize Śiva as its actual source.

However, the most telling example of Utpaladeva’s conception on the role
of sense objects, and therefore, of his aesthetic theory (proper) is yet
another verse from the Śivastotrāvalī:

While incessantly drinking in through the senses

The heady wine of your worship

From the overflowing goblet of all objects,

Let madness overtake me.21

Clearly enough, the madness our author is talking about is the absolute
and totalizing feeling of thrilled union with the divine that is to be
attained precisely through a complete immersion in the passionate
enjoyment of the objects of senses. Another way of interpreting the
positive significance of the sensory fruitions is sketched in the
following verses of the Śivastotrāvalī:

May there be in me, as there is in common people,

a forceful craving for the objects [of the world],

O Lord, but may I view them as your own body,

in so far as my conceptual divisions have disappeared.22

Let my sense faculties, thrilled with delight,

Be attached to their respective objects.

But may there not be, oh Lord, even for an instant,

Any cruel loss of the joy (rasa) of non-differentiation with you.23

Moreover, to better understand the significance of any instance of
sensory enjoyment, one should not forget what the sense-organs really
are, i.e. Śiva’s own śaktis, his sense-goddesses.24 As Utpaladeva
himself almost patently states in another verse:

Homage to the terrifying host of your powers,

who offer you everything they enjoy

through fruitions of the objects

that are ultimately nothing but pleasure.25

In the whole Tantric corpus of revealed texts, it is easy to spot
numerous examples of practices that aim at multiplying and intensifying
the fruitions of sense objects in order to detonate, so to speak, the
component of desire that permeates them. My contention is that this very
detonation of desire in an ecstatic outburst of beatitude and freedom
represents also, so to say, the ultimate goal of Utpaladeva’s
“aesthetics of devotion”. The absolute sentiment of love-brimming
devotion towards the divine, embodied in the enjoyment of sensory
experience, becomes the blissful immersion in the absolute divine
consciousness itself. It represents, therefore, an actual practice of
enlightenment.

The best-known paradigmatic examples of these practices of complete
absorption in the sensory experiences and in the fulfilment of desire
are the 112 dhāraṇās for the attainment of liberation expounded in the
celebrated Vijñāna-Bhairava.26 Many of these means consist, in fact, in
various instances of an incredibly intense sensory experience. In
general terms, towards the end of the text, the Vijñāna-Bhairava reads:

Whenever the consciousness of the all-pervading Lord is revealed through
any of the sense-organs, since their nature is ultimately the same, the
plenitude of the self by dissolution into consciousness [itself is
obtained].27

Therefore, Utpaladeva’s ecstatic aesthetics — as I would tentatively
call it — represents a clear offshoot of the widespread positive
assessment, in Tantric traditions, of the role of desire-charged sense
experiences, especially of ravishingly intense and totalizing ones, in
the human search for enlightenment. Exactly in so far as the whole world
is nothing but the beautiful and playful manifestation of the absolute
consciousness, the sensory experience of such a world is nothing but the
main gate for the realization of our identity with this very world, and
therefore with the absolute itself.

One of the main concerns of Utpaladeva’s aesthetics is, thus, the
usefulness of the perception of beauty. But what kind of beauty? The
beauty of creation, namely the beauty of nature, a beauty that is a
direct mirroring, or even better, the very manifestation of the beauty
of the Lord. But what about the beauty in art, the significance of art,
especially in so far as it is different from nature, from the universe
we ordinarily perceive?

After a cursory survey of the literature of non-dual Kashmir Śaivism
prior to Abhinavagupta, including obviously Utpaladeva’s writings, one
can actually find several stray references to the arts. However, these
instances do not certainly imply a full-fledged speculation on art nor,
I would argue, are they indicative of “a concern for art in itself”.
Quite on the contrary, I would claim that they are employed as
suggestive metaphors or as simple instances of an “ordinary” or “common”
experience, possibly a very intense one.

Just to quote some examples, one might refer to the well-known
theatrical metaphor hinted at in the famous three aphorisms of the
Śivasūtra (3.9: nartaka ātmā “the self is the actor/dancer”, 3.10: raṅgo
’ntarātmā “the inner self is the stage” and 3.11: prekṣakāṇīndriyāṇi
“the senses are the spectators”). Unfortunately, all the commentaries on
the Śivasūtra are later than Utpaladeva and cannot therefore help us in
retrieving the interpretation he might have given to these passages.28
In any case, at this junction, Kṣemarāja quotes a verse from Bhaṭṭa
Nārāyaṇa’s Stavacintāmaṇi,29 a text that might well have been known to
Utpaladeva30 and might have established some of the main coordinates for
the understanding of the theatrical metaphor in his times.

This pivotal31 verse reads:

You have initiated the drama of the three worlds,

containing in its womb the seed of the numerous entities emitted [by
you].

Is there any other poet but you, O Destroyer [i.e. Śiva],

who might be capable of bringing it to its conclusion?32

An example of the second manner of employing artistic references that I
have postulated, i.e. as an instance of an ordinary experience, possibly
a very vivid one, can be found in verses 41 and 73 of the
Vijñāna-Bhairava, where the explicit reference is the enjoyment of
music. Such is the fame of these verses that their verbatim quotation is
useless and can be merely included in a footnote.33

These and other references, together with the much larger number of
occurrences found in the works of Abhinavagupta and the masters who
followed him,34 have been gathered, for instance, by Bäumer, in order to
prove the great importance that the aesthetic dimension plays, and has
always played, in the domain of non-dual Kashmir Śaivism.35 As should be
clear by now, I do agree with this claim, but only in so far as one
understands “aesthetics” in its etymological sense, namely as a
discourse on sense perception.

Conversely, an art theory proper, i.e. “aesthetics” in its contemporary
sense, did not see the light before the ground-breaking works of
Abhinavagupta.36 In other words, before him, any reference to the arts
in the textual corpus under scrutiny was simply a metaphor,37 a powerful
metaphor indeed, for the creativity and the freedom of the absolute
consciousness or a simple example of any sensory experience whatsoever.

First, in his Locana on Ānandavardhana’s Dhvanyāloka and then, to an
even broader extent, in his Abhinavabhāratī on Bharata’s Nāṭyaśāstra,
Abhinavagupta develops an unprecedented and very sophisticated theory of
art. As I have also argued in my unpublished doctoral dissertation,38
the greatest achievement, the veritable paradigm shift, embodied in
Abhinavagupta’s art theory consists in the identification of “art” as a
specific separate domain of theoretical investigation. In particular,
Abhinavagupta’s implicit recognition of the apartness of “art” and of
“the fictional world created by it” is made explicit by the unambiguous
acknowledgement of a complete difference of plane between the
experiences determined by the “real world” and those triggered by the
appreciation of “an artistically created universe”.

In brief, the ordinary (laukika, as Abhinavagupta says) response to
everyday sensory perceptions brought about by the contact with the
common world of sense objects is almost inextricably entangled with the
inescapable concern for our well-being. Namely, any perception triggers
an emotional response mainly consisting in the cognition of the
possibility that the environmental situation might alter our welfare.
Consequently — unless we recognize the situation as indifferent to it,
in which case no emotion at all is aroused — the emotional response,
imbued by the structural desire to acquire pleasure and to avert
suffering,39 necessarily prompts us to act in order to remove an (even
hypothetical) state of pain or to prolong an (even hypothetical) state
of pleasure.40

Contrarily, the “aesthetic” response triggered by the perception of an
artistically created universe — a response that is to be recognized as
rasa in Abhinavagupta’s reinterpretation of the term — consists in a
special kind of emotion (alaukika or lokottara,41 as he says),
fundamentally devoid of any feeling of attachment or aversion, and
therefore consisting in the pure appreciation of emotionality in itself.
Abhinavagupta explains this peculiar capacity of art to evoke such a
desireless, and hence intrinsically beatific emotional response, by
borrowing the crucial idea of sādhāraṇīkaraṇa (generalization), from
Bhaṭṭa Nāyaka, one of his predecessors in the analysis of the concept of
rasa. To quickly illustrate his point: the emotions experienced while
enjoying an art work are “generalized”, in so far as they become
“deprived of any spatial or temporal qualifications, as well as
non-belonging to any specific individual”.42 Such a state of
generalization depends on a sort of clash between cognitive stances. The
enjoyers of any artistically created situation, though perfectly aware
of the fictional nature of the represented events, cannot avoid trusting
the clear, straightforward data of their direct perception.43 In
Abhinavagupta’s own words, the generalization occurs “on the basis of a
complete suppression of limiting causes such as time, space, subject and
so forth — those really existent as well as those evoked by poetry — as
a result of their reciprocal opposition”.44 Therefore, the artistic
universe is perceived as simultaneously real and non-real, so to speak.
For this very reason, i.e. for the inherent impossibility of a too
“concerned” involvement, it can indeed become the object of our
unconditioned delight.

As this topic has been extensively treated elsewhere by the present
author,45 it is time to go back to our central concern and try to answer
the questions raised above and, implicitly, to test our initial
hypothesis against the adduced evidence.

With regard to our question number 1, the one concerning the actual
divergence between Utpaladeva’s and Abhinavagupta’s aesthetic ideas, I
think it is safe to assume now that Utpaladeva’s “aesthetics proper”,
i.e. Utpaladeva’s theory of perception, is quite different from
Abhinavagupta’s “aesthetics in the contemporary sense”, i.e. from
Abhinavagupta’s art theory. On the one hand, we find Utpaladeva’s very
positive evaluation of a complete, totalizing, ecstatic immersion in the
whirlpool of sense experiences permeated, as they are, by unquenchable
desire, possibly by progressively redirecting them towards the active
union with the absolute through the very door of the ordinary
perceptions themselves. On the other hand, we find Abhinavagupta’s
analysis of art as the trigger for an intrinsically extramundane and
beatific experience, this being possible only in so far as the peculiar
ontological status of the artistic universe — contemporaneously real and
non-real — determines the temporary suppression of the element of desire
that haunts the ordinary sensory experience and dooms it to nothing but
an endless succession of unsatisfactory and unsatisfied cravings.

A very important point has gone unmentioned so far. We have already seen
how, in his speculations on art, Abhinavagupta sheds, so to speak, the
robes of the Tantric master and advocates a path to the beatific
savouring of one’s own consciousness that is radically different from
the one indicated by such texts as the Vijñāna-Bhairava, i.e. the total
absorption in increasingly more forceful fruitions of sensory objects,
immersed in the whirling eddy of desire. None the less, the Locana and
the Abhinavabhāratī represent only a small part of Abhinavagupta’s
writings. In all his more “sectarian” writings — if I am allowed the
unfair expression — he follows and develops the speculations of his
paramaguru Utpaladeva, and of the revealed tradition they equally share,
in recognizing both the metaphysical and the soteriological centrality
of sensory perceptions, and of the desire that enlivens them. His
attitude towards sense objects and desire can be illustrated, for
instance, by two famous stanzas of his Mālinīślokavārttika, a versified
commentary on the Mālinīvijayottara-Tantra:

That which is in desire, in the centre of desire, or opened by the hook
of desire, one shall obtain by desire. Willingly (kāmam) one shall unite
desires with desires.

Desire is the wish to appropriate. With [desire] as a cover, the
desirous attains everything, because desire is the ultimate principle of
this [whole universe].46

One might actually multiply ad libitum the quotations in this respect,
as this is indeed Abhinavagupta’s standard view regarding sensory
experience and desire. Therefore, one should ask why he maintains a
different position in his works dedicated to art by implicitly espousing
the “orthodox” view of “mainstream Brāhmanical thinking”47 — if you
allow me this provisional generalization — namely the view that condemns
and demonizes the desire-loaded sensory experience as the very shackle
that fetters us to suffering and transmigration.48 This crucial issue
will be tentatively met in answering our fourth question, namely the
practical and theoretical reasons for the differences between Utpala and
Abhinava with regard to “aesthetics”. However, answers to questions two
and three are presently due first.

With regard to our question number 2, the one concerning the sources of
inspiration and the direct influences on what we can now call
Utpaladeva’s “aesthetics” and Abhinavagupta’s “art theory”, we have
already given a provisional and, in my opinion, quite plausible
response. On the one hand, Utpaladeva’s ecstatic aesthetics is part and
parcel of his larger philosophy, based on the revealed śaiva texts
hinging on the recognition of the absolute unity of all experience and
reality in the perfect totality that is the supreme consciousness of
Śiva. On the other, Abhinavagupta’s art theory is deeply rooted in the
speculations of the authors that preceded him in commenting on the
Nāṭyaśāstra and in trying to formulate a theoretical discourse that
could account for the specific experience one has while enjoying a work
of art. Furthermore, as it is widely acknowledged, Abhinavagupta’s
aesthetics does also maintain a strong śaiva tinge; it could not be
otherwise, but more on that later on.

With regard to our question number 3, the one concerning the reasons for
the significant difference in bulk and organization between Utpala’s and
Abhinava’s speculation on “aesthetics”, one has to admit that a thorny
issue did dissolve into thin air, as promised, by means of the
differentiation between “aesthetics” and “art theory” I have proposed.
Since Utpaladeva did not consider aesthetics as a separate domain, it is
quite obvious that he did not dedicate a specific work to this topic but
simply discussed the utmost significance of sensory experiences in
different passages of his works. On the contrary, Abhinavagupta could
not but dedicate specific treatises to the issue of art, especially in
so far as he did want to establish the experience of art as a sui
generis experience and even resorted to a somewhat different theoretical
background in order to account for its internal logic.

Finally, let us try to respond to our question number 4, the one
regarding the teleological ratio in Utpala’s and Abhinava’s theories
underlying the very reason and purpose for developing their theories.
Questions about purposes are often the most difficult to deal with, and
— at least in Abhinava’s more complex case — I cannot claim that my
proposals are more than tentative hypotheses.

As we have already hinted at before, Utpaladeva’s discourse on
perception is a necessary component of his broader philosophy, therefore
its existence is somehow self-justified. However, with regard to
Abhinavagupta, one might sensibly ask: Why did Abhinavagupta need to, or
at least, why did he choose to conceive an unprecedented theory of art
and, in addition, one that requires a theoretical framework that seems
partly divergent from his śaiva Weltanschauung?

As the spoiler-like subtitle of my paper has already proclaimed, my
tentative response is that Abhinavagupta’s aesthetics is consciously
devised as an ecumenical endeavour. In other words, he moves even
further along the path traced by his paramaguru Utpaladeva, an attitude
clearly described in a section of the blurb of the conference from which
the present proceedings stem:

The main aim of the Pratyabhijñā philosophers was to cause the Tantric
Śaiva sects to emerge from the dimension of restricted circles, often
devoted to transgressive practices, and establish themselves in the
stratum of social normality, by internalizing, or in any case
circumscribing, their own specific differences. Their addressees are not
the ascetics, but, typically, the householders.49

Abhinavagupta conquers, so to speak, another intellectual field,
constituted by both Nāṭyaśāstra and Alaṁkāraśāstra — two knowledge
systems he intended to accommodate and unify by colonizing them with his
speculative might, although this operation necessarily required a
watering-down of his extreme, often antinomic paramādvaita.

This might be the reason for the aforementioned, somewhat paradoxical
situation in Abhinavagupta’s works on art: the simultaneous presence of
concepts and speculations that do have a strong Tantric śaiva tinge
along with ideas and perspectives that clearly do not fit in a Tantric
śaiva world-view. On the basis of the ecumenical agenda that I propose
he had in mind, we might see the former aspect of Abhinavagupta’s
writings as the possible result of an active enterprise of colonization,
and the latter as a necessary backward step, i.e. the self-aware choice
of downplaying, or simply remaining silent about, the most extreme
features of his Tantric legacy — in particular the aspects of his
thought that could have been charged with the accusation of antinomism
(say, the centrality of “extreme sensory experience” and “desire”). Such
watering-down consists, therefore, in the partial — temporary, we might
say — acceptance of a frame of reference that might be considered
amenable to an audience larger than the comparatively small śaiva
community.

Buttressing the Paradox

As a sort of corollary and backstage to the current discourse, it is
important to present some evidence that might buttress the simultaneous
presence of contradictory features in Abhinavagupta’s works on art
theory, features that as yet have been only stated but not really
investigated, especially in so far as the non-śaiva ecumenical attitude
is concerned.

With regard to the well-known and often reiterated overtly śaiva
features, one might just mention the use of many “charged” terms such as
the already mentioned pratibhā, camatkāra, saṁvid and viśrānti, then —
more specifically — the designation of the aesthetic experience with
terms that elsewhere label the blissful unity with Śiva;50 the
parallelism between the experience of art and the experience of the
absolute;51 the introductory and concluding verses of the chapters of
both the Dhvanyāloka-Locana and the Abhinavabhāratī that unequivocally
refer to śaiva doctrinal and philosophical notions,52 and many more
items that one might add to this short and cursory list.53

On the other hand, the main feature that is indicative of Abhinava’s
ecumenical attitude is the very account of the nature of rasa that we
have sketchily illustrated earlier. This account necessarily entails an
implicit and, at least, partial acceptance of a demonization and
marginalization of sensory experience and desire. Such a theoretical
stance cannot but be in radical opposition to the śaiva valorization of
desire as a crucial element in both ontology and soteriology, a
valorization that Abhinavagupta clearly supports in his other works.54
Another possible hint at such an attitude is the choice of the term
ātman to identify the real essence of the individual, instead of using
the word aham, a term he prefers in his Tantric and philosophical works,
as it better expresses the intrinsically dynamic nature of
consciousness.55 Furthermore, as inherently cautious argumenta e
silentio, one can mention the absence of extremely “loaded” terms such
as pratyabhijñā or vimarśa, and — even more remarkably — the absence of
quotations from any śaiva scripture whatsoever. On the contrary, the
many quotations that buttress his arguments on issues of aesthetics (in
the sense of “art theory”) come mainly from very well-known “mainstream”
sources such as the Yoga-Sūtra, the Sāṁkhya-Kārikā, the Nyāya-Sūtra or
the Mānava-Dharmaśāstra. Furthermore, I argue that the mere choice of
writing about issues regarding literature, and the arts in general,
already entails an inbuilt ecumenical attitude, “because — as Bhoja
states in his Śr̥ṅgāra-Prakāśa, p. 398, ll.10-11 — literature is
thoroughly non-sectarian (sāhityasya sarvapārṣadatvāt)”.

What might be regarded as a direct proof of such an ecumenical approach
is the presence of some passages in both the Locana and the
Abhinavabhāratī, in which Abhinavagupta argues for the validity of his
interpretations on aesthetic issues even from the viewpoint of different
philosophical or doctrinal positions — and therefore, so to say, even
independently of their actual tenets. Equally important in support of
this view is the presence of some similar passages in which
Abhinavagupta refrains from indulging in the analysis of different
philosophical positions, in so far as they are considered irrelevant to
the aesthetic issues at stake. One might quote in extenso a significant
passage of the Abhinavabhāratī, where, after giving his interpretation
of a verse, Abhinavagupta adds:

Furthermore, in this regard, one could look at Vijñānavāda,56
dvidhābhidhāna,57 sphoṭatattva,58 Satkāryavāda,59 ekatvadarśana,60 etc.
However, we have not been taught to resort to the void exertion of
weighing up bits of knowledge that would prove useless for the subject
at issue. Hence, enough with it.61

Notwithstanding the possible — or impossible — identification of the
various schools hinted at here,62 the purport of this passage clearly
lies in the idea that the analysis of rasa — or, at least, of the point
under discussion here — can be considered valid according to all the
different ways of interpreting reality, i.e. according to all traditions
of thought.63 Another passage that possibly harbours a similar implicit
rationale is Abh ad NŚ 6.15-16, vol. 1, p. 266 where the relation
between the main, great rasa and the various — implicitly secondary —
rasas is compared to the relation between word-meaning and
sentence-meaning according to the various theories of linguistic
signification usually upheld in classical Indian philosophy:

Furthermore, because of such a great rasa that is the principal one, the
other rasas — seen in interpenetration with the [respective] Stable
States — can be described as unreal, as in the doctrine of sphoṭa; as
real in that they have the nature of instruments, as in the doctrine of
anvitābhidhāna; or [as real] in that they have the nature of parts of
that whole [which is the great rasa], as in the doctrine of
abhihitānvaya (tataś ca mukhyabhūtāt mahārasāt sphoṭadr̥śīvāsatyāni vā,
anvitābhidhānadr̥śīvopāyātmakāni satyāni vā, abhihitānvayadr̥śīva
tatsamudāyirūpāṇi64 vā, rasāntarāṇi bhāvābhiniveśadr̥ṣṭāni rūpyante).65

Again, beyond the implicit technicalities of the various theories evoked
by Abhinavagupta,66 the main point of the passage seems again to justify
the “inter-disciplinary” validity of his interpretation of rasa-related
issues.

Therefore, if it is appropriate to generalize the purport of these and
similar passages, this sort of almost blatant statements concerning the
cross-philosophical (or, one might say, cross-sectarian) validity of
Abhinavagupta’s aesthetics amounts to the very statement of the autonomy
of the aesthetical discourse proper, at least in my understanding of the
issue.

To conclude the list of the pieces of evidence regarding Abhinavagupta’s
ecumenical stance in aesthetic matters, one might quote the “indirect”
evidence that is the very success of his theories that won general
acceptance, at least in their main features, among many later authors of
Nāṭyaśāstra and Alaṁkāraśāstra, regardless of their varied
philosophical-cum-religious affiliation.67

To put it otherwise, my contention is that, if one were to read
Abhinavagupta’s Dhvanyāloka-Locana and his Abhinavabhāratī without
knowing anything about Abhinavagupta as a Tantric master and as the main
exponent of a complex monistic philosophy based on an idea of the
absolute as an intrinsically dynamic and desire-ridden reality, one
could not recognize him as such. One could only surmise his Tantric
śaiva affiliation from the evidence gathered from the introductory and
the final verses that frame all the chapters of his works. One might
certainly not look for a strictly śaiva rationale of his aesthetic
issues, as nothing would point to this kind of interpretation (although
nothing would parade against it either).

However, to really conclude this digressional section, one should admit
that the hermeneutical proposal of an ecumenical attitude in
Abhinavagupta’s works on aesthetics is, for the time being, highly
tentative and intrinsically provisional. Its validity can be definitely
ascertained only by means of a complete scrutiny of the Abhinavabhāratī
and the Dhvanyāloka-Locana, a thorough investigation of Abhinavagupta’s
philosophical and Tantric works, and a non-cursory analysis of the many
authors who accepted and developed the main tenets of Abhinavagupta’s
Rasa Theory.

Concluding Remarks

Dousing or fanning the fire of desire?

To go back to the main issue of the present endeavour and sum up my main
thesis, it should now be apparent that the thinkers of Kashmir treated
so far explicitly recognized the centrality of desire and sensory
perceptions in the human experience of reality and dealt with their
overwhelming presence and force by dint of two different paths: the
“defusing desire” strategy and the “detonating desire” strategy. On the
one hand, the approach of “defusing desire” is pursued by Abhinavagupta
in his works on art theory, as he was implicitly following the lead of
what has been conditionally called the “mainstream” approach of
classical Indian thought to the issue of desire, i.e. its demonization,
especially with regard to any progress on the soteriological path. This
was, in my interpretation, a conscious choice, in so far as such a
strategic, ecumenical move would have let him reach the widest possible
audience and establish his aesthetic theories as “non-sectarian” and
hence “universally” appealing. On the other hand, the approach of
“detonating desire” is preferred in both Utpaladeva’s writings and
Abhinavagupta’s other works, those not focused on the experience of art,
in accordance with the main tenets of their Tantric tradition, in which
the tremendous and all-encompassing power of sensory experiences and
desire is ridden as an untamed stallion in an ever increasingly wilder
and more frenzied journey of enjoyments and sensory fruitions, up to the
very detonation of experience that is the final release and
identification with the supreme consciousness of Śiva.

* I am deeply grateful to Raffaele Torella, Vincenzo Vergiani, Elisa
Ganser, Elisa Freschi and Alessandro Graheli for their precious remarks
and suggestions. Any mistakes, of course, are mine alone.

Bibliographical References

Primary Literature

Abhinavagupta, 1918-38, Tantrāloka with Commentary by Rājānaka
Jayaratha, ed. M.K. Shastri, Allahabad/Srinagar/Bombay: Kashmir Series
of Texts and Studies XXIII, XXVIII, XXX, XXXVI, XXXV, XXIX, XLI, XLVII,
LIX, LII, LVII, LVIII.

———, 1921, Mālinīvijayavārttika, ed. Madhusudan Kaul Shastri, Srinagar:
Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies XXXII.

———, 1938-43, Īśvarapratyabhijñāvivr̥tivimarśinī, ed. Madhusudan Kaul
Shastri, Bombay: Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies, I-III.

———, 1940, Dhvanyāloka-Locana, ed. Paṭṭābhirāma Śāstrī, Benares: Kashi
Sanskrit Series 135.

———, 1985, Gītārthasaṁgraha, ed. S. Sankaranarayanan, Tirupati: Oriental
Research Institute.

———, 1998, Abhinavabhāratī, ed. R.S. Nagar, Delhi: Parimal Publications,
4 vols.

Ānandavardhana, 1940, Dhvanyāloka, ed. Paṭṭābhirāma Śāstrī, Benares:
Kashi Sanskrit Series 135.

Bhāmaha, 1970, Kāvyālaṁkāra, ed. and tr. P.V. Naganatha Sastry, Delhi:
Motilal Banarsidass.

Bhaṭṭa Nārāyaṇa, 1918, Stava-Chintāmaṇi, with Commentary by Kṣemarāja,
ed. with notes by Mukunda Rama Shastri, Srinagar: Kashmir Series of
Texts and Studies X.

Bharata, 1998, Nāṭyaśāstra, ed. R.S. Nagar, Delhi: Parimal Publications,
4 vols.

Daṇḍin, 1938, Kāvyādarśa, ed. Pt. Rangacharya Raddi Shastri, Poona:
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute.

Kṣemarāja, 1911, Śivasūtravimarśinī, ed. J.C. Chatterji, Srinagar:
Kashmitr Series of Texts and Studies I.

Somānanda, 1934, Śivadr̥ṣṭi, with Utpaladeva’s Vr̥tti, ed. Madhusudhan
Kaul Shastri, Srinagar: Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies LIV.

Udbhaṭa, 1925, Kāvyālaṁkārasārasaṁgraha, with the Laghuvr̥tti of
Pratīhārendurāja, ed. Narayana Daso Banhatti, Poona: Bombay Sanskrit and
Prakrit Series.

Utpaladeva, 2000, Śivastrotrāvalī, with the Commentary of Kṣemarāja, ed.
with Hindi commentary by Swami Lakshmana Joo, Jammu/ Srinagar/New Delhi:
Ishwar Ashram Trust.

Vāmanadatta, Svabodhodayamañjarī (see Torella 2000).

Vijñānabhairava, ed. Mukunda Rama Shastri, Bombay: Kashmir Series of
Texts and Studies VIII, 1918.

Secondary Literature

Aiyar, K.A., 1939, “Pratibhā as the Meaning of a Sentence”, in
Proceedings and Transactions of the Tenth All-India Oriental Conference,
Tirupati, pp. 326-32.

Amaladass, A., 1984, Philosophical Implications of Dhvani: Experience of
Symbol Language in Indian Aesthetics, Vienna: De Nobili Research
Library.

Bailly, C. Rhodes, 1987, Shaiva Devotional Songs of Kashmir. A
Translation and Study of Utpaladeva’s Shivastotravali, Delhi: Sri
Satguru Publications.

Bansat-Boudon, L., 1992, Poétique du théâtre indien. Lectures du
Nāṭyaśāstra, Paris: Publication de l’Ecole Française d’Extrême Orient.

Bäumer, B., 1997, “Aesthetics of Mysticism or Mysticism of Aesthetics?:
The Approach of Kashmir Śaivism”, in B. Bäumer (ed.) Mysticism in
Shaivism and Christianity, Delhi: Abhishiktananda Society.

———, 2003a, Vijñāna-Bhairava: Das Göttliche Bewusstsein, Grafing:
Edition Adyar.

———, 2003b, “Beauty as Ānandaśakti in Kashmir Saivism”, in Saundarya:
The Perception and Practice of Beauty in India, ed. H.V. Paranjape, New
Delhi: Samvad India Foundation.

———, 2008, “Light and Reflection: The Metaphysical Background of
Aesthetics in Kaśmīr Śaivism”, in Vatsyayan and Chattopadhyaya, (eds.),
2008: 127-47.

Bhattacarya, K., 1972, “Śāntarasa et Advaita”, Journal Asiatique, 160:
89-105.

Bhattacharya, S.P., 1976, Śānta Rasa and Its Scope in Literature,
Calcutta: Sanskrit College.

Biardeau, M., 1995, L’Hinduisme. Anthropologie d’une Civilisation,
Paris: Flammarion.

Bilimoria, P. and A. Wenta, eds., 2015, Emotions in Indian
Thought-Systems, Routledge.

Boccali, G. and R. Torella, eds., 2007, Passioni d’Oriente. Eros ed
emozioni in India e Tibet, Torino: Einaudi.

Bonnet R., 1989, Shivastotravali. Les Hymnes de Louange a Shiva, Paris:
Maisonneuve.

Brodbeck, S., 2010, “Review of Christopher G. Framarin, Desire and
Motivation in Indian Philosophy, 2009”, Religious Studies, 46: 135-40.

Bronner, Y., 2012, “A Question of Priority: Revisiting the
Bhāmaha–Daṇḍin Debate”, Journal of Indian Philosophy, 40(1): 67-118.

Cahill, T., 2004, An Annotated Bibliography of the Alaṁkāraśāstra,
Varanasi: Indica Books.

Chakrabarti, A., 2005, “The Repose of the Heart: A Phenomenological
Analysis of the Concept of Viśrānti”, in Das and Furlinger 2005: 27-36.

Christie, E., 1979, “Indian Philosophers on Poetic Imagination
(Pratibhā)”, Journal of Indian Philosophy, 7: 153-207.

Cuneo, D., 2007, “The Emotional Sphere in the Light of the
Abhinavabhāratī”, Rivista di Studi Orientali, 80: 21-39 (published in
2009).

———, 2008-09, “Emotions without Desire: An Interpretive Appraisal of
Abhinavagupta’s Rasa Theory. Annotated Translation of the First, Sixth
and Seventh Chapters of Abhinavagupta’s Abhinavabhāratī”, unpublished
Ph.D. thesis, ‘Sapienza’ University of Rome.

———, 2013, “Unfuzzying the Fuzzy: The Distinction Between Rasas and
Bhāvas in Abhinavagupta and Bharata”, in Puṣpikā: Tracing Ancient India
Through Texts and Traditions — Contributions to Current Research in
Indology, vol. I, ed. Nina Mirnig, Péter-Dániel Szántó and Michael
Williams, Oxford: Oxbow Books.

Das, S. and E. Furlinger, eds., 2005, Sāmarasya: Studies in Indian Arts,
Philosophy and Interreligious Dialogue, New Delhi: D.K. Printworld.

De, S.K., 1959a, Some Problems of Sanskrit Poetics, Calcutta: Firma K.L.
Mukhopadhyay.

———, 1959b, “The Śānta Rasa in the Nāṭya-Śāstra and the Daśa-Rūpaka”, in
De, 1959a: 139-43.

Deutsch, E. and R. Bontekoe, eds., 1977, A Companion to World
Philosophies, Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers.

Fernández, R., 2001, “The Play of Freedom: An Aesthetic Approach to
Kashmir Śaivism”, in Marchianò and Milani, 2001: 125-34.

Framarin, C.G., 2009, Desire and Motivation in Indian Philosophy,
London: Routledge.

Fürlinger, E., 2009, The Touch of Śakti: A Study in Non-Dualistic Trika
Śaivism of Kashmir, New Delhi: D.K. Printworld.

Gerow, E., 1977, Indian Aesthetics: A Philosophical Survey, in Deutsch
and Bontekoe (eds.), pp. 304-23.

———, 1994, “Abhinavagupta’s Aesthetics as a Speculative Paradigm”,
Journal of American Oriental Society, 114: 186-208.

Gerow, E. and A. Aklujkar, 1972, “On Śānta Rasa in Sanskrit Poetics”,
Journal of the American Oriental Society, 92: 80-87.

Gnoli, R., 1968, The Aesthetic Experience according to Abhinavagupta,
Varanasi: Chowkamba Sanskrit Studies, 72, 2nd edn.

———, 1985, Il Commento di Abhinavagupta alla Parātriṁśikā
(Parātriṁśikātattvavivaraṇa), traduzione e testo, Roma: Istituto
italiano per il Medio ed Estremo Oriente.

———, 1999, Abhinavagupta. Luce dei Tantra, Milano: Adelphi.

Gonda, J., 1963, The Vision of the Vedic Poets, The Hague: Mouton & Co.

Hanneder, J., 1998, Abhinavagupta’s Philosophy of Revelation, Groningen:
Egbert Forsten.

Hobart, A. and B. Kapferer, 2005, Aesthetics in Performance: Formations
of Symbolic Construction and Experience, New York: Bergahn Books.

Hulin, M., 1978, Le principe de l’égo dans la pensée indienne classique:
la notion d’ahaṁkāra, Paris: Publications de l’Institut de Civilisation
Indienne.

Ingalls, D.H.H. ed., 1990, The Dhvanyāloka of Ānandavardhana with the
Locana of Abhinavagupta, tr. D.H.H. Ingalls, J.M. Masson and M.V.
Patwardhan, London: Harvard Oriental Series 49.

Iyer, K.A.S., 1980-81, “Bhartr̥hari on Sentence”, Adyar Library Bulletin,
44-45: 15-49.

Jhanji, R., 2003, “Abhinavagupta’s Concept of Pratibha”, Sandhana, 3(2):
67-78.

Johnson, W.J., 1994, The Bhagavad-Gita, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Joshi, S.D., 1977, “Bhartr̥hari’s Concept of Pratibhā: A Theory on the
Nature of Language Acquisition”, in Kumar et al. 1977.

Kaviraj, G., 1923-24, “The Doctrine of Pratibhā in Indian Philosophy”,
Annals of the Bhandarkar Research Institute, 5: 1-18; 6: 113-32.

Kotru, N.K., 1985, Sivastotravali of Utpaladeva: Sanskrit Text With
Introduction, English Translation and Glossary, Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass.

Krishnamoorthy, K., 1944, “Observations of Sanskrit Literary Critics on
Poetic Imagination”, Poona Orientalist, 9: 123-32.

———, 1980-81, “The Nature of Creative Pratibhā according to Kuntaka”,
Indologica Taurinensia, 8-9: 223-32.

Kulkarni, V.M. (ed.), 1986a, Some Aspects of the Rasa Theory, Delhi:
Bhogilal Leherchand Institute of Indology.

———, 1986b, “Abhinavagupta on the Alaukika Nature of Rasa”, in Kulkarni
(ed.), 1986a: 28-42.

Kumar, C.S., R.N. Dandekar, V. Raghavan, H.P. Schmidt, T.G. Mainkar,
S.N. Gajendragadkar, 1977, Some Aspects of Indo-Iranian Literary and
Cultural Traditions: Commemoration Volume of Dr. V.G. Paranjpe, Delhi:
Ajanta Publication.

Kunjunni Raja, K., 1963, Indian Theories of Meaning, Adyar Library and
Research Centre, Madras.

Lakshman Joo, S., 2008, Śivastotrāvalī of Utpaladeva: A Mystical Hymn of
Kashmir, tr. and ed. Ashok Kaul, with musical rendering in a CD by Manju
Sundaram, Foreword by Prabha Devi and Introduction by Bettina Bäumer,
New Delhi: D.K. Printworld.

Larson, G.J., 1969, Classical Sāṁkhya, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.

Marchianò, G. and R. Milani, eds., 2001, Frontiers of Transculturality
in Contemporary Aesthetics, Torino: Trauben.

Marjanovic, B., 2011, Stavacintāmaṇi of Bhaṭṭa Nārāyaṇa with the
Commentary by Kṣemarāja, Varanasi: Indica.

Masson, J.M., 1975, “When Is a Poem Artificial?: A Note on the
Ghaṭakar-paravivr̥ti”, Journal of the American Oriental Society, 95(2):
264-65.

Masson, J.M. and M.V. Patwardhan, 1969, Śāntarasa and Abhinavagupta’s
Philosophy of Aesthetics, Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Series 9.

———, 1970, Aesthetic Rapture, 2 vols., Poona: Deccan College.

Matilal, B.K., 1986, Perception: An Essay on Classical Indian Theories
of Knowledge, Oxford: Clarendon Press.

McCrea, L.J., 2008, The Teleology of Poetics in Medieval Kashmir,
Cambridge, MA and London: Harvard University Press.

Oberhammer, G. (ed.), 1998, Studies in Hinduism II, Miscellanea to the
Phenomenon of Tantras, Wien: Österreichische Akademie der
Wissenschaften.

Pandey, K.C., 1944, “Dhanañjaya and Abhinavagupta on Śāntarasa”,
Proceedings of the All India Oriental Conference, 12: 326-30.

———, 1963, Comparative Aesthetics, 2 vols., Varanasi: Chowkhamba
Sanskrit Series Office.

Pandit, B.N., 1997, Some Principles of Kashmir Śaivism, New Delhi:
Munshiram Manoharlal.

Parlier, B., 1975, La Ghaṭakarparavivr̥ti d’Abhinavagupta, Paris:
Institut de civilisation indienne.

Pollock, S., 2010a, Epic and Argument in Sanskrit Literary History:
Essays in Honor of Robert P. Goldman, New Delhi: Manohar.

———, 2010b, “What Was Bhaṭṭa Nāyaka Saying?: The Hermeneutical
Transformation of Indian Aesthetics”, in Pollock 2010a: 143-84.

Potter, K.H. ed., 1981, Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies, Advaita
Vedānta up to Śaṅkara and His Pupils, Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press. (Contributors: Edeltraud Harzer, S. Subrahmanya Sastri
and Allen W. Thrasher.)

Raghavan, V., 1967, The Number of Rasas, Madras: Adyar Library and
Research Centre.

Rao, S., 1998, Perceptual Error: The Indian Theories, Honolulu:
University of Hawai’i Press.

Sathaye, A., 2010, “The Production of Unpleasurable Rasas in the
Sanskrit Dramas of Ārya Kṣemīśvara”, Journal of the American Oriental
Society, 130(3): 361-84.

Schmithausen, L., 1965, Maṇḍanamiśra’s Vibhramavivekaḥ. Mit einer Studie
zur Entwiklung der inischen Irrtumlehre, Wien: Österreichische Akademie
der Wissenschaften.

Sen, R.K., 1965, “Imagination in Coleridge and Abhinavagupta: A Critical
Analysis of Christian and Shaiva Standpoints”, Journal of Aesthetics and
Art Criticism, 24: 97-107.

Sharma, B.N.K., 1961, History of the Dvaita School of Vedānta and Its
Literature, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.

Shulman, D., 2005, “The Buzz of God and the Click of Delight”, in Hobart
and Kapferer 2005: 43-63.

Shulman, D., 2008, “Illumination, Imagination, Creativity: Rājaśekhara,
Kuntaka, and Jagannātha on Pratibhā”, Journal of Indian Philosophy, 36:
481-505.

———, 2010, “Notes on Camatkāra” in Shulman 2010a: 249-75.

——— ed., 2010a, Language, Ritual and Poetics in Ancient India and Iran:
Studies in Honor of Shaul Migron, Jerusalem: The Israel Academy of
Sciences and Humanities.

Siauve, S., 1968, La Doctrine de Madhva, Pondichéry: Institut Françias
d’Indologie.

Silburn, L., 1964, La Bhakti: le Stavacintāmaṇi de Bhaṭṭanārāyaṇa,
Paris: E. de Boccard.

Sreekantiya, T.N., 1937, “Imagination in Indian Poetics”, Indian
Historical Quarterly, 13: 59-84.

Tieken, H., 2001, “The Pūrvaraṅga, the Prastāvanā, and the Sthāpaka”,
Wiener Zeitschrift der Kunde Sudasiens, 45: 91-124.

Tola, F. and C. Dragonetti, 1990, “Some Remarks on Bhartr̥hari’s Concept
of Pratibhā”, Journal of Indian Philosophy, 18: 95-112.

Torella, R., 1998, “The Kañcukas in the Śaiva and Vaiṣṇava Tantric
Traditions: A Few Considerations between Theology and Grammar”, in
Oberhammer, pp. 55-86.

———, 2000, “The Svabodhodayamañjarī, or How to Suppress the Mind with No
Effort”, in Tsuchida and Wezler, pp. 387-410.

———, 2002, The Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikā of Utpaladeva with the Author’s
Vr̥tti, Critical Edition and Annotated Translation, Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass.

———, 2004, “How Is Verbal Signification Possible, Understanding
Abhinavagupta’s Reply”, Journal of Indian Philosophy, 32: 173-88.

———, 2007a, “Passioni ed emozioni nelle filosofie e nelle religioni
dell’India”, in Boccali and Torella 2007: 22-32.

———, 2007b, “L’invenzione del desiderio”, in Boccali: and Torella 2007:
61-92.

———, 2009, “Introduzione: Passioni ed emozioni nelle tradizioni
filosofico-religiose dell’India premoderna”, Rivista di Studi Orientali,
80: 11-20.

———, 2011, The Philosophical Traditions of India: An Appraisal,
Varanasi: Indica Books.

———, 2013, Gli Aforismi di Śiva con il commento di Kṣemarāja
(Śivasūtravimarśinī), Milano: Adelphi.

Tsuchida, R. and A. Wezler (eds.), 2000, Harānandalaharī. Studies in
Honour of Prof. Minoru Hara on His Seventieth Birthday, Reinbeck: Velag
für Orientalistische Fachpublikationen.

Vatsyayan, K. and D.P. Chattopadhyaya, eds., 2008, Aesthetic Theories
and Forms in Indian Tradition, vol. VI, part I: History of Science,
Philosophy and Culture in Indian Civilization, New Delhi: Munshiram
Manoharlal.

Webster, D., 2005, The Philosophy of Desire in the Buddhist Pali Canon,
London: Routledge.

Williams, P., 1989, Mahāyāna Buddhism: The Doctrinal Foundations, New
York: Routledge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 As Gerow 1994: 186 puts it: “Since the publication of K.C. Pandey’s
pioneering Indian Aesthetics, one of the leitmotifs of scholarship on
Abhinavagupta’s remarkable aesthetic theory has been commentary on his
‘philosophical’ basis”. In particular, the philosophical “basis” of
Abhinavagupta’s Rasa Theory is the speculative assumption of Śāntarasa
and Abhinavagupta’s Philosophy, a very important work by Masson and
Patwardhan (1969). On the contrary, Gerow (1994) argues for the somewhat
“opposite” strategy of interpretation, namely, he argues for the
tenability and usefulness of examining Abhinavagupta’s metaphysical
theses in the light of his aesthetic speculations. As it will be clear
later, my proposal of interpretation is different still.

2 On camatkāra in secondary literature, see also Gnoli 1968: xlv-xlvii,
Gnoli 1985: 32, fn. 90; Hulin 1978: 343-58; Masson and Patwardhan 1969:
46; 1970: 17-18 and notes; Shulman 2005, 2010. For a bird’s-eye view on
camatkāra as an aesthetic concept after Abhinavagupta, see Sathaye 2010:
378-80.

3 See, for instance, Amaladass 1984. For a general bibliography on
dhvani, see Cahill 2004, sub voce.

4 The bibliography on pratibhā is extremely rich. On pratibhā in its
philosophical (and especially linguistic-philosophical) incarnation, see
Kaviraj 1923-24; Aiyar 1939; Joshi 1977; Christie 1979; Iyer 1980-81;
Tola and Dragonetti 1990. On pratibhā in its aesthetical incarnation,
see Sreekantiya 1937; Krishnamoorthy 1944; Gonda 1963: 318-48; Sen 1965;
Krishnamoorthy 1980-81; Jhanji 2003 and Shulman 2008.

5 See, for instance, Chakrabarti 2005.

6 Specifically, I am referring to Bӓumer 1997, 2003b and 2008.

7 Specifically — and I hope exhaustively — the occurrences are to be
found in the Vr̥tti ad Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikā 1.5.11, 4.1, 4.6; in the
Śivastotrāvalī 5.15, 13.14; in the Vr̥tti ad Somānanda’s Śivadr̥ṣṭi 1.8,
1.38.

8 Besides the already quoted articles by Bettina Bäumer that deal both
directly and indirectly with the text, the bibliography of translations
and studies on the Śivastotrāvalī is comparatively small. See, in
particular, Kotru 1985; Bailly 1987; Bonnet 1989 and Lakshman Joo 2008.
Some interesting remarks and analyses on the text are to be found also
in Fürlinger 2009: 71-132. The translation by Bailly has become so far
the standard English version of the text. Nevertheless, whenever
Bailly’s translation does not appropriately suit the purposes of the
discourse at hand, my own translation will be supplied. For reference
purposes, Bailly’s rendering will be offered at any rate in the
footnotes.

9 See, for instance, Śivastotrāvalī 2.21:

mumukṣujanasevyāya sarvasantāpahāriṇe ।

namo vitatalāvaṇyavarāya varadāya te ।।

The translation by Bailly reads as follows: “May you be glorified, O
Granter of Boons, / Who are served by those aspiring for liberation, /
and whose boundless depths of beauty / Dispel all afflictions.”

and Śivastotrāvalī 13.14-15, quoted in extenso in the following note.

10 Śivastotrāvalī 13.14-15:

yat samastasubhagārthavastuṣu sparśamātravidhinā camatkr̥tim ।

tāṁ samarpayati tena te vapuḥ pūjayanty acalabhaktiśālinaḥ ।।

sphārayasy akhilam ātmanā sphuran viśvam āmr̥śasi rūpam āmr̥śan ।

yat svayaṁ nijarasena ghurṇase tat samullasati bhāvamaṇḍalam ।।

It is worth noticing that, in translating the root āmrś- with the
not-too obvious “delighting/filling with delight”, the translator had
probably in mind the commentary by Kṣemarāja: tathā svarūpam āmr̥śan —
nijaṁ svarūpaṁ camatkurvan nikhilaṁ viśvam āmr̥śasi āsvādanena
ānandaghanaṁ ghaṭasi.

11 I am obviously oversimplifying the issue for the sake of expounding
my previous, implicitly naïve, line of reasoning.

12 Another “aesthetical” work of Abhinavagupta — worth mentioning at
least in a footnote, although it will not be dealt with in the present
article — is the Ghaṭakarparakulakavivr̥ti (Commentary on the kulaka
called the Fragments of a Pot), a commentary on a short poem attributed
to Kālidāsa. For a translation thereof, see Parlier 1975. For a partial
study thereof, see Masson 1975.

13 Actually, only one single instance of the term alaukika rasa is
present in the whole Śivastotrāvalī, i.e. Śivastotrāvalī 1.21.

14 Furthermore, as far as the Sanskrit knowledge system is concerned,
there is practically no term for the concept of aesthetics proper, i.e.
for a discourse on sensory perception, although the issue of perception
and the senses play an absolutely central role in practically all Indian
traditions (see, for instance, Matilal 1986 for the discussion on the
centrality of pratyakṣa “perception” as the main pramāṇa “means of valid
knowledge”). On the contrary, as far as the existence of an art theory
is concerned, one finds, since a comparatively early date, the
speculations on “poetry”, i.e. the already quoted Alaṁkāraśāstra (the
first extant treatises are Bhāmaha’s Kāvyālaṁkār̥a and Daṇḍin’s
Kāvyādarśa, both seventh century ce; see Bronner 2012 for the thorny
issue of their theoretical relation and respective dating), and even
earlier speculations on “drama”, i.e. the aforementioned Nāṭyaśāstra
(Bharata’s Nāṭyaśāstra, tentatively dated between the second century bce
and the second century ce). Furthermore, it is precisely with
Abhinavagupta’s overarching theoretical narrative that these
speculations converge completely and become, at least theoretically, the
standard paradigm for the interpretation and comprehension of all
possible art forms (a partial fusion and somewhat consequential
innovation already occurred in Ānandavardhana’s Dhvanyāloka; see McCrea
2008). Therefore, also from an emic perspective (an insider’s point of
view, if you prefer) it is appropriate to keep separate the two
mentioned theoretical domains, “aesthetics proper” and “art theory”, in
so far as the former has no direct correspondence in the Sanskrit
knowledge system while the latter does, but only to a certain extent
(the full inclusion of arts such as sculpture and painting is late and
problematic) and only from a certain point of time onwards. A somewhat
dated but synthetic and still interesting introduction to classical
Indian aesthetics — “art theory” — as a whole is Gerow 1977.

15 As far as I know, there is no overall study on the concept of desire
in the Tantric tradition, let alone in the whole culture of pre-modern
India, and no systematic study to assess the status quaestionis. The
2015 volume by Purushottama Bilimoria and Aleksandra Wenta is the first
attempt at filling this gap in scholarship. Biardeau 1995 is a general
introduction to the Indian tradition, which deepens the notion of
“desire” beyond the common practice of introductory texts. A recent,
though not completely satisfying, book on desire in Indian philosophy is
Framarin 2009, to be read together with the review by Brodbeck 2010. As
far as the Buddhist Pāli Canon is concerned, see the interesting Webster
2005. Many more essays on single aspects of the concept of “desire”
might be quoted. In particular, a recent Italian book Boccali and
Torella 2007 and a recent issue, volume 80, of the Rivista di Studi
Orientali 2007 (published in 2009) are wholly dedicated to emotions and
desire in South Asia, but not only with regard to the Tantric
traditions. However, on the pivotal role played by desire as an
unavoidable force in the structure of the human being and of the whole
universe according to many Tantric currents, a passage from Torella’s
introduction to the aforementioned journal issue might well be quoted:
“L’universo — e qui è ancora il grande Abhinavagupta a parlare
(Tantrāloka 9.62) — è stato creato appunto per soddisfare le anime nelle
quali una frenesia (lolikā), una febbrile smania di fruizioni è stata
suscitata. Questa sottile frenesia non ha contorni né orizzonti, è per
così dire uno “stato desiderante” senza oggetto (niṣkarmā abhilāṣitā),
uno stato di indefinita aspettazione (Jayaratha: lolikā svātmani
sākāṅkṣateva) [The universe — it is again the great Abhinavagupta who
does the talking — has been created just to satisfy the souls in which a
frenzy (lolikā), a hectic crave for fruitions, has been kindled. This
subtle frenzy has no outline, nor horizons — it is, so to speak, an
objectless “desiring state” (niṣkarmā abhilāṣitā), a state of indefinite
expectancy (Jayaratha: lolikā svātmani sākāṅkṣateva)].” Along similar
lines, on rāga, again “attachment”, “primeval desire” as one of the
kañcukas (cuirasses) that both enable the single soul to act in the
world and prevent it from instantly realizing its unity with the supreme
consciousness, see Torella 1998 and 2007b.

16 By commenting saṁvinmārgo nīlapītādibodharūpaḥ panthaḥ, Kṣemarāja
points out that the cognitions Utpaladeva is talking about are, clearly,
sensory cognitions.

17 Śivastotrāvalī 1.10:

sarva eva bhavallābhahetur bhaktimatāṁ vibho ।

saṁvinmārgo ’yam āhlādaduḥkhamohais tridhā sthitaḥ ।।

The translation by Bailly reads as follows: “The path of the senses is
threefold, / Marked by pleasure, pain and delusion. / For the devotee
this is the path / That leads to your attainment.”

18 Śivastotrāvalī 16.26:

yato ’si sarvaśobhānāṁ prasavāvanir īśa tat ।

tvayi lagnam anarghaṁ syād ratnam vā yadi vā tr̥ṇam ।।

The translation by Bailly reads as follows: “You are the fountainhead, O
Lord, / Of everything beautiful. / All things become precious at your
touch / Whether gem or piece of straw.”

19 Śivastotrāvalī 6.9:

kāṁ bhūmikāṁ nādhiśeṣe kiṁ tat syād yan na te vapuḥ ।

Translation by Bailly.

20 Śivastotrāvalī 3.11:

garjāmi bata nr̥tyāmi pūrṇā mama manorathāḥ ।

svāmī mamaiṣa ghaṭito yat tvam atyantarocanaḥ ।।

Translation by Bailly, slightly modified.

21 Śivastotrāvalī 13.8:

tattadindriyamukhena santataṁ yuṣmadarcanarasāyanāsavam ।

sarvabhāvacaṣakeṣu pūriteṣv āpibann api bhaveyam unmadaḥ ।।

Translation by Bailly.

22 Śivastotrāvalī 8.3:

lokavad bhavatu me viṣayeṣu sphīta eva bhagavan paritarṣaḥ ।

kevalaṁ tava śarīratayaitān lokayeyam aham astavikalpaḥ ।।

The translation by Bailly reads as follows: “Let me, like other people,
/ Yearn deeply for the objects of the world, / But allow me to view them
as your form, O Lord, without contradiction.” Quite pregnant is
Kṣemarāja’s commentary on astavikalpa, i.e. galitabhedapratipatti.

23 Śivastotrāvalī 8.5:

nijanijeṣu padeṣu patantv imāḥ karaṇavr̥ttaya ullasitā mama ।

kṣaṇam apīśa manāg api maiva bhūt tvadavibhedarasakṣati-sāhasam ।।

Translation by Bailly, slightly modified.

24 Kṣemarāja’s commentary on ŚSĀ 8.5 also stresses the same point by
glossing karaṇavr̥ttayaḥ with cakṣurādisaṁviddevyaḥ.

25 Śivastotrāvalī 2.23:

sukhapradhānasaṁvedyasambhogair bhajate ca yat ।

tvām eva tasmai ghorāya śaktivr̥ndāya te namaḥ ।।

The translation by Bailly runs as follows: “Homage to your terrifying
sense-goddesses! / Whatever they enjoy / Is all in offering to you.”

Kṣemarāja clarifies the already patent reference: śaktivr̥ndaṁ
saṁviddevīcakram (the multitude of powers is the circle of the goddesses
of consciousness).

26 For the text and the translation of the Vijñāna-Bhairava, see, for
instance, Bӓumer 2003a. On very similar teachings, see the
Svabodhodayamañjarī of Vāmanadatta, edited and translated in Torella
2000. Along similar lines, see the passage on the sensory organs of
Abhinavagupta’s Bhagavadgītārtha-Saṁgraha and the passage on the modes
of fruition in Kṣemarāja’s Śivasūtravimarśinī, both translated and
glossed in Torella 2007b: 82-84.

27 Vijñāna-Bhairava 117:

yatra yatrākṣamārgeṇa caitanyaṁ vyajyate vibhoḥ ।

tasya tanmātradharmitvāc cillayād bharitātmatā ।।

28 For the study of the passage in the light of the commentaries, see
Torella 2013: 210-15.

29 A recent translation of both Bhaṭṭa Nārāyaṇa’s text and Kṣemarāja’s
commentary has been published by Marjanovic 2011. An old and important
translation of the hymn is by Silburn 1964.

30 Marjanovic 2011: 19 dates Bhaṭṭa Nārāyaṇa as living between the late
ninth and the early tenth century ce, while Silburn 1964: 8 assigns him
to the ninth century, possibly under the reign of Avantivarman (ce
855-83). In both cases, it is probable that Utpaladeva might have known
his work.

31 The following are two other interesting verses from the same text by
Bhaṭṭa Nārāyaṇa that might be quoted in this respect, specifically on
painting as a metaphor of the world (jagaccitra):

Stavacintāmaṇi 9:

nirupādānasambhāram abhittāv eva tanvate ।

jagaccitraṁ namas tasmai kalāślāghyāya śūline ।।

“Adoration to [Śiva] the bearer of the trident, praised thanks to its
art [or to the digits of the moon on his forehead], for he draws the
world picture even with no canvas, no material cause and no instrument.”

Translation in Bӓumer 2008, slightly modified.

Stavacintāmaṇi 80:

muhur muhur jagaccitrasyānyānyāṁ sthitim ūhitum ।

śaktir yā te tayā nātha ko manasvī na vismitaḥ ।।

“O Lord, is there any sensible man who is not amazed by your power,
capable to conceive, at every moment, the ever new conditions of the
world picture?”

Translation in Bӓumer 2008, slightly modified. It is worth noticing that
Kṣemarāja, in his commentary on this verse, does not refer to the
jagaccitra as a metaphorical expression drawn from the field of the
arts, as he does — at least implicitly — in the case of his commentary
on verse 59.

32 Bhaṭṭa Nārāyaṇa’s Stavacintāmaṇi 59:

visr̥ṣṭānekasadbījagarbhaṁ trailokyanāṭakam ।

prastāvya hara saṁhartuṁ tvattaḥ ko ’nyaḥ kaviḥ kṣamaḥ ।।

In this verse, the grand metaphor of “the world as drama” is supported
by the use of some technical terms borrowed from the theatrical domain,
imbued with a double meaning, on one side, cosmological, and theatrical,
on the other (such as bīja, the first of the “five elements of dramatic
actions” or arthaprakr̥tis, i.e. the seed of the dramatic action, an
event that contains in nuce the whole development of the drama, see NŚ
19.22 and Bansat-Boudon 1992: 130-31 or the material cause of the whole
universe [māyāprakr̥tyādi according to Kṣemarāja’s commentary], and
prastāvanā, the introductory portion of every drama see Bansat-Boudon
1992: 76-77 and Tieken 2001 or the actual act of initiating the universe
as such). Unfortunately, the commentary of Kṣemarāja on this portion of
the text is partially lacunose. Anyway, as Kṣemarāja himself says,
further expatiating on the technicalities of Nāṭyaśāstra would not be
useful for the matter under discussion (prakr̥tānupayogῑ).

33 Vijñāna-Bhairava 41:

tantryādivādyaśabdeṣu dīrgheṣu kramasaṁsthiteḥ ।

ananyacetāḥ pratyante paravyomavapur bhavet ।।

“If one listens with undivided attention to the sounds of string
instruments and others which are played successively and are prolonged,
then one becomes absorbed in the supreme ether of consciousness.” —
Translation in Bӓumer 1997

Vijñāna-Bhairava 73:

gitādiviṣayāsvādāsamasaukhyaikatātmanaḥ ।

yoginas tanmayatvena manorūḍhes tadātmatā ।।

“When the mind of a yogī is one with the unparalleled joy of music and
other (aesthetic delights),

Then he is identified with it due to the expansion of his mind which has
merged in it.” — Translation in Bӓumer 1997

34 For some telling examples, see the already mentioned crucial terms
such as camatkāra, pratibhā or dhvani and the bibliography quoted above.
The study of Kṣemarāja’s use of quotations and speculations in glossing
the occurrences of these, and related, “aesthetically loaded” terms in a
non-strictly aesthetic context remains, for instance, a scholarly
desideratum.

35 An important case study, in this regard, could be represented by an
inquiry into the use of the “drink metaphor” in Utpaladeva’s
Śivastotrāvalī. Briefly, the standard metaphor for the enjoyment of the
absolute — be it in a relation of complete identity or in the loving
relation of the devotee brimful of the sentiment of bhakti — is the
drinking of a psychotropic liquid. The array of synonyms used for such a
drink (sudhā, pāna, rasa, amr̥ta, mada, pīyūṣa, asava, seka) or its
enjoyment (camatkāra, āsvādana, bhoga, etc.) is indeed stunning. Further
study is surely needed both on the remote origin (unmistakably Vedic,
cf. the soma juice) and the significance of such “drink metaphor”. As
far as its relationship with the rasa theory is concerned, my working
hypothesis is that it is the same “drink metaphor” that developed
independently, on the one hand, as a metaphor for any extremely intense
sensory experience that reaches the very essence of the appreciated
object — such as in the Śivastotrāvalī — and, on the other hand,
possibly along similar lines, as a metaphor for the experience of art —
first in the Nāṭyaśāstra, and consequently in Abhinavagupta’s grand
aesthetic theory (see below).

36 Obviously, I am not trying to argue that the previous works on
Alaṁkāraśāstra and Nāṭyaśāstra did not deal with what we would call
“art”, but simply that the inquiry into “art” was not yet completely and
consciously identified as a specific sui generis domain of theoretical
investigation, particularly in so far as the experience of art, the
“aesthetic experience”, was not yet considered independently as an
experience per se in opposition to ordinary experience (see below). But
I might be slightly overstating my point here.

37 Moreover, one might try and argue that, in his works that do not deal
directly with artistic phenomena, Abhinavagupta himself uses “art” and
art speculations simply as metaphors. But this line of inquiry would
require a separate investigation.

38 See Cuneo 2008-09. As convincingly argued by Pollock 2010b, a great
predecessor of Abhinavagupta and a direct source of his innovativeness
in the aesthetic field is the renowned Bhaṭṭa Nāyaka (see below).

39 See ABh ad NŚ 6, prose after 31, vol. 1, p. 281:
duḥkhasaṁśleṣavidveṣī sukhāsvādanasādaraḥ.

40 For a more detailed description of the psychological process briefly
outlined here, see Cuneo 2007.

41 The locus classicus for the discrimination between laukika and
alaukika in Abhinavagupta’s works is Locana ad DhvĀ 1.18. For a list of
all the passages of Abhinavagupta concerning the alaukika nature of rasa
per se and a thorough analysis of the idea of alaukikatva — also in
relation to the Kantian concept of the autonomy of the aesthetic
experience — see the valuable article by Kulkarni 1986b.

42 Cuneo 2013.

43 It is worth remembering that, in the most widespread philosophical
perspectives of classical India, perception is regarded as the first and
foremost means of knowledge, the one that is to be followed and
believed. See Matilal 1986.

44 ABh ad NŚ 6, prose after 31, rasasūtra, vol. 1, p. 278: vastusatāṁ
kāvyārpitānāṁ ca deśakālapramātrādīnāṁ niyamahetūnām
anyonyapratibandhabalād atyantam apasaraṇe. Abhinavagupta actually seems
to maintain that this epistemic incongruence is only the secondary cause
of this generalization of emotions, whereas the primary cause is found
in the specific qualities possessed by the “ideal connoisseur”, the
sahr̥daya. For more on this theoretical nuance, see again Cuneo 2013, n
46.

45 Cuneo 2013.

46 These verses are Mālinīślokavārttika 1.280-81. The Sanskrit text runs
as follows:

kāmasthaṁ kāmamadhyasthaṁ kāmāṅkuśapuṭīkr̥tam ।

kāmena sādhayet kāmān kāmaṁ kāmeṣu yojayet ।।

kāmaḥ svīkartum icchaiva tadācchādanayogataḥ ।

viśvaṁ sādhayate kāmī kāmatattvam idaṁ yataḥ ।।

The translation is by Hanneder 1998: 105, modified only in the last
hemistich, as I prefer to read the compound kāmatattvam as a bahuvrīhi,
while Hanneder reads it as a tatpuruṣa and consequently translates: “for
this [world] is the reality of desire”. The first hemistich of this
quote is also quite doubtful. Following the suggestion of Raffaele
Torella, one might emend the text on the basis of the well-known
confusion -aṁ/-aḥ. Consequently, the text would read: kāmasthaḥ
kāmamadhyasthaḥ kāmāṅkuśapuṭīkr̥taḥ. The translation would be: “He who
stays within desire, in the middle of desire, encapsulated by the hook
of desire, shall obtain desires by means of desire. He shall merge
desire into desires” which would also improve the scarcely convincing
“willingly” for kāmam in the last pāda. Again, it is Raffaele Torella’s
suggestion that the expression puṭīkr̥ta might refer to the well-known
ritual procedure to “place” a mantra before and after a ritual act or
object. In this way, the two mantras box it or encapsulate it, so to
say. It is therefore pervaded and sanctified by them. Anyways, whatever
the text and the meaning might be exactly, the centrality of desire in
this passage cannot be underplayed.

47 On account of the overt over-generalization — only partially
justified by the quotation of the following note — the inverted commas
are here a scholarly obligation.

48 The locus classicus for this view of desire as the “eternal enemy” is
obviously the astoundingly famous and influential Bhagavad-Gītā (BhG).
See, for instance, BhG III.36-41:

arjuna uvāca —

atha kena prayukto ’yaṁ pāpaṁ carati pūruṣaḥ ।

anicchann api vārṣṇeya balād iva niyojitaḥ ।।

śrībhagavān uvāca —

kāma eṣa krodha eṣa rajoguṇasamudbhavaḥ ।

mahāśano mahāpāpmā viddhy enam iha vairiṇam ।।

dhūmenāvriyate vahnir yathādarśo malena ca ।

yatholbenāvr̥to garbhas tathā tenedam āvr̥tam ।।

āvr̥taṁ jñānam etena jñānino nityavairiṇā ।

kāmarupeṇa kaunteya duṣpūreṇānalena ca ।।

indriyāṇi mano buddhir asyādhiṣṭhānam ucyate ।

etair vimohayaty eṣa jñānam āvr̥tya dehinam ।।

tasmāt tvam indriyāṇy ādau niyamya bharatarṣabha ।

pāpmānaṁ prajahi hy enaṁ jñānavijñānanāśanam ।।

“Arjuna said:

‘So what is it that impels a man to do evil, Varshneya, even
unwillingly, as though compelled to it by force?’”

“The Lord said:

‘It is desire, it is anger, produced from the constituent of passion
[rajas], all-consuming, all-injuring; know that that is the enemy here.

As a fire is covered by smoke and a mirror by dust; as an embryo is
covered by a sac, this world is enveloped by that.

By this perpetual enemy of the wise, by this insatiable fire in the form
of desire, knowledge is obscured, Son of Kunti.

It is said that the senses, the mind, and the intelligence are its
locality; having obscured a man’s knowledge with these, it deludes the
embodied self.

Therefore, having first restrained the senses, Bull of the Bharatas,
strike down this evil thing, the destroyer of insight and knowledge.’”

— tr. Johnson 1994: 18.

For an Italian translation of this passage, along with five verses of
the Kashmiri recension of the BhG, which is even harsher against desire,
see Torella 2007a: 27-28.

49 Blurb written by Raffaele Torella and pre-circulated among the
speakers of the conference Utpaladeva, Philosopher of Recognition,
Shimla, Indian Institute of Advanced Study, 20-21 August 2010.

50 See, for instance, ABh ad NŚ 6, prose after 31, rasasūtra, vol. 1, p.
279: tathā hi loke sakalavighnavinirmuktā saṁvittir eva
camatkāranirveśara-sanāsvādanabhogasamāpattilayaviśrāntyādiśabdair
abhidhīyate. “To illustrate: in the ordinary world, words such as
rapture (camatkāra), immersion (nirveśa), relish (rasanā), savouring
(āsvādana), enjoyment (bhoga), accomplishment (samāpatti), dissolution
(laya) and rest (viśrānti), indicate nothing but the consciousness
completely freed from any obstacle whatsoever.”

51 Although I would argue that the depiction of aesthetic experience as
strictly akin to the mystical experience does not pertain specifically
to the śaiva Weltanschauung or to the philosophy of Pratyabhijñā. At
this junction, it is appropriate to deal with the concept of śānta rasa,
which has often been considered the point of convergence between
Abhinavagupta’s aesthetics and philosophy. Probably following the clues
offered by Udbhaṭa (Kāvyālaṁkārasaṁgraha 4.4) and Ānandavardhana (Vr̥tti
ad DhvĀ 4.26 and also 4.5), Abhinavagupta accepts the introduction of a
ninth rasa into the ancient list of eight (NŚ 6.15). This was called
śānta rasa, “rasa of pacification” (the need for its introduction
developed probably in a Buddhist or a Jaina milieu, or maybe as a result
of the search for a single dominant rasa in the Mahābhārata). This
aesthetic emotion derived from the successful representation of
“liberation”, the culmination of the mystical experience par excellence.
The whole śāntarasaprakaraṇa is devoted to this rasa, and, in particular
to the identification of its sthāyibhāva. Without plunging into the
details and the analysis of the soundness of the different opinions,
let’s state Abhinavagupta’s conclusion: the sthāyibhāva of śānta rasa is
the ātman itself, the immutable substratum of all the contingent
emotional possibilities. Therefore, as its stable state is the most
stable among the stable states, the śānta rasa represents the acme of
aesthetic experience per se. It is the supreme rasa, the fundamental
rasa of which the other rasas can be considered as mere modifications.
As Abhinavagupta states it in another passage (ABh ad NŚ 6, prose after
31, vol. 1, p. 270), eka eva tāvat paramārthato rasaḥ. This utterly
monistic move of Abhinavagupta — which has been called “rasa-synthesis”
(Raghavan 1967: 195-212) — has been recognized as the point of the
convergence between aesthetic speculations and philosophical theory.
However, on closer scrutiny, nothing specific to paramādvaita or śaiva
can be found in the description of śānta. On the contrary, its depiction
seems to follow a somewhat stereotypical and unspecified image of
liberation and its external traits. See, for instance, the first three
verses on śānta rasa attributed to Bharata and preceding Abhinavagupta’s
śāntarasaprakaraṇa (which, more or less implicitly, comments and
supports them): mokṣādhyātmasamutthas tattvajñānārthahetusaṁyuktaḥ ।
naiḥśreyasopadiṣṭaḥ śāntaraso nāma sambhavati ।। I ।।
buddhīndriya-karmendriyasaṁrodhādhyātmasaṁsthitopetaḥ ।
sarvaprāṇisukhahitaḥ śāntaraso nāma vijñeyaḥ ।। II ।। na yatra duḥkhaṁ
na sukhaṁ na dveṣo nāpi matsaraḥ । samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu sa śāntaḥ
prathito rasaḥ ।। III ।। My tentative translation is the following: “I.
What is called śānta rasa, taught as the summum bonum [in Theatre],
occurs when it arises from an inner self in a state of liberation and in
connection with its cause, namely [the aspiration towards] the goal of
achieving the knowledge of reality. II. One should realize that what is
called śānta rasa has its grounding in the inner self via the restraint
of the senses of cognitions as well as of the senses of actions, and is
conducive to the happiness of all living beings. III. When there is no
pain, no pleasure, no aversion and no passion, it is the śānta rasa that
is displayed, identical in all living beings.” In śaiva teachings,
contrarily to what has been outlined here, the absolute and its
achievement are characterized in somewhat different terms. For instance,
as stated in the Śivadr̥ṣṭi 3.87b-88, Śiva, the absolute, can never be
defined as quiescent or isolated (śānta, kevala). Therefore, the śānta
rasa is indeed the point of convergence between aesthetics and
religiosity, but a kind of religiosity characterized by an ecumenical
attitude, as I tentatively designate it. On śānta rasa, see Pandey 1944;
De 1959b; Raghavan 1967; Masson, Patwardhan 1969, 1970; Bhattacarya
1972; Gerow and Aklujkar 1972; Bhattacharya 1976 and Gerow 1994.

52 For instance, as remarked by Ingalls 1990: 200, “[i]n the final
ślokas to the chapters of his Locana Abhinava renders homage to the
powers or stages of Vāc: at the end of the First Chapter, to the parā
śakti; of the Second, to the paśyantī śakti; of the Third, to the
madhyamā śakti; and of the Fourth, to the vaikharī śakti. That speech
exists in four stages is a concept as old as R̥gveda I.164.45. [. . .] To
Tantric authors like Abhinava the four śaktis represent a double process
of evolution: on the metaphysical plane, from undifferentiated unity
through two intermediate stages, to the sensible everyday world of
diversity; on a linguistic plane, from the undifferentiated
śabda-Brahman, again through two intermediate stages to the physically
manifested speech by which worldly communication is carried on.” Then,
as far as the Abhinavabhāratī is concerned, consider, for instance, how
every introductory verse to the various chapters of the Abhinavabhāratī
is composed in praise of Śiva in the form of one of the thirty-six (or
thirty-seven) hierarchic tattvas (ontological principles) of śaiva
metaphysics, so that all the maṅgalas taken together represent a praise
to the whole cosmos in all its evolutes. For a general discussion on the
tattvas, see Tantrāloka 9, passim; Pandit 1997: 71-79 and Gnoli 1999:
693.

53 This issue is already treated in the well-known pioneering work by
Pandey 1963: 86-150.

54 Notwithstanding such valorization of desire in śaiva teachings, it is
also often the case that some passages of śaiva works share the
demonization of desire typical of “mainstream Brāhmanism” or, at least,
do not undervalue per se the apparently non-desirous states of
consciousness. For instance, even in Somānanda (see Śivadr̥ṣṭi 1.41cd-43,
3.53cd-56 and Utpaladeva’s Vr̥tti thereon), the category of śānta is not
denied and devalued in itself, as one might expect, but neither
attributed a special status. It is simply an existing state that occurs
in the scriptures, a specific (not-too-high) phase in the multilayered
structure of reality and manifestation. What really matters is that even
in such a state the energy of the absolute consciousness is anyway
present and throbbing, though in a lesser degree and in a far less
visible modality, contrarily to what the opponents might try to say by
stressing the pacified and static aspect of the term śānta. I thank
Raffaele Torella for this suggestion and reference, which allow me to
properly nuance my otherwise over-generalized picture.

55 Although aham and ātman are often just synonyms in Abhinavagupta’s
technical terminology (Raffaele Torella, personal communication).

56 This is clearly the doctrine of Yogācāra Buddhism. See, for instance,
Williams 1989: 84-102.

57 This might be a vague hint to some form of dualism, possibly of a
kind similar to the Dvaita Vedānta of the much later Madhva. But this
would at best be mere guesswork. On Madhva, see Sharma 1961 and Siauve
1968. Or maybe some kind of corruption of anvitābhidhāna, although it
does not seem really pertinent here. Otherwise, it might be a concise
way to refer to both anvitābhidhāna and abhihitānvaya, with a tentative
translation of “the double [theory of] signification”. But, actually,
the reference remains impervious to all my attempts of understanding.

58 This is clearly a reference to the theory of sphoṭa developed in the
grammatical tradition (Vyākaraṇa). See, for a quick overview of the
subject matter, Kunjunni Raja 1963: 95-148. It is worth mentioning here
that Abhinavagupta did not accept the theory of sphoṭa (see Torella
2004).

59 This might be a reference to the theory of causation — in particular,
the pre-existence of the effect in the cause — upheld by Sāṁkhya, and
hence to Sāṁkhya itself. See, for instance, Larson 1969.

60 This might be a reference to some kind of monism, maybe some sort of
Advaita Vedānta. See, for instance, Potter 1981.

61 ABh ad NŚ 6.38, vol. 1, p. 294: atra ca vijñānavādo dvidhābhidhānaṁ
sphoṭatattvaṁ satkāryavāda ekatvadarśanam ityādi draṣṭavyam । vayaṁ tu
prakr̥tānupayogiśrutalavasandarśanamithyāprayāsasaṁśrayam
asuśikṣitapūrviṇa ity āstām. The passage is not overtly clear, to say
the least, and the translation remains doubtful. But its use as a
rhetorical device for furthering the ecumenical nature of
Abhinavagupta’s hermeneutical enterprise does not appear doubtful.

62 See the preceding notes for some more or less educated guesses.

63 For instance, see Abh ad NŚ 1.107, vol. 1, p. 36, where, after
defining the kind of cognition that the peculiar status of the aesthetic
experience elicits, Abhinavagupta adds: “Furthermore, this [kind of
cognition] might well be [interpreted as] a mere form of knowledge,
something superimposed on an actual form, something having [only]
generic features, a creation restricted to that specific time [proper to
the artwork] or something else. Here we will not annoy the connoisseurs
with an irrelevant topic, whose result would be the presentation on our
part of an amount of information on other systems of knowledge that
would be nothing but an obstacle to the illustration of the subject
matter (tac ca jñānākāramātram āropitasvarūpaṁ sāmānyātmakaṁ
tatkālanirmitirūpaṁ cānyad vā kiñcid astu । nātrāprastutalekhanenātmano
darśanāntara-kathāparicayaprakaṭanaphalena prakr̥tavastunirūpaṇavighnam
ācarantaḥ sahr̥dayān khedayāmaḥ).” With these four brief suggestive
definitions (jñānākāramātra, āropitasvarūpa, sāmānyātmaka and
tatkālanirmitirūpa), Abhinavagupta is probably referring to the
“aesthetic” cognition, proper to the theatrical sphere, as it might be
understood in various schools of Indian philosophy. The following
identifications might be attempted here, at least on a hypothetical
ground. The term jñānākāramātram, translated as “a mere form of
knowledge”, could be a reference to Yogācāra Buddhism. Along these
lines, the kind of cognition that occurs in watching a theatrical
performance might be interpreted in accordance with Yogācāra philosophy
and its conception of the external world of objects, i.e. like a mere
form or image of knowledge in which the object of this knowledge — the
real world — is ultimately non-existent (but the identification remains
doubtful). The term āropitasvarūpa, translated as “something
superimposed on an actual form”, might refer to the standard view of
Nyāya philosophy as regards the misapprehension of something, i.e. the
mother-of-pearl erroneously cognized as silver due to the
superimposition on the former, which is actually perceived, of some
characteristics of the latter, which is only remembered. The term
sāmānyātmaka translated as “something having [only] generic features”
might refer to the Prābhākara Mīmāṁsā’s theory of error, according to
which an erroneous perception amounts to the perception of only general
characteristics of the actually present object, which is therefore
correctly, yet incompletely cognized as, for instance, something bright
and lustrous, thus paving the way for one’s recollection of another
similarly bright object and eventually for the incomplete knowledge that
juxtaposes the two, but fails to distinguish the one from the other. The
term tatkālanirmitirūpaṁ, translated as “a creation restricted to that
specific time”, reminds of Vedānta’s theory of error, according to which
the erroneous cognition — and, on a different level, the whole world as
well, for what it matters — is an indescribable (anirvacanīya) creation
of māyā (illusion). On the theory of error in Indian philosophy, see
Schmithausen 1965; Matilal 1986: 180-220; Rao 1998 and Torella 2011:
187-88. Just as in the case of the previously quoted passage, the
importance is not in the attempted identifications — speculative in
nature — but in the intended ecumenical stand that Abhinavagupta seems
to be taking: namely, with respect to his aesthetic theory, every
possible philosophical theory can be accepted to explain it, as far as
the essential points of his own rasa theory are kept intact.

64 This is actually my tentative emendation for tatsamudāyarūpāṇi.

65 With regard to the same attitude shown in the Locana, see, for
instance, how the various classical theories of meaning are all
mentioned on the same plane of value in Locana ad DhvĀ 4.7 (translation
of this passage in Ingalls 1990: 712).

66 It is worth trying to illustrate the possible meaning of the
comparison. According to the theory of sphoṭa upheld by the
grammarian-philosopher Bhartr̥hari and his followers, with respect to the
utmost reality of the sentence and the sentence-meaning, words and
word-meanings are ultimately unreal. Similarly, the great rasa is alone
real, while the other rasas are comparatively unreal. According to the
anvitābhidhāna theory, upheld by the Mīmāṁsaka Prabhākara and his
followers, the words are real and constitute the actual elements of
language, but they do not convey meaning except in the context of the
sentence. Therefore, they are indeed real, but only as instruments for
the understanding of the sentence meaning. Similarly, the various rasas
can be considered real, but only in so far as they make savour the
“great fundamental rasa”. According to the abhihitānvaya theory, upheld
by the Mīmāṁsaka Kumārila Bhaṭṭa and his followers, sentence meaning is
simply the concatenation of the individual meanings expressed by words.
Similarly, the rasas are only the individual elements that constitute
the “great fundamental rasa”. For the first general references, see
Kunjunni Raja 1963: 95-148 on the doctrine of sphoṭa, 193-203 on the
doctrine of anvitābhidhāna and 203-13 on the doctrine of abhihitānvaya.

67 For instance, Abhinavagupta’s aesthetic theory is accepted and
developed by authors such as the Kashmirian Mammaṭa, probably of śaiva
affiliation, in his Kāvyaprakāśa, the Jain Hemacandra in his
Kāvyānuśāsana, up to the Vaiṣṇava Viśvanātha in his Sāhityadarpaṇa (even
the vedāntin Jagannātha Paṇḍita in his Rasagaṅgādhara is heavily
influenced by Abhinavagupta, although it is true that he deviated from
many crucial theoretical points). For a bibliography on these authors,
see Cahill 2004, sub voce.

4

