Utpala’s Insights into Aesthetics and

His Impact on Abhinavagupta’s

Aesthetic Speculation*

Navjivan Rastogi

Utpala is reckoned as a philosopher, a metaphysician, a devotee but not
an art theoretician, nor an art critic, nor a literary genius. He also
does not dwell directly on any matter aesthetic. So I owe an apology to
the discerning readers for choosing this topic.

Let me admit that in choosing this topic I am inspired by my teacher
K.C. Pandey who specially pinpoints Utpala’s impact on Abhinavagupta and
his teachers1 and makes numerous allusions to Utpala’s formative
insights and contribution in the domain of aesthetics and arts.2 Pandey
remembers him as a probable commentator of the Nāṭyaśāstra or of some
part of it, in any case as an authority on music. He specially takes
note of Abhinavagupta’s conceptualization of vimarśa in terms of
camatkāra expanded in his commentary on Utpala’s Vivr̥ti on three of the
latter’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-kārikās (ĪPK 1.5.11, 13; 2.3.8) being the
underlining aestheticizing principle; notices the interconnection
between vikalpahāna (loss/diminution of logical constructs) and the
kathartic experience in drama towards occasioning universalization;
unearths affinity between the metaphysical notion of pratibhā as
maheśvara and the aesthetic notion of creativity and artistic
sensitivity. Even prior to Pandey, though it came to my notice later,
Kane3 referred to the direct influence of Utpala on the figure of speech
called ullekha (representation). Working for my paper on camatkāra in
19884 I found that Gnoli also referred to the aesthetical significance
of the notion of camatkāra crediting its first technical use to Utpala5
while tracing its conceptual evolution and discussing it against the
background of its Western parallels. Raghavan constitutes another source
of inspiration. While alluding to the authors quoted in the
Abhinavabhāratī, he revisits Pandey’s references using additional
sources buttressing a credible hypothesis of Utpala’s having attempted a
work on music interpreting therein certain sections from Bharata’s
text.6 Mukund Lath7 records Utpala’s views on indispensability of
certain notes in gāndharva music and his difference from the later-day
musicians such as Kallinātha, the author of the Kalānidhi, commentary on
the Saṅgīta-Ratnākara of Śārṅgadeva. Lath even translates a relevant
passage from the Abhinavabhāratī.

While sifting through the original accounts one might be tempted to
examine the hypothetical possibility of Utpala’s being a grand-teacher
of Abhinava in the sphere of aesthetics as well. Utpala was Abhinava’s
grand-teacher in Pratyabhijñā, i.e. the teacher of his teacher
Lakṣmaṇagupta. However, Abhinavagupta employs the title of paramaguru
for Utpala even in former’s works on dramaturgy and poetics. Apparently
there ought to be no incongruity in doing so, but given the fact that
Abhinavagupta was endowed with an acute sense of history with an eye on
precision and also that he learnt different disciplines from an
exclusive set of teachers, this is likely to cause some confusion.
Perhaps this could be the reason why Uttuṅgodaya, the Keralite author of
the Kaumudī commentary on Abhinavagupta’s Locana, takes Utpala as the
teacher of Bhaṭṭendurāja, Abhinavagupta’s teacher in the Dhvanyāloka.8
This ascription might be questioned on the ground that Uttuṅgodaya is
glossing Abhinavagupta’s statement in the context of a citation from a
Pratyabhijñā text.9 However, in another context, Abhinavagupta cites the
explanation offered by his grand-teacher Utpaladeva and also notes his
differences from him.10 Now, this is not a Pratyabhijñā context, but a
situation where grand-teacher and grand-pupil are holding divergent
views. Utpala could have been Abhinavagupta’s grand-teacher in a
dramaturgic or specifically a musicological context through his teacher
Bhaṭṭa Tauta. In that eventuality one could possibly suspect that Utpala
could have been his teacher’s teacher, that is the teacher of Bhaṭṭa
Tauta. Nevertheless we cannot draw definite conclusion from such a
slender evidence as to whether the epithet paramaguru has extended
implications beyond Pratyabhijñā. But there is not even an iota of doubt
that Utpala cast strong impact on Abhinavagupta’s opinions in the domain
of music. In the absence of any contrary information to this day, it
appears fair to go with Raghavan who on the authority of Basavarāja,
author of the Śivatattva-Ratnākara, tends to believe that Utpala
possibly wrote a work on music and was recognized as an authority.11
Nevertheless the fact that our only direct source of access to Utpala’s
music connection is Abhinavagupta’s Abhinavabhāratī underscores some
kind of intra-systemal bond between the two.

The other factor that ignited my interest is the immensely aesthetical
character of the speculative tradition in which Utpala is born.
Notwithstanding the characterization by Northrop and Jung of the entire
Eastern thought as being predominantly aesthetic vis-à-vis Western as
rational, Utpala’s own tradition in the overall context of Indian
thought displays a unique and unmatched aesthetical bias with the sole
exception of the later-day philosophical school of Caitanya. Utpala’s
thought seminally goes back to Bhartr̥hari. As Torella has very ably
shown and I have also noted elsewhere about Utpala’s absolutely opposite
valuation of Bhartr̥hari from his master’s,12 Bhartr̥hari univocally holds
word-essence as forming the genesis of all sciences, crafts and art.13

Preceding Utpala, in his home ground, one has the Vijñāna-Bhairava
advocating the emergence of extreme joy from complete absorption into a
song or other sensory relishings;14 the Śivasūtra envisioning a complete
metaphor of a stage-presentation portraying the self as an actor,
embodied self as the stage, cognition-senses as the savouring
spectators;15 the Spanda-Kārikā projecting the world as the sport or
playful activity of the yogin or consciousness16 reminding Bharata’s
description of the drama as a plaything, toy (krīḍanīyaka).17 Again the
Stava-Cintāmaṇi is found offering a complete imagery of a dramatic
enactment passing through all its developmental stages or that of a
portrait by an artist,18 and his own teacher Somānanda picturing the
ultimate reality as embodying flashing joyous consciousness
(sphuran-nirvr̥ta-cidvapuḥ) or pure beatitude in the nature of
consciousness (cidrūpāhlādaparamaḥ [conscious beatitude: Torella])
marking the source of whole creation which is but an expansion of His
form or beauty, rendering beauty as a necessary condition of being.19

In all these sources one thing is strikingly common and constant that
the whole creation as well as creativity is essentially in the nature of
rasa — rasa is the basic paradigm — symbolizing a fluid state of
uninterrupted flow of consciousness characterized by joy, relish and
beatitude. Notwithstanding some faint voices in the hoary Vedic
antiquity, this kind of pervasive systemal perception is qualitatively
unique in the history of Indian thought. Being a repository of such a
joyous tradition as well as the progenitor of a school of thought that
re-defined the aesthetic consciousness of succeeding academia under the
tutelage of his grand-pupil Abhinava, the curiosity to look for its
roots in Utpala’s writings does seem to make a reasonable sense.

This much for the background rationale. In formulating my opinions
Utpala’s ĪPK, ĪPVr̥, ĪPViv (as found in ĪPVV) and ŚDVr̥tti have been my
mainstay. Besides, the ŚSĀ, ABh and Locana have been quite useful.
However, the most important text has been Abhinavagupta’s ĪPVV without
which it would have been impossible to reach out to several ingenuous
insights of Utpala in the Vivr̥ti, Vr̥tti or even Kārikā (i.e. ĪPK).

The methodology adopted is partly anthological and compilatory, partly
hermeneutical and partly reconstructive. Utpala’s beauty-consciousness
has flown through two outlets namely, religious and secular. It is the
latter that we intend to mostly focus on20 — this, despite the fact that
the basic undercurrent that essentially remains spiritual and religious,
provides the requisite framework for the secular to flourish expressed
through a shared fraternity of imagery and metaphors such as dance,
drama, actor/artist, song, juice/tasty drink or concoction, sport,
savouring and painting. We first take up Utpala’s philosophical
observations regarding the issues that concern beauty and art experience
followed by his inputs on independent arts such as dance, drama, poetics
and music.

Integral Vision as an Aesthetic Process:

Bhakti Is Philosophy’s Beauty Apperception

Pursuit of aesthetics distinguishes itself from the pursuit of
philosophy, because it lays greater emphasis on consciousness as feeling
as compared to the philosophy’s emphasis on consciousness as knowing, to
borrow the parlance of a great Indian thinker of our times, K.C.
Bhattacharya,21 implying that reality could also be realized through
feeling or empathy and not by gnosis alone. This perhaps explains why
the soteriological experience is modelled on art experience. If we look
at his ŚSĀ, Utpala seems to be fully absorbed in celebrating the joyous
world-view of Kashmir Śaivism — its USP, to use a current marketing
jargon. The joyful outlook succeeds in not only consecrating life with
meaningfulness, it also soaks the spiritual journey and the
soteriological realization with the elixir of joy. As a logical
corollary the structural environ of the Śaivite non-dualistic devotion
(bhakti), i.e. religious beauty apperception, offers a powerfully cogent
background towards fuller appreciation of beauty experience, rasa
experience and art experience. The overwhelming pursuit of joy and its
fruition is seen present in so many contexts that its centrality simply
baffles us viewing phenomenal world as the sport or play of the Lord,
repeatedly treating the whole process of praying or worshipping as a
grand festival, ongoing recourse to the metaphors of incessant downpour
of rain, placid waters of a tranquil pond, intoxicating drink, wine,
juice and nectar as a vehicle of transmission of joyous feeling,
continual allusion to the creative beauty-drenched modes of art wrought
by artist, actor and poet, the rasa-nature of religious experience (i.e.
bhakti) and therethrough its essential character as bliss and
transcendental relish keep on building up an all round ambience of
creative rejoicing. It is in this context that Utpala’s description of
the Lord, the Ultimate Reality, as “exceedingly beautiful”
(atisundara)22 or “sole charming principle” (lalita)23 is immensely
befitting. The special significance of this description lies in the fact
that this is perhaps the first time in the history of Indian philosophy
that reality is reckoned in terms of beauty by an otherwise rigorously
gnostic system.24

This overarching notion of joy and beauty leads to elevation of bhakti
as an aesthetic sentiment (rasa)25 on its own accord as well as the
metasentiment (mahārasa)26 being the matrix of all the aesthetic
sentiments thus discharging the double role of rasa and mahārasa both,
so to say. However, such a situation indicates two conflicting
valuations of bhakti between poetics/dramaturgy and philosophy both
claiming allegiance to the Trika proper. Significantly enough, Utpala
begins his ĪPK with rendering servitude to Maheśvara in terms of
recognition. That is, by equation between dāsya-bhakti (devotion in the
master–servant relationship mode) and pratyabhijñā Utpala removes the
gap between perception through feeling/emotion and perception through
knowing/gnosis.27 If we go by Abhinavagupta, Utpala declares that
emotions too can lead to knowledge. The taste one gets in integral
vision constitutes joy in terms of emotion, devotion in terms of
complete absorption (samāveśa) and liberation in terms of gnosis.28 Not
only here, Utpala makes a direct reference by proper name to his
remaining drenched in constant ecstasy, intoxicated as he was with
devotion.29 Kṣemarāja, his commentator and great grand-pupil, specially
highlights this aspect.30 According to Gopinath Kaviraj, the
Pratyabhijñā theoreticians by enunciating servitude have, as it were,
clinched the basic secret of the rasa-hood of bhakti.31 Utpala, in close
agreement with Bhaṭṭa Nārāyaṇa, takes us to two stages of bhakti. The
first is the emerging state of devotion (sphuraṇāvasthā) unflinching
faith being its distinctive mark. The next is the perfected or fully
developed state (prarūḍhāvasthā), its mark is total self-surrender and
absolute identity. They might be named as śānta-bhakti (tranquil/serene
devotion) and dāsya-bhakti (servitude devotion) respectively. No sooner
śānta comes into being, it gets coloured by dāsya. This demarcation
between the two will be found germane to our upcoming discussion.

It sounds somewhat strange that poeticians not only disagree with the
Śaiva monists who unanimously subscribe to the rasa character of bhakti,
but there is also lack of unanimity among themselves. In
pre-Abhinavagupta recensions of the NŚ only eight poetic sentiments are
mentioned, śānta rasa (sentiment of quietude) does not figure there. The
issue of bhakti being a rasa simply does not arise. The Gaekwad edition
of the NŚ used with the ABh does have a recension which mentions śānta
as a ninth dramatic sentiment. Some scholars therefore tend to suspect
this portion to be an interpolation. The important thing that one finds
here is that all the eight sentiments are derivatives/modifications
(vikr̥ti) and śānta is their genesis/prototype (prakr̥ti). Owing to their
respective efficient causal factors they come into being and merge back
in their sources once these factors wither away from the scene. The
other point to be noted is that śānta is employed for the purpose of
attaining salvation (mokṣa).32 Abhinavagupta defines śama (peace), the
enduring emotion of śānta rasa, as “knowledge of truth in the nature of
self ” (ātmasvarūpaṁ tattvajñānaṁ)33 and delves into an exhaustive
discussion as regards determinants, consequents,34 etc. However, the
most pertinent observation that Abhinavagupta makes is that he does not
consider bhakti and śraddhā (devotion and reverence) as independent
rasas, at the most they could be viewed as ancillaries of śānta.35 This
does not accord well with the stand taken by Utpala philosophically.
Bhakti represents compulsive relishing arising from total absorption in
the divine beatitude, whereas śraddhā happens to be pre-relishing
tendency towards mastering the same.36 In philosophy bhakti is rasa by
itself, metasentiment (mahārasa) at that, and constitutes matrix
(prakr̥ti) of all rasas, rendering even śānta as its subsidiary. The
poetician Mammaṭa echoes Abhinavagupta by upholding nine rasas in
poetics: śānto’pi navamaḥ rasaḥ, but discards rasa-hood of bhakti.
Mammaṭa goes on to propound one more distinction that bhakti is not
subsidiary of śānta, but that of rati (love, the enduring emotion of
śr̥ṅgāra, the erotic sentiment) and belongs technically to the category
of bhāva. However, Kaviraj perceives it differently. According to him,
in poetics/rhetorics bhakti proper, that is primary, comes under śānta
rasa and it is secondary bhakti that is considered only bhāva.37 But in
the domain of bhakti discipline śānta rasa itself is a special kind of
bhakti and the bhakti proper or primary bhakti is of the nature of rasa
alone.38

Kaviraj is convinced that Utpala’s conceptualizing bhakti as dāsya opens
the floodgates for the synthesis of the respective perceptions of bhakti
in philosophy and poetics/dramaturgy and feels that Abhinavagupta’s
treatment of rasa in the ABh has been profoundly impacted by the
philosophical notion of bhakti.39 Because rasa experience is nothing but
rapturous relishing of perfect I-hood (pūrṇāhaṁtā-camatkāra) and ditto
is the case with bhakti. The seemingly two differing approaches — one
holding śānta rasa as being the knowledge-of-truth-centric
(tattvajñāna-pradhāna) as found in poetics/dramaturgy and the other
finding the meta-aesthetic relishing of the unity of consciousness and
joy (cid-ānanda-ātmaikya-āsvāda-pradhāna) being central to the notion of
dāsya as is the wont of philosophy — both emerge from the rasa essence
of bhakti. What is more, thanks to the underlying unity, attachment,
malice, pain, misery, self-conceit, all these states of mind (bhāva),
which appear mutually conflicting, ultimately get manifested as
instances of the Divine, dense in bliss, and thereby becoming relishable
as multiple modes of the blissful consciousness elicit a resonating
analogue in the aesthetic savouring of (the negative mental states such
as) grief, fear, fury when reduced to the condition of rasa (emerging as
sentiments of sorrow, horror, furiousness: karuṇa, bhayānaka, raudra) in
the domain of art. Perhaps it may look quite far-fetched to consider the
suggested pun and interpret the word nava (new) in the phrase
navarasārdrārdra40 (lit. repeatedly moistened by the ever new relish),
employed by Utpala, in the sense of number “nine” as well, veiledly
implying thereby Utpala’s intention to uphold the independent rasa
status of bhakti as the ninth rasa or mahārasa laying the metaphysical
foundation for the independent rasa status of śānta whose centrality has
been so passionately advocated by his grand-pupil Abhinavagupta in
dramaturgy and poetics.

Contextualization of Aesthetics within

Trika Ontology: Situating Aesthetics

under Vimala Vyavahāra

Utpala’s some of metaphysical stipulations seem to have gone long way to
have cast profound formative influence on the aesthetical speculation of
posterity. One of the foremost problems is how and where to situate
aesthetics, art experience, art object, art creation and art
appreciation, all included ontologically within the Trika metaphysics.
Utpala would, without hesitation, place it under the rubric of vimala
vyavahāra (pure worldly transaction). He says:

Thus ordinary worldly transaction, whether pure or impure, is
experienced as resting on the Lord inlaid (khacita) with (or, coloured
by) the manifestations of objects very different from one another.41

In the Vr̥tti, Utpala makes it clear that the whole human activity is
based on duality and this activity could be of two types — sullied, i.e.
impure (malina), and clean or pure (śuddha). The former relates to those
who are blinded by ignorance because of māyā and the latter to those who
are in the know of reality as such. To it Utpala further adds: that all
this transactional behaviour is grounded in the Lord is always certified
by one’s immediate experience.42 It remains for Abhinavagupta to bring
out the inherent import of Utpala’s pronouncement. Under the twofold
categorization of ordinary transactions of human life — general and
particular,43 and then subjecting them to their qualitative
classification — pure and impure, proposed by Utpala, Abhinavagupta is
prone to label “aesthetical” transaction as ‘a particular human
transaction of the pure category’.44

In developing Utpala’s thesis Abhinavagupta comes out with five relevant
sub-formulations.

One: The impure particular transaction relates to sheer mundane
activities such as sales, purchase, quarrel, etc. whereas the pure
particular transaction represents all academic, intellectual, cultural,
spiritual and religious activities such as teaching, initiation, ritual
and ceremonial praxis, meditation, total self-absorption (samādhāna), et
al. (ādi). The terminal ādi (et al.) is quite pregnant.

Two: The pure particular transaction too belongs to those who have
recognized their self-identity and is the exclusive prerogative of the
followers of the “special discipline” (viśeṣadr̥ṣṭi: i.e. the school
Abhinavagupta belonged to) thereby obliquely hinting at his tradition’s
special closeness to these activities.

Three: Though the transactional character of the pure activities
continues to persist since māyic operation is not withdrawn, because of
its configurational structure enlivened by unity–diversity, the
transactional character disappears (tirodhīyate) on vanishing of
duality.

Four: It is in this sense that this transaction, despite consisting in
exchange or interaction between self and other/s, could be appropriately
called pure, free from impurity, in proportion to the extent of their
recognizing the supreme Self.

Five: There are twin parameters for determining purity or freedom from
impurity, to be more precise, e.g.:

i. purification or refinement of impurity, and

ii. compact density of consciousness.45

Abhinavagupta fully utilizes the opportunity to develop full potential
of Utpala’s thesis by taking direct cues from him. Utpala himself
glosses anubhūyate from the Kārikā as saṁbhāvyate ’nubhavena in the
Vr̥tti. Further glossing tathājñāninām […]saṁbhāvyate from the Vr̥tti and
kevalaṁ as well as the probable phrase siddhādiḥ from the Vivr̥ti46
Abhinavagupta underscores his master’s enunciation of the possibility of
purity, absence of defilement arising from the pursuit of intellectual,
spiritual and cultural transactions leading to the perception that the
Lord is the final ground of all transactions even when one is unable to
cast off his dualizing consciousness fully.47 Abhinavagupta connects
Utpala’s thesis with the doctrine of viśeṣa (difference, distinction,
surplus, excess, addition) envisaged in the Vijñāna-Bhairava and
formulated as “attentiveness in relationship represented by the
knower–known apperception”.48 Abhinavagupta reminds us of this
connection in the Vimarśinī also.49 Abhinavagupta formulates this viśeṣa
as adhika (additional, transcending, more). What is striking is that
Abhinavagupta talks of this adhikā pratipatti applicable in case of a
qualified aesthete in the Abhinavabhāratī while introducing his own
theory of rasa.50

The reason behind this rather long engagement with Utpala’s ontological
positioning of the aesthetic dimension of human transaction and his
several supplemental insights filtered through Abhinavagupta’s
interpretation such as the notions of absence of impurity,
unity–diversity structure of human transactions, potential for
“more”-ness, that is attentiveness in relation as a tool for
value-transformation, all woven together is to show how Utpala offers an
inclusive framework that substantially creates space for determining the
nature of aesthetic experience, particularly as represented by rasa, the
unity–diversity dynamics of rasa-generation as a process, the suggested
poetic meaning in terms of recognition, and the role of manaskāra
(mental attentiveness) underlining the process of beauty apperception.
In the following lines these issues come up for discussion as per demand
of the context.

Relishing Freedom and Self-awareness:

Paradigmatic Model of Spotless Human Activity of Art:

Sourced to Mohāpasāraṇa and Pratyabhijñāna

Through his doctrine of nirmala-vyavahāra (spotless transactions of
life) Utpala takes us to his two presuppositional paradigms consisting
of removal of stupor (mohāpasāraṇa) and recogniton (pratyabhijñāna). In
ĪPK 2.3.1751 he sources this nirmala vyavahāra to the disclosure of
powers (śaktiprakāśa: “bringing to light of the powers”) and in 1.1.352
recognition of self-identity to the discovery of powers
(śaktyāviṣkaraṇa). The two, disclosure (śaktiprakāśa) as well as
discovery of one’s innate powers (śaktyāviṣkaraṇa), are synchronous with
the removal of stupor, ignorance or veil. In Book Three, i.e. section on
Āgama of his ĪPK, Utpala equates mala (impurity) with moha (stupor,
blinding ignorance). In his typical diction impurity is either the loss
of freedom of one’s self-awareness or the loss of awareness of one’s
innate freedom.53 Thus nirmalatā (immaculate, stain-free state) of
vyavahāra implies such activity in the domain of practical life as
ensures complete enjoyment of one’s essential being consisting in
freedom and self-awareness. This is precisely the paradigmatic model in
which the spotless human activity that is centred on beauty in and
through art also operates.

Besides anugraha, the Sanskrit word for divine favour is prasāda, which
is amenable to be translated variously depending upon the context such
as grace, favour, purity, clarity, pelucidity and perspicuity. In the
ŚSĀ Utpala is constantly striving for the dispensing of grace (prasāda)
by the Lord.54 Abhinavagupta interprets this prasāda as immaculation or
absence of impurity,55 which he again conceives as that state of divine
essence where Śiva is shining in his total glory.56 There are two
dimensions to this freedom from impurity: substantive and processive. In
the former, i.e. substantive, it represents the luminosity aspect of
Paramaśiva who is regarded as the unity of prakāśa and vimarśa. In the
benedictory verse of the Vivr̥ti, Utpala bows to Śiva who is possessed of
unbroken, unobscured and immaculate mode of being.57Abhinavagupta offers
a lengthy exegesis of Utpala’s verse, but for us what matters is that
while connecting svaccha (lit. very clean, crystal clear, transparent)
with prakāśa and svacchanda (lit. self-willed, self-dependent,
self-driven) with dynamism of vimarśa, Abhinavagupta emphasizes the
“self-exceeding” aspect of purity without inducing any change or excess
within the intrinsic essence of reality58 and thus allowing it to
translate into self-extension, self-outgrowth, by way of creation. The
reference already made earlier to this “excess” is slightly on a
different note. The nirmalatā-vyavahāra may be rationalized as having
two components. In ĪPK 1.5.15-16, Utpala makes it abundantly clear that
freedom-from-impurity (nirmalatā) component may be linked to prakāśa as
its source and the vyavahāra component to svātantrya.59 Thus throughout
his ĪPK Utpala is intent upon showing the internal and external forms of
the Absolutic agency in terms of this binary modality itself and taking
recourse to this very vocabulary establishes the autonomous agenthood of
the Lord in its totality reducing every form of creation in the mould of
externalization of the internal.60 As regards the latter, i.e.
processive dimension, freedom from impurity constitutes the whole
process of eradicating dirt, defilement, delusion or negativity from
mind.61 That the emphasis on the processive side was very much in the
mind of Utpala is clear from his construction in the Vivrt̥i of the word
nirantara (constant, incessant) used by himself in the Vr̥tti. For him
continuity means purity of concentric attention characterized by the
absolute lack of heterogeneous mental activity (vyavahāra).62 This idea
gets fully reflected or aesthetically reconstrued when aesthetic
experience is formulated as aesthetic relish in the nature of unimpeded
or unobstructed awareness (alaukikanirvighnasaṁvedanā or
vītavighnapratīti) and the whole operation behind rasa-production as the
process and mechanism of the removal of the barriers and impediments in
the way of rasa-realization. On the similar lines the fitness of an
appreciative reader or viewer is determined by the extent his
appreciative genius is free from the defiling elements
(vimalapratibhānaśālihr̥dayaḥ). We will see more of it later. In the
domain of epistemology it emerges as the Pratyabhijñā definition of
pramāṇa, whereas in the emotive or psychic sphere it paves way for
effecting pleasant disposition, poise, lucidity, elevation or
sublimation of mind. Sublimation of mind or ego means moving from
impurity or limited purity towards complete or absolute purity. One of
the three literary guṇas (basic qualities), prasāda is notionally very
close to and in a sense may be said to have been inspired by the Śaiva
de-impurity thesis. Prasāda is a guṇa that is common to all rasas and
represents lucidity of language and perspicuity or cleanliness of style
implying instantaneous conveyance and comprehension of poetic meaning.
Mammaṭa compares this meaning with fire from dry fuel or reflection in
clear water.63

It is interesting to see that these two basic parameters mohāpasāraṇa
(eradicating stupor) and pratyabhijñana (re-knowing), are duly
propounded by Utpala in a single kārikā, i.e. ĪPK 1.1.364 as
constituting two sides of the same process. Recognition through
discovery of innate faculties is tantamount to eradication of delusion
supposed to be solely responsible for failure in identification even on
perception. We have already seen interconnection between the ideas of
experience or awareness devoid of obstacles, luminosity of consciousness
and removal of delusion.65 Similarly Utpala demonstrates
innerconnectivity through the ideas of recognition, self-affirming
ideation, rapturous self-savouring and the understanding that directly
enters the heart.66 Through an ingenuous employment of the two
expressions “perception” and “noticing/marking” (darśana and upalakṣaṇa
[the latter also construed as vīkṣaṇa, vide ĪPK 4.1.17, “close
perception, noticing”]) Utpala implicatively anticipates these twin
notions of delusion–elimination and recognition, and thereby proposes a
series of nuances of pratyabhijñāna extensively relied upon by the later
aestheticians. Let it be clearly understood that presently my allusion
to recognition is art specific. To my knowledge, Utpala employs the word
pratyabhijñā in four senses: (i) knowing in the form of unflinching
certitude;67 (ii) full or complete knowledge (parijñāna,68 lit. pari
“full, whole, from all sides”; jñāna “knowledge”) in the sense of
infinitization (aparimitīkaraṇa); (iii) revealing (prakāśana)69 in the
sense of making a hitherto unknown thing known hence alternatively
construed as jñāpana; and (iv) careful focused consideration or
specially analysing inherent meaning (viśeṣataḥ nirūpaṇa) abstracted in
terms of anusaṁdhāna by Abhinavagupta.70

Out of the four, all the senses with the sole exception of the first
could be said to pertain to or have some extent of bearing on the realm
of poetry and art. The second sense, i.e. infinitization, could be
linked to the notion of saṁvid-vikāsa or saṁvid-vaitatya
(consciousness-expansion or consciousness-extension, also alternatively
construed as expanded/extended consciousness). This notion appears to
have provided impetus to the nurturing of the later-day theory of
universalization (sādhāraṇīkaraṇa) so vital to experiencing rasa. The
third meaning, prakāśana (revealing, expressing), could be seen as
pointing to the trans-epistemic nature of communication of the import
from a piece of art. Treading on similar lines with mohāpasāraṇa the
process of art revelation is neither productive nor cognitive, but
suggestively expressive (vyaṅgya), re-creatively recognitive. In the
fourth, i.e. final, sense, it might be seen as nurturing the notion of
“aesthetic chewing” (carvaṇā) and its essentially processive character
(rasanā: sādhyarūpatā) as against its substantivization (siddharūpatā)
in the context of the subsequent theorization of art experience. This
sense of pratyabhijñā as an ongoing recognitive synthesis towards
discovering the precise meaning inherent in the piece of art (or,
technically the medium of art) also could be viewed as lending further
strength to the previous meaning.71

Going forward, ĪPK 1.1.3 continues to remain overwhelmingly important
from our point of view. Utpala seems to exploit enormous semantic
potential of the phrase anupalakṣite (remaining unnoticed/unmarked). In
the Vr̥tti Utpala glosses it by ahr̥dayaṁgamatvād (because of its
inability to enter the heart)72 and thereby rendering anupalakṣite in
the Kārikā, in effect, to read anupalakṣitatvāt.73

Abhinavagupta remains our only source and support for making it possible
to have a peep into the probable and intended direction of Utpala’s line
of thinking. From the long textual extract that appears in the note
below74 the following insights could be directly attributed to Utpala:

1. “Noticing” (upalakṣitatva = hr̥dayaṅgamatva) stands for perception
(darśana) that has reached the state of definitive reflective awareness
(vimarśa = hr̥daya). Only and only then it could lead to a vyavahāra,
otherwise it is as good as a blade of grass on road which, though seen,
remains unnoticed.

2. “Entering into heart” or “reaching the heart” could be defined in
terms of “being reflectively aware”.75

3. “Being reflectively aware” (a) calls for complete absorption by the
experiencing subject (pramātrāveśa), implying that even the appearing of
an object to or shining of an object in the knower’s consciousness is a
subjective act (pramātr̥prakāśabalena) and not a mechanical objective
reflex; (b) implies, in addition, integral grasp or acceptance of object
in all aspects, inherent in the expression “am configuring” (vimr̥śāmi)
that suggests essential identity with the experiencing subject, whereas
the expression “shines” (ābhāsate) refers to only part-grasping;76 (c)
reduces “condition of reaching the heart” (hr̥dayaṅgamatva) to “repose in
heart” (hr̥daya-viśrānti).

4. “Entering into heart” is intrinsically an aesthetic activity turning
the object of perception, which lacked relishability at the initial
moment of bare perception, into an object of relish, resulting from
thorough appreciation of all the essential characterstics of the
objects: “yes, this is its actual form (satyam etadrūpam)”. This
appreciation is accompanied by an implicit mental assurance about its
occurring necessarily within the realm of possibility.77

Having thus positioned himself it is easier for Utpala now to take the
next logical step. By repeating upadarśyate (lit. closely
shown/demonstrated) in the Vr̥tti, Utpala emphatically converts the act
of promised demonstration/showing (i.e. exposition) of recognition of
the Lord (who is the Self through the discovery of His intrinsic
faculties), which on the face of it apparently aims at presenting the
Lord as a part of the practical transaction, into an act of unveiling or
revealing someone with concealed identity as actually being close and
intimate by bringing it to the frontal consciousness due primarily to
heart’s interactive integration.78 In this way a neutral-looking
transactional activity acquires the semblance of a self-transcending
aesthetic activity with heartful participation on the part of subject.
The value of such a stipulation speaks for itself when in the domain of
art criticism we find Bhaṭṭa Nāyaka solicit elimination of delusion
(mohāpasāraṇa) from pre-eminence of sattva (sattvodreka) (being the
necessary precondition for the rise of aesthetic experience)79 in sharp
contrast to Utpala who sees the same accrue from recognition
(pratyabhijñāna). For Utpala recognition is not due to preponderance of
sattva, but due to “discovery through powers” (śaktyāviṣkaraṇa), i.e.
“through evincing mark of recognition constituted by extraordinary
power” (asādhāraṇaprabhāvābhijñānakhyāpana).80

Hr̥dayasaṁgamatva Construed as

Aesthetic Savouring, i.e. Camatkāra

As we tread along the historical growth of Indian aesthetics post Utpala
one can easily pick up the centrality of the notion of hr̥daya and
hr̥dayaṁgamatva. Abhinavan resort to a series of sub-themes of
hr̥dayānupraveśa (penetration into heart), hr̥dayasaṁvāda (resonance
of/with heart), hr̥dayaviśrānti (repose in heart), sahr̥daya (gourmet,
aesthete), sahr̥dayatā (qualification and critical faculty for art
appreciation) and the like would be found to stem from and revolve round
the notion of hr̥dayaṁgamatva enunciated by Utpala. Using hr̥dayaṁgamatva
he glides into the cognate technical notion of camatkāra81 (savouring
act of the subject; lit. “wonderment”). More correctly, he rationalizes
the former in the form of the latter. We have already seen Pandey draw
our attention to Utpala’s thematization of vimarśa as camatkāra and
Gnoli to his first ever deployment of this term philosophically within
the Kashmir Śaivite academia. The aesthetic value of this concept
becomes amply evident when even a lay student sees Abhinavagupta open
his treatment of rasa (aesthetic experience) in terms of camatkāra.
Abhinavagupta offers two primary reductions, viz.:

(i) camatkāra is unimpeded mental awareness represented by dense
uniformity of the spectator’s (or for that matter, connoisseur’s)
perception,82 and

(ii) it is the mental activity of a savouring subject, a gourmet, who is
fully immersed in vibration of the wonderful enjoyment/relish,83

and one secondary abstraction, e.g.:

The physical changes, generated by it, such as trembling, horripilation,
pleasant upward shaking of body or limbs, etc. are also called
camatkāra.84

In the ensuing discussion I will try to examine how far these Abhinavan
deductions are impacted and informed by Utpala’s insights.

On this point the available source material could be divided under two
heads, direct and indirect. The first, i.e. direct, which takes into
account Utpala’s own averments, covers Padasaṁgati, Utpala’s commentary
on the ŚD, ĪPVr̥, ĪPViv and ŚSĀ. The second, i.e. indirect, covers
Abhinavagupta’s comments and observations establishing and clarifying
interconnections and implications in the statements of Utpala.85 Before
proceeding to take stock of the material in hand, it might be
appropriate to make a few general comments.

Utpala’s conceptualization of camatkāra seems to take two directions.
One represents the general aesthetic undercurrent interlacing the entire
thought, be it regarding reality, knowledge, language, religious faith
or any other aspect. This we may describe as ontological or
“existential” camatkāra consisting in joyful valuation of everything as
unabated flow of beatitude. It spells out the general attitude of the
system in distinguishing the Trika perception of all categories as
soaked in rasa (sarasa) from the non-Trika perception which is labelled
as dry (śuṣka). This ontological insight Utpala holds in common with
other savants like Kallaṭa and Somānanda. The only contribution Utpala
makes is that he channelizes the floating idea by giving it a technical
name, i.e. camatkāra, and also by providing supporting metaphysical,
logical, psychological and phenomenological framework. The other
conceptualization may be said to pertain to aesthetics and described as
“experiential” camatkāra. The second type has direct bearing in the
domains of bhakti and art. A careful scrutiny suggests a further
secondary conceptualization under this second variety relating to the
objective, material or physical side of art as well as bhakti. In this
formulation camatkāra touches the medium of art, artefact, i.e. art
object, and the content of beauty rendering all these as varying marks
or stages of camatkāra.

Utpala’s primary inspiration seems to have come from his own teacher,
Somānanda. The word camatkāra is absent in Somānanda, but his āmoda
(lit. joy, delight; also, diffusive fragrance), occurring four times, is
rendered in terms of camatkāra twice,86 of āsvāda (taste) once87 and
once remaining unexplained88 in the Padasaṁgati. Camatkāra is further
construed as tathāsvarūpaparāmarśana (reflecting upon/brooding over or
being reflectively aware of His having such a form).89 Taking into
account Utpala’s alternative formulation in terms of āsvāda, the
intended connection of camatkāra with āsvāda becomes clear. At both the
places, context is similar — whether you call it expansion (jr̥mbhā, lit.
“yawning”) or abundance (bāhulya) (of āmoda) — it consists in Self’s
unfolding in the form of universe. One can notice two distinctive yet
complementary lines taken by Somānanda and Utpala respectively.
Somānanda delineates Śiva, the absolute reality, as joy incarnate
(pramodātmā: lit. of the nature of joy), his experience as entrancement
by own power-savouring (prabhāvāmodabhāvitaḥ),90 his activity as play or
sport (krīḍati)91 and the source of his joyous experience as the flow of
his own beauty, form or (variegated) colour (the three primary senses of
the word rūpa: rūpaprasārarasataḥ).92 As regards Utpala, he has four
points to add: (i) this reflective awareness necessarily has the nature
of transworldly relish or unique savouring, (ii) this represents a
process, an unending current of relish (vibhavāsvādo ’parisamāptaḥ: lit.
unfinished gustation), (iii) play or sport is invariably a vibratory
reflex following joy,93 and (iv) the absolute beauty-apperception
(rūpaparāmarśa) in the form of phenomenal expansion metaphorically
portrayed as “yawning” (jr̥mbhā) which being an outflow of āmoda (i.e.
camatkāra for Utpala), is reconceptualized as ghūrṇana (from √ghūrṇ, to
whirl around, revolve, move, reel) by Utpala who by invoking his other
work, ŚSĀ, explains it as “swaying with his own blissful spontaneity”.94
Perhaps Utpala wants to re-emphasize and draw endorsement from his
teacher that both processes, appreciative as well as creative, are
aesthetic to the core.

In his ŚSĀ Utpala pushes his stand further. The word āmoda which he uses
here only once and which he so fervently reconstructs as camatkāra in
the ŚDVr̥ starts losing its sheen, and going by Kṣemarāja, it now comes
to denote fragrance.95 Though I still believe that contextually its
rendering into camatkāra would have been more apt and closer to Utpala’s
original presentation. From the ŚDVr̥ to ŚSĀ there is a visible change of
context — Utpala transiting from philosophy to theology or devotion, to
be more precise. There are only two occurrences of the word camatkāra.
Out of the two, in the first one,96 which thematically takes us back to
ŚD 1.1, Utpala resorts to the experiential formulation of camatkāra
professedly in terms of savouring. Utpala’s innovation lies in
connecting this savouring (of devotional relish) with the metaphorical
act of chewing/munching (carvaṇā): repeating instantaneously the act of
tasting over and over again for an extended period of time, and thereby
making it a landmark contribution. This is perhaps the first ever
reference to carvaṇā within the academic community of Kashmir Śaivists
and may be accepted as the foundation of Abhinavan theorization of
aesthetic experience in terms of carvaṇā, i.e. aesthetic
chewing/relishing of rasa. The second usage97 marks the existential
formulation of camatkāra. It is due to sheer touch of the divine that a
thing of beauty produces joy — a state of rapturous thrill (camatkr̥ti) —
in the beholder. In this formulation the object too is beautiful and
therefore is capable of causing relish. With such a posture Utpala
brings even all the objective reality within the ontological canvas of
beauty.

However, the most important component of Utpala’s hermeneutics of
camatkāra is found in his seminal Pratyabhijñā texts. Even at the risk
of appearing repetitive I would like to summarize the key points of his
elaborate treatment, specially the complex methodology adopted and major
conclusions drawn before looking into them in detail. From our point of
view ĪPK 1.5.11 and 2.4.20 transpire to be most relevant. It is in the
Vr̥tti on 1.5.11 that Utpala moots the notion of camatkāra by rendering
vimarśa as camatkāra equating it with sentience that distinguishes the
sentient from the insentient, the animate from the inanimate. In the
Vivr̥ti on the same this camatkr̥ti is further understood as unique or
special delight/pleasure (viśeṣaprīti) or unique or distinctive
experience (viśeṣapratīti), the second option representing “the view of
others”.

Taking cues from the Vr̥tti and Vivr̥ti Abhinavagupta resurrects his
metaphysics of rasa by identifying: (a) camatkāra with the savouring
activity of the gourmet, (b) this activity with joyful experience, and
(c) this joyful experience with subjective repose. Under ĪPK 2.4.20, the
Vivr̥ti presents the Vr̥tti as being the re-endorsement of 1.5.11 and
develops the notion of svātantrya in terms of camatkāra. This notion is
reconnected with the notion of rasa with Abhinavagupta suggesting mutual
complementarity between ĪPK1.5.11 and 2.4.20, specially as regards the
Vr̥tti and Vivr̥ti on the two. Under 2.4.20 Abhinavagupta highlights
Utpala’s twin formulations of camatkāra in terms of kriyā and icchā, the
former emerging as aesthetical, i.e. experiential formulation and the
latter as existential, i.e. ontological formulation. Abhinavagupta
demonstrates that the latter formulation is impacted by Somānanda and
pertains to the absolutic/supreme realm (parāvasthā) of reality, whereas
the former is Utpala’s ingenuous formulation and pertains to the
ultimate–non-ultimate (parāpara) realm of reality. Pandey’s ascription
of aesthetic experience (rasānubhava) to the level of Śakti category
might be understood in reference to this formulation. The notion of
camatkāra as developed under 1.1.3 (Vivr̥ti), 1.5.11 (Vr̥tti and Vivr̥ti),
1.5.13 (Abhinavagupta’s ĪPVV), 1.5.14 (Vivr̥ti), 2.3.7-8 (Abhinavagupta’s
ĪPVV) and 4.1.6 (Vr̥tti) represent kriyā-formulation, whereas that under
2.4.20 (Vivr̥ti) represents kriyā- and icchā-formulations both. In any
case both formulations transform camatkāra as constituting repose
(viśrānti) in the subject. One more notion of camatkāra offered by the
Vr̥tti under 4.1.1 contextually could be said to have ontological tidings
but on analysis (being instrumental to the “augmentation”, upabr̥ṁhaṇa)
transpires to be kriyā-formulation.

Let us now go into some more detail. Utpala’s starting point on
camatkāra happens to be the Vr̥tti on ĪPK 1.5.11,98 duly elaborated in
the Vivr̥ti. Unfortunately our access to the Vivr̥ti is fragmentary being
limited to the extracts by Abhinavagupta,99 occurring as part of his
comments. Nonetheless we get a fairly good idea of Utpala’s mind, even
if we look at them independently of Abhinavagupta’s long exegesis.
Abhinavagupta shows that Utpala in the role of the author of the Vivr̥ti
is intrigued by the unusual course adopted by (him in his another role
as) the author of the Vr̥tti in rendering vimarśa in terms of an unknown
category like camatkāra without any apparent compulsion. The reason
which emerges from Abhinavan presentation of the Vivr̥ti100 is that
Utpala is driven by the urge to develop vimarśa as the sole
aestheticizing principle and project it as a singular factor responsible
for dividing animate from inanimate. Animation, i.e. sentience, is the
capacity to enjoy oneself by self-objectification which inanimate, i.e.
insentient, utterly lacks. Thus camatkāra, representing as it does the
precise activity of the subject101 who is actually engrossed in
savouring, amounts to joy that embodies culmination of relish or
enjoyment. This is what constitutes the vitalizing essence of
prakāśa.102 Exactly this is the point which affords ample scope to
Abhinavagupta for bringing in his elaborate insights.103

Abhinavagupta seeks to put forth the following major stipulations:

1. Bliss or joy is the essence of “self” (sva-rūpa) and consists in
total self-actualization.

2. Joy, i.e. self-actualization, is possible in a state of total freedom
— freedom from dependence on/expectation from the other or from
interfering conditions which, when logically abstracted, constitute the
“other”. This absolute independence amounts to being established in
ecstatic thrill (camatkāra) characterized by (self-)savouring.104

3. One who primarily reflects upon the subjective aspect is called a
savourer or gourmet (bhuñjāna, lit. one who is savouring).105 This state
becomes possible only when there is no obstruction or interference in
tasting from any side and the objective aspect, technically styled as
prakāśa, is subordinated to the subjective aspect. This precisely
defines “aesthetic susceptibility” or “capability to appreciate”
(sahr̥dayatā: lit. condition of being endowed with heart) and is also
construed as “repose in subjecthood” (pramātr̥tā-viśrāntī).106

4. Abhinavagupta unearths a replicative affinity in art experience. He
identifies rasanā, the process of experiencing in poetry or drama, in
the nature of obstruction-free tasting, with pramātr̥tā-viśrānti (repose
in subjectivity) and rasa with the psychic or mental states being
objectified or forming content in such a tasting.107 Like metaphysics,
art in its most elevated stage, as I said elsewhere,108 “is always
brimming with joyous self-repose which eschews any counter force or
obstruction. That is why this state of consciousness is depicted as
paramabhoga, supreme enjoyment, in contrast to the ordinary bhoga”.

5. Abhinavagupta is therefore prompted to abstract parāmarśa or vimarśa
in terms of “reflective awareness in the nature of uniform dense
savouring” (rasanaikaghanatayā parāmarśaḥ) in respect of that one alone
who is free and marks his constant presence in the intrinsic
consciousness. Alternate nomenclature for camatkāra is nirvr̥ti (delight)
or paramānanda (absolute joy).109 Having foregrounded such an elaborate
analysis of the notion of camatkāra, Abhinavagupta feels assured that
Utpala, the author of the Vivr̥ti, now has enough justification for
supporting Vr̥tti’s instance in preferring camatkāra to vimarśa when it
comes to propounding the distinguishing feature of the sentient.110 What
is more, Abhinavagupta underscores his endorsement of the Vivr̥ti’s
viewing camatkāra as a “unique delightful experience” (viśeṣaprītiḥ) in
contrast with the “unique experience” (viśeṣapratītiḥ) as interpreted by
others (apareṣāṁ) on the strength of a variant reading. Thus the Vivr̥ti
is fully justified in concluding that vimarśa by virtue of its being
camatkāra could alone constitute sentience and as such it can rest only
on a knowing subject and not on the insentient or inert object.111

Though, unlike the Vr̥tti on ĪPK 1.5.11, the Vr̥tti on 2.4.20112 does not
mention camatkāra, the Vivr̥ti by subjecting the phrase svātantryābhāvāt
(“since it does not possess freedom/ owing to the absence of freedom”)
occurring in the Vr̥tti113 to the same format of scrutiny conclusively
establishes Utpala’s ultimate intention to develop svātantrya in terms
of camatkāra as the principle solely responsible from demarcating
sentient from insentient, and thereby to turn svātantryābhāvāt ipso
facto into camatkārābhāvāt.114 Abhinavagupta makes us conclude that
Utpala has two alternative formulations of svātantryābhāva as
kriyā’bhāva and icchā’bhāva respectively, both kriyā and icchā (action
and will) are finally abstracted as camatkāra. As regards
kriyā-formulation, the component camattva (camatkāra has two components:
camat + kāra) indicates continuation of original understanding as
savouring (bhuñjānatārūpam, lit. savouring subjecthood) and the other
component -kāra stands for action (kriyā). Thus syntactically camattva
becomes the object (karma) of the verb karoti (camattvaṁ karoti): evaṁ
bhuñjānatārūpaṁ camattvaṁ tad eva karoti. Accordingly “savouring”
(camatkāra) emerges as savouring activity indulged in by the tasting
subject.115 It is in this sense that the aesthetic savouring is seen as
an activity, as a process — a fact duly acknowledged by Abhinavagupta
reiterating the salient features of previous discussion and urging
reader to go over them under 1.5.11.116

Behind kriyā-formulation Utpala’s own metaphysics is at play. Kriyā is
nothing but vimarśa in the nature of camatkāra marking the highest
primordial stage of prakāśa. This is what goes by the name of svātantrya
(freedom). This kriyā (in ĪPK 2.4.20), that is, svātantrya, is beyond
icchā (will); the phenomenon of will comes next. This svātantrya
acquires the form of icchā when the potential object of will/desire
(iṣyamāṇa) comes into being. In this sense icchā belongs to the second
order of reality, i.e. the primary–secondary (parāpara) order. The same
svātantrya, having descended to the secondary or lower order of reality,
apara daśā of prakāśa, loses its perfection.117 It seems that with
reference to its definition of reality as prakāśa–vimarśa synthesis, or
being–becoming synthesis, the Vivr̥ti is abstracting vimarśa in the sense
of “freedom to be” (bhavanasvātantrya) inherent in the notion of “being”
(bhavana), analogous to the notion of prakāśana (illumination or
illuminating-activity) in prakāśa (light) and thereby projecting kriyā
(action) as kartr̥tā (agency), reminiscent of its formulation, e.g.
citkriyācitikartr̥tātātparyeṇa in ĪPK 1.5.12. Vimarśa, in such a
formulation, is camatkāra: self-reflecting awareness turns into
self-savouring awareness.118 In this formulation kriyā is the
presupposition of will which remains latent in it as integral aspect and
is manifested only on kriyā coming into play. To put it logically,
willing is to be deduced from kriyā. What is important from our
immediate point of view is that it provides an insight into
Abhinavagupta’s mind as to why he is so emphatic in associating
Bharata’s notion of rasa in the Vivr̥ti with this kind of formulation of
camatkāra. As its direct fall out, the word niṣpatti (lit. production)
in ‘rasa-niṣpatti’ in the Rasa Sūtra of Bharata is interpreted by
Abhinavagupta as belonging to the tasting = rasanā (as an activity) and
not rasa (as a substantive object), whereas rasa is the content of such
tasting and it is only metaphorically that the accomplishing or
production of rasa could be spoken of.119

Foundationally, camatkāra represents viśrānti (repose) in the subject.
This repose could be twofold, either in the nature of kriyā (action) as
we saw just now or as icchā, which is a legacy from Utpala’s
metaphysical tradition or, to be more exact, from his own teacher
Somānanda. For the sake of convenience we could call it
icchā-formulation. Exegeting two words from the Vivr̥ti, e.g. evaṁ and
athavā, Abhinavagupta uncodes the background of the alternative
formulation undertaken by Utpala. Elaborating evaṁ (thus, in this way)
Abhinavagupta states that prior formulation in terms of action is the
result of abstracted perception of prakāśa and vimarśa, śiva and śakti.
In this case śiva, viewed as divorced from śakti and hence reckoned as
śāntaśiva (quiescent Śiva), constituted the absolute state (parā daśā)
leaving no scope for will. Hence everything other than prakāśa, i.e.
Śiva, has to be accounted for in terms of action. Contrary to this, the
second formulation in terms of will indicated by athavā (or,
alternatively) stems from unitary perception of Śiva as ever-remaining
possessed of Śakti, the stand taken by the ŚD. On this view now it
becomes possible to have will even in the ultimate state and identify it
with camatkāra. Under this formulation, action is subsumed within
will.120

In this context Abhinavagupta comes out with two theorizations of
camatkāra. The first comes in the wake of his gloss on athavā from the
Vivr̥ti121 and is simply put: “everywhere savouring by itself is will”
(sarvatra camatkāra eva icchā). The second comes by way of explanation
of the Vivr̥ti’s “saiva hi”. Here the “subjective mode of relishing”
(camatkāritā) is defined in terms of “being in the agential mode of
savouring” (bhuñjānarūpatā) in the nature of will invariably marked by
self-repose. Simply stated, camatkāra is the state of subjective
savouring which is will universally characterized by self-repose.122 For
Abhinavagupta, the word “universally” (sarvatra, everywhere) has special
significance indicating that all human emotions and mental states are
the varied manifestations of will.123 In fact, the word sarvatra again
seems to be the legacy of Utpala himself, because in course of
developing his thesis Abhinavagupta refers to Utpala’s use of the word
ādi and exegetes it to imply even āṇavamala which he calls abhilāṣamala
(maculation of desire) (and in its trail autsukya eagerness/anxiety, and
others):124 it applies to situations where the objective referent, even
though having a generalized form, survives as a latent residual trace.
The deep-rooted impact of this formulation becomes fully evident in
several key areas of Abhinavagupta’s theory of rasa; first and foremost,
in his notion of universalization (sādhāraṇīkaraṇa) leading to the
uniformity of perception of the spectator which is also instrumental to
the uniform nourishment of rasa in all the spectators.125 It is because
the spectators’ minds are innately endowed with latent traces resonating
with each other, the minds being variegated by beginningless latent
traces.126 By extension this also provides basis for the permanent
nature (sthāyitva) of the enduring emotions (sthāyibhāva) because they
represent the forms of consciousness a living being is innately endowed
with in the form of the beginningless residual traces.127

The Vivr̥ti is now all set to sum up its rationalization of svātantrya in
terms of will (icchā), this is how Abhinavagupta wants us to understand.
But Abhinavagupta also wants us to appreciate that even on this
formulation the binary abstraction of camatkāra remains intact.128 The
notion of freedom may be approached in two ways: either with reference
to “will-to-be” (bubhūṣā-yogena) or without such reference (ayogena).
While the former position is easy to identify as the will-formulation,
the latter has to be taken as action-formulation even though the word
kriyā is not there.129 Technically, these could be reframed in terms of
viśrānti (repose, rest) taking the forms as kr̥iyālakṣaṇā viśrānti and
icchālakṣaṇā viśrānti (the reader may kindly bear with repetition). This
twofold formulating alters the meaning of viśrānti in their respective
applications. In action-formulation viśrānti is viśramaṇa, that is
“resting”: savouring (camatkāra) is “resting” in the non-dependent,
non-expectant self. It represents action being done — savouring-
activity being performed — by the subject (bhuñjānatā-rūpaṁ camat-tvaṁ,
tadeva karoti): savouring itself is “resting” in the subject.130 In
will-formulation viśrānti is “rest” (not “resting”): being in the state
of camatkāra (camatkāritā) is being in the state of a savouring subject
(bhuñjāna-rūpatā) characterized by rest in one’s own self.131

Though ĪPK 2.4.20 is the only place where (as per Abhinavagupta’s
showing) Utpala has directly put forward two clearly marked-out
approaches: one ascribed to himself and the other traced to his teacher,
this differentiation is consistently implicit in Abhinavagupta’s
presentation throughout. Under ĪPK 1.5.13 while glossing ekā from the
Vivr̥ti referring to Parā Vāk Abhinavagupta first refers to two discreet
states of Parama śiva as the holder of power (śaktimadrūpa) and as power
(śakti) itself, and renders Parā Vāk in terms of śakti identifying it
with parāmarśa. Whereas Parama śiva, i.e. śaktimān, represents the state
of absolute transcendence untouched by the traces of variety consisting
of subject–object, Parā Vāk is the homologized totality of the
differentiated potential creation. What is striking, Parā Vāk is viewed
as āsvāda, i.e. as the state full (of relishing) of one’s own magnitude
(ābhoga), which Abhinavagupta reckons as camatkāra (savouring) in the
nature of reflective awareness of one’s own expansion
(nijābhogaparāmarśātmā).132 In Abhinavagupta’s technical parlance, the
term ābhoga represents processive action or function (vyāpāra)
constituted by discovering (such progression as) emergence, nourishment
and recurring reflection (lit. chewing) with regard to the consciousness
element (cidbhāva) submerged in the midst of the traces of numberless
objects lying within (antarbruḍita) the knowing awareness
(saṁvedana).133 It is interesting to note that Abhinavagupta invokes ŚSĀ
13.15 (of Utpala),134 the same verse which Utpala himself cites while
formulating Somānanda’s āmoda in terms of camatkāra in the Padasaṁgati
on SD 1.7. Attention to this has been drawn earlier.135

This is no doubt Utpala’s own pet formulation. But Abhinavagupta here
finds scope for another formulation, attributed to Somānanda, as well.
On the alternative construction Abhinavagupta says that Parameśvara,
i.e. Parama śiva, is never for a moment bereft of such (tadrūpa, i.e.
“being of the nature of that”) nature, i.e. He is never without Śakti or
self-reflective awareness as has been so far presented (evam). In order
to prove his point he relies upon ŚD 3.56.136 No doubt, the imprint of
camatkāra in its will-formulation mode is quite explicit here.

In the ĪPVV137 on 1.5.14 Abhinavagupta develops Utpala’s insight still
further remaining glued to Utpala’s original kriyā-formulation of
camatkāra. As we have already seen earlier, in the Kārikā and in the
Vr̥tti Utpala talks of two complementary reductions of self-reflecting
awareness (pratyavamarśātmā citiḥ), e.g. foundation (pratiṣṭhā) as well
as heart (hr̥daya). The prime focus of the Vivr̥ti is on establishing
vimarśa as heart whether the two formulations are taken independently or
conjointly where the former acts as the logical reason for the
latter.138 From whatever of the Vivr̥ti that has come down to us,139 it
is clear that Utpala offers a complete argument towards building up his
notion of heart.

Abhinavagupta demonstrates that in this kārīkā Utpala takes a serialized
route for architecting his notion of heart. Displaying its unique
characteristic, vimarśa-śakti transforms causality (kāraṇatā) into
agency (kartr̥tā). Causality by definition is constrained by its
dependence on, or reference to, the effect (kārya). Agency (kartr̥tā) is
therefore causality freed from cause-dependence or cause-reference. The
implication, in no uncertain terms, being that Parama Śiva is not just a
mere cause but the agent on whom entire phenomenal creation rests.140 As
such agency is to be necessarily perceived in terms of the absolute
autonomy (svātantrya). It is this autonomy that Utpala believes has
camatkāra for its intrinsic essence (camatkr̥tirūpatvāt).141 As to the
definition of this camatkr̥ti we have no direct word from Utpala in the
present context but Abhinavagupta constructs it as “repose culminating
in the ultimate enjoyment (paramabhoga) characterized by joy”
(ānandātmakaparamabhogaparyantā viśrāntiḥ). This is exactly the same
formulation that we saw Abhinavagupta undertake while formulating
camatkāra (ānandātmā paramo bhogaḥ) in his exegesis of the word pūrṇa
from the Vivr̥ti on 1.1.3 and to which an allusion has already been
made.142 Resorting to the reverse identification of camatkāra with
unalloyed autonomy (viśuddha svātantrya), where there is no room
whatsoever for dependence occasioned by obstruction or restriction, if
we believe Abhinavagupta, Utpala serves two purposes with a single
stroke in the form of present thesis: one, he lays down the foundation
for his upcoming theory of multifaceted and transcausal creation (note
the semantic richness of the word vicitra in vicitranirmāṇa) to be taken
up in the next kārikās (1.5.15-16), and two, establishing heart as
constituting foundation of universal consciousness (viśvacetana) in the
primary sense of the term.143 This formulation seems to contain several
implications which could be seen as aesthetically meaningful. Art
experience, and for that matter rasa experience, represents a unique
kind of tasting (āsvāda), described by art theoreticians as rasanā (cp.
camatkāra as āsvāda/ ānanadātmakaparamabhoga) that consists in
obstructionless awareness (cp. pratighātaleśarahita svātantrya), art
creation and artistic creativity that eschews causal laws and boasts of
endless variety (cp. transcausal agency and vicitranirmāṇa emanating
from self-reposed blissful autonomy).

We come across one more direct formulation of camatkāra in Utpala’s
Vr̥tti on 4.1.1.144 Utpala develops akhaṇḍāmarśa as tanmelanācamatkāra
deliberately underscoring the essential nature of the reflective
awareness constituted by “savouring” that marks the fusion, the
interactive unification of the unfragmented knowing subject with the
unfragmented knowable object. Melanā (fusion) is a form of action that
befits Utpala’s characterstic attitude in approaching the problem of
relishing. The formulation of akhaṇḍāmarśa in terms of
tan-melanācamatkāra, that is, savouring as fusing, as unifying, as
integrating — is an attempt to evaluate savouring in a relational
context. Viewed from the perspective of art, the notion of saṁyoga, i.e.
combination of various ingredients of art creation and appreciation,
carries structural significance. Perhaps it might sound a far-fetched
suggestion, yet it does revive memory of saṁbandhe sāvadhānatā and
underlies the integration of the universalized (de-individualized)
subject with the universalized (de-individualized) object unshackled
from the individuating factors in an aesthetic situation.

It would be only fair to digress a little bit from Utpala’s direct
inputs on camatkāra to some indirect ones where he is seen to draw
inspiration from his teacher Somānanda, particularly with pointed
reference to the latter’s idea of nirvr̥ti145 (in the absence of a better
equivalent the nearest term could be sublime/serene delight or blissful
sublimity).146 Abhinavagupta is developing Utpala’s concluding remark
while winding up the foregoing discussion in the Vivr̥ti on 1.5.11:
“Hence it has been rightly said ‘(He) Himself shines like that
(tathā)’.”147 And his explanation is: “Thus ‘I’ constitute the
foundational essence (vapuḥ, lit. body) of light in the nature of
sublime delight (nirvr̥tirūpaṁ), characterized by reflective awareness
(vimarśa).”148 The preceding long discussion149 establishes the
absolutism of prakāśa, denying any legitimacy to the division of
luminous consciousness into knower, known and relation between them:
everything is prakāśa and this prakāśana (manifestation) is nothing but
vimarśa (reflective awareness). However, this is the standard position
of the system but what makes it peculiar is its context and placement.
This discussion is coming up just in the wake of Utpala’s discussion on
camatkāra as a sole discriminating factor between conscious and
unconscious and its delighting characteristic,150 with which we are
already conversant. Since camatkāra or sentience, of necessity, rests in
the subject, the residual reflective awareness survives in the form of
“I” only. Now at this point Abhinavagupta calls our attention to the
fact that this distinction between prakāśa and vimarśa was thoroughly
brought home by Utpala in the Vivr̥ti on 1.1.3 at the time of discussing
the sentence: “Moreover, reflective awareness never stoops (āskandati,
lit. attacks/assaults) to the plane of thisness.”151 The reason being
that all reflective awareness must strive to rest on the subject alone,
hence it is logically impossible to shine as “I” in the realm of “this”.
Now, when we go back to this portion of the text under 1.1.3152 we find,
to our amazement, that the notion of pure, unmixed, i.e. absolute
subjectivity is reduced to the notion of camatkāra and is explained
thus. Vimarśa, whether it refers to the subject or to the object, does
rest in the subject. But their mutual distinctions arise from the planes
of prakāśa they belong to. Utpala, as per Abhinavagupta’s presentation,
stipulates two planes of prakāśa: the absolute, that is, free from the
objective colouration, identified with the subject and represented by
“I” marking repose in the unbroken light of consciousness; and the
relative (this word is not used by either, Utpala or Abhinavagupta),
that is coloured or affected by object, and identified with means of
knowing (i.e. pramāṇa). The freedom from affection is what constitutes
“purity” or “absoluteness” of prakāśa, which accounts for the action,
being done in the form of reflectively reacting (saṁrambha) by the
savouring subject, “It is I who am the enjoyer of the objects such as
blue, etc.” and distinguishes by definition the conscious subject from
the insentient object.

Having been thus equipped with the background by Abhinavagupta we can
now pick up the thread from where we started: “Hence it has been rightly
said ‘(He) Himself shines like that’.”153 This is what characterizes
vimarśa’s essence as blissful sublimity (nirvr̥ti).154 Not only the
reflective awareness “I”, but even the objective categories such as body
and vital breath where it is superimposed also shine as full of sublime
delight. Abhinavagupta makes it clear that he owes this idea to Utpala.
I may draw the attention of the reader to a similar proposition in the
ABh, where Abhinavagupta holds obstruction-free awareness as standing
for camatkāra proper and the physical effects arising therefrom also as
camatkāra (which could for the sake of precision be described as
secondary).155 Due to the striking similarity one cannot miss to notice
Utpala’s influence on Abhinavan stipulation. However, Abhinavagupta’s
main concern is to show Utpala’s indebtedness to Somānanda in linking
camatkāra to nirvr̥ti. Responding to a probable opponent Abhinavagupta is
convinced that even the so-called painful experiences are intrinsically
marked by joyful relish (camatkāra) because of the presence of “I”. It
is only by undergoing the process of enjoyment that the experiencing
subject makes his pain rest only within. Since the subject is
preoccupied with the outside object, which now stands destroyed due to
pragmatic considerations, he is unmindful of the inner rest even though
the inner rest is very much there. However, as a result of regaining
composure due to specialized training, the inner rest gains ground
disregarding or subduing the external object. This idea Abhinavagupta
ascribes to the ŚD: “In pain also, through the blossoming, i.e.
expansion (of the essential nature).”156 With this formulation
Abhinavagupta takes us back to the notion of aesthetic susceptibility
(sahr̥dayatā), developed only a few paragraphs back in course of his
presentation of the Vivr̥ti’s rationalization of camatkr̥ter abhāvāt
occurring in the Vr̥tti. Sahr̥dayatā constitutes the mental state of a
connoisseur when the appreciative awareness (represented by heart:
hr̥daya and homologized with parāmarśa) gains prominence over the
objective content of art owing to the disregard or subjugation of the
prakāśa aspect grounded in and represented by the objective
configuration.157 Thus the affinity between the two notions of
sahr̥dayatā and bhuñjānatā becomes quite transparent, because bhuñjānatā
(savouring subjecthood) too consists in primarily relishing of the
subjective aspect alone.158

Somānanda seems to have visualized three stages of soteriological
progression duly appropriated by Utpala (as Abhinavagupta would have it)
as forming three stages of camatkāra.159 These could be constructed in
the following manner

i. Loosening of imposition of camatkāra (camatkārādhyāsa-śithilana),

ii. transmitting the grasp or reception of camatkāra
(camatkāra-grahābhisañcāraṇa), and

iii. abiding in the state of thrill characterized by camatkāra
(camatkārānandadaśāvalambana)

with reference to a seeker on way to salvation. The first stage marks
the unfastening of the savouring of I-consciousness from his body; the
second stands for the transfer or transfusion of the same into the body
of a higher order or superior abode and the third represents the
ultimate state brimming with joy of savouring free from obstacles keenly
sought to be embraced by those who having reached the final phase are
fully geared to discard the mortal frame. Despite the overall tone of
the entire presentation being soteriological the three characteristic
features of camatkāra, namely, I-centricity, freedom from obstructions
and joyousness, are conspicuously present in this formulation as
well.160

However, one must remember that Somānanda’s contribution is limited to
offering philosophical flashes for creating a perspectival backdrop for
future aesthetic speculations. Utpala’s contribution is much deeper.
Though he does not lay down a theory of art as such, he furnishes a
framework supported by a logical and ontological rationalization
congenial for the flowering of aesthetic speculation. So far as the
full-blooded theory of art is concerned, the sole credit has to be
accorded to Abhinavagupta for fully appropriating these insights for
building up a system.

Camatkāra as Rasa-Experience and

Rasa as Its Content: āsvādya

Through his profound and exhaustive hermenutics of camatkāra, primarily
under ĪPK 1.5.11 and 2.4.20, Abhinavagupta highlights Utpala’s emphasis
on developing camatkāra as rasa-experience (rasanā), a state of
aesthetic enjoyment (āsvāda). But at the same time Abhinavagupta,
remaining fully alive to Bharata’s legacy, shows that Utpala is equally
conscious that this experience is not possible in the absence of its
content (āsvādya). This aspect Utpala develops under ĪPK 1.8.3-4 and
1.8.9 as well as under 2.3.7. The main focus of ĪPK 1.8.9 is to develop
an ontology so as to explain how psychic mental states become content of
aesthetic experience even while retaining their innate internality.
Integral to this process it also seeks to develop an ontology of
immediacy in perception, i.e. experience of the aesthetic content. ĪPK
2.3.7 together with its Vr̥tti is addressed to establishing the unique
non-ordinary yet unitary character of rasa experience arising from the
uniqueness of the object of experience by embracing the model of a
svalakṣaṇa, i.e. individualized existential objective unit of
experience. Reading with ĪPK 1.3.7, 1.4.2 and 2.2.2 it further provides
a structure and an epistemic blueprint for the underlying process of the
rasa nourishment.

Let us look at it in some more detail. As already observed above,
Abhinavagupta is fully aware that Utpala is a metaphysician and as such
aesthetics is not his (Utpala’s) immediately legitimate concern and
appropriates all credit for aesthetic theorizing to himself,161 but at
the same time what is noteworthy is that he is deliberately unravelling
the aesthetic potential of his master’s insights precisely at those very
spots. Under 1.5.11 Utpala’s reduction of vimarśa to camatkr̥ti prompts
Abhinavagupta to further reduce it to taste, relish (āsvāda), i.e.
experience. According to Abhinavagupta this experience, i.e. taste,
could be multifold or varied and has for its object mental states that
represent nine rasas which have been thoroughly analysed in
Abhinavagupta’s gloss on the Nāṭyaśāstra.162 However, Abhinavagupta does
not leave us in doubt that the precise inspiration of his contention is
Utpala himself. While explaining the phrase sukhādeḥ (of the pleasure,
etc.) in ĪPK 1.8.9163 and duly cited in the Vivr̥ti he takes it to stand
for all the mental states categorized as permanent (sthāyin) and
transient (vyabhicārin) propounded by authorities like Bharata (the
celebrated author of the NŚ), etc.164 I have no doubt that this idea
does hail from Utpala, because Abhinavagupta consistently repeats his
observation as well as linkage with Bharata in the ĪPV on this
kārikā.165 And we are fully aware that Abhinavagupta’s professed aim in
the ĪPV is to bring out the real purport of Utpala’s aphorisms.166 Not
only the permanent emotions, even the inclusion of the transitory mental
states is suggested by Utpala’s explicit mention of lajjā (shame,
blushing) in the Vr̥tti.167 Glossing atadrūpāc ca from the
Vivr̥ti,Abhinavagupta makes it abundantly clear that Vr̥tti’s recourse to
lajjā is intended to underscore its categorial distinction from pleasure
and pain, etc. and is indicatory of the transitory mental states in
general such as anxiety, etc.168 From what we have seen it appears that
Utpala, at the back of his mind, wanted to evolve an inclusive
metaphysics that could answer and account for the main issues in
aesthetics as well: how the mental images and emotive states are
objectified; how their grasp or reception, despite taking place at
mental level, tends to be as unmediated as sense-perception. In his
answer Utpala first clubs pleasure, etc. with mental imagery (ullekha:
lit. projection/inscribing/painting/carving)169 and considers them as
external. In this case the word ‘external’ has a technical sense. There
are two types of externality in Kashmir Śaivism: one, general or
primary, and the other, secondary or sense-perceptual (bāhyatā and
bāhyendriyavedyatā). The primary externality consists in non-identity
with or differentiation from the subject, the I, and is therefore
reckoned as graspability or knowability (grāhyatā). A thing becomes an
object of knowing only when it is de-identified with or differentiated
from the knowing subject. The other externality consists in its
perceptibility by the external sense faculties. As regards the external
objects, their externality is double, they are separated from the
subject and also from the object of the sense-perception. But in case of
the internal objects, i.e. realities in the mental or conceptual domain,
their externality is single, i.e. conceptual, primary in the sense that
though they abide in as well as are perceived by mind, i.e. the internal
sense/s, they can no longer be identified with their intrinsic
subjective essence.170 Their “internality” is also similarly restricted,
it is “locational” with reference to their seat of occurrence and inner
instrumentalities of cognition, but not “essential” owing to their
externalization due to loss of oneness with the inner subjectivity.
Pleasure, pain, emotions, psychic states and mental figurings constitute
and belong to this realm only. Utpala likens this internality as
residual trace-like subsistence within I-ness.171

Utpala at this point introduces a subtle distinction even within the
sphere of second type of externality having enormous significance from
our point of view.172 According to him, not only jar, etc. popularly
known external entities, but even the entities that are mentally
projected, pictured, imagined, represented, or visualized/recreated in
meditation and which are specially brought under the semantic umbrella
of the word ullekha173 too need be treated as sense-perceptible external
objects. The only difference between the worldly objects and the
mentally constructed or willed ones is that while the former enjoys the
actual externality, the latter does so by its potential fitness
(yogyatayā).174 Thus the external things as well as the mentally created
ones not actually apprehended through the external senses partake of
both types of externality, viz., subjectivity-alienation and
sense-perception. Contrary to this the experiential and emotive states
of mind such as pleasure and pain are considered to be grasped via
internal senses only and are supposed to be external in the technical
sense of missing intrinsic unity with I-awareness.175

Equipped with this minute analysis, Utpala is well poised to take next
logical step in proclaiming that this external manifestation is purely
mental, i.e. it takes place through the mind (here called
“intellectual”: bauddha) alone and the mental projection and psychic
states grasped are as vivid and immediate as in perceptual experience of
form, colour, etc. through normal sense-organs such as eye.176 By the
chosen use of the word “as” (yathā in the Kārikā and iva in the
Vr̥tti)177 Utpala again very subtly, one must note, underlines the
relationship of the illustration (dr̥ṣṭānta) and the illustrated
(dārṣṭāntika) between the objects of sense-perception such as jar and
form and those of internal/mental perception such as mental imagery and
pleasure.178 This again is going to prove very helpful in our ongoing
pursuit.

What Utpala is intending to prove [and for which he employs ĪPK 1.8.4
and Vr̥tti thereon]179 is that

(i) this spontaneity and immediacy of perception as regards the mental
states and representations is not simply a datum, a presentation by the
empirical circumstances, but something that could be reproduced, vividly
recreated180 in the present;181

(ii) this could be achieved through intense and uninterrupted mental
representation, contemplation, for which Abhinavagupta has coined a
special term: nirantaro vikalpaḥ or nirantarotprekṣaṇa (unbroken
ideation, projection);182 (iii) this could be wrought by seeking
recourse to certain special effort or preparation;183 and

(iv) once actualized it is as efficacious and effective in generating
the desired effect such as blooming or joyful state (of mind)
(vikāsādihetuḥ).184

A Digression: Utpala as the Sole Inspiration

Behind Ullekha-Alaṁkāra

It may not be entirely unfair to digress a little at this point. Towards
the beginning of this paper I had mentioned Kane’s drawing our attention
to Utpala’s direct impact on the figure of speech called ullekha, which
Kane translates as “representation”.185 Perhaps, it was Ruyyaka alias
Rucaka (circa 1125-75) who conceived this figure of speech.186 According
to him, perceiving one and the same thing in different ways owing to
differing factors is termed ullekha.187 The word ullekha carries the
imprint of Utpalan usage of the term in the sense of “picturing up in
imagination” (Pandey) or “reproduction/recreation due to representation”
or “mental representation” (Torella).188 The reason for multiple grasp
is the inherent capacity of having manifold representation
(rūpabāhulyayogena) in the item described.189 The causal factors that
make such diversified representation in respect of a single entity
endowed with multiple traits possible are three — taste, purpose and the
cultural insight.190 This formulation of Ruyyaka is self-acknowledgedly
inspired by Utpala’s famous kārikā (i.e. ĪPK 2.3.3) that defines the
nature of an object of a means of cognition. “In an object, even though
it is established as one by the ontological synthetic activity (of mind)
(its) manifestation may be differentiated according to the taste, the
practical purpose and the knowledge of the established usage (of the
perceiving subject).”191 Though Ruyyaka does not name Utpala, the kārikā
is cited in full and Jayaratha in his Vimarśinī identifies the precise
textual source as the ĪPK.192 Not only this, Jayaratha’s explanation
fully echoes the linguistic nuances of the Pratyabhijñā
conceptualization as well.193 Ruyyaka’s prescription that in a poet’s
scheme these causal factors may be deployed, either jointly or
severally,194 there is no restriction to it, is again lifted from
Utpala’s Vr̥tti.195 The only literary variation introduced by Ruyyaka is
that he talks of the two varieties of this poetic representation. The
first occurs where the same object is apprehended by different
percipients in different ways owing to different factors. Ruyyaka picks
up portrayal of Śrīkaṇṭha-janapada from the Harṣacarita of Bāṇa (3rd
chapter) for illustrating the same. The one and same Śrīkaṇṭha habitat
is apprehended as a hermitage by the sages, as a seat of amorous
activities by the prostitutes and as a concert hall by the
choreographers depending upon their aptitude, requirement and learnt
skills.196 The second variety takes place where one and the same thing
is delineated variously due to difference of object (viṣaya) or, going
by the Citra-Mīmāṁsā or Rasa-Gaṅgādhara, that of locus (āśraya).197 The
reason for difference in multiple representations lies in their
producing a distinct kind of poetic charm (vicchittyantara).

Jayaratha (circa 1150–1200), the author of the Vimarśinī commentary on
the Alaṁkāra-Sarvasva was himself a celebrated Pratyabhijñā philosopher.
Besides the observation that we saw above he specially renders
representation (ullekha) in terms of grasping or apprehending (grahaṇam)
and not in terms of imaginative projection or reproduction, since
perception or apprehension includes both types of cognitive episodes,
free imagination as well as generated perceptions. In sharp contrast to
Utpala’s stand that word-synthesis is the indispensable component of an
ābhāsa, Jayaratha thinks that this is not an invariable constituent of
imaginary productions but nevertheless remains open to being grasped.198
The anonymous author of the Samudrabandha commentary (circa 1250–1300)
from Kolamba in the south appears thoroughly well-versed in the system,
since his interpretation of the term anusandhāna (synthesizing) in terms
of reflection of the several particulars by combining, mixing or
blending them in a dynamic leading-subordinate relationship is
unmistakably reminiscent of the Śaivist view of the same.199 The other
commentator, again from deep south, Śrīvidyācakravartī (circa
1291–1342), the author of the Sañjīvinī commentary is a well-known
Kashmir Śaivist and is famous for his brilliant commentary on the
Virūpākṣa-Pañcāśikā. He innovates on the notion of ullekha interpreting
it as determination by specification or selection (nirdhāraṇa) as
compared to apprehension or imaginative projection.200 The precise
function of anusandhāna is nirdhāraṇa. It is in relation to such a
definitively selected object that the ābhāsa operates. Ābhāsa is,
likewise, construed as experience, perceptual knowledge or cognition
(pratīti) and not as an epistemic object. Thus ullekha alaṁkāra leads to
the rise of cognitive reaction full of multiple representations.201

This figure of speech found wide acceptance in the later phases of the
Alaṁkāraśāstra. The spirited exchange between and the inputs by the
Citra-Mīmāṁsā, Sāhitya-Darpaṇa, Candrāloka and Rasa-Gaṅgādhara, etc. is
a proof to that effect. I have however to leave it here for reasons of
relevance and space.

Rasa as the Content of Aesthetic

Experience, i.e. āsvādya, Continued

Resuming the main discussion we can now connect Abhinavagupta’s several
insights with Utpala’s erstwhile theorization. Pandey in his pioneering
work on aesthetics points to the twofold formulation of rasa as an
aesthetic object and as an aesthetic experience.202 Bharata primarily
viewed rasa as an aesthetic object203 having twin dimensions: external
and internal. The external represents the dramatic presentation on the
stage. The internal aesthetic object, as shown by Abhinavagupta,
consists of permanent and transient mental states, whereas the aesthetic
experience represents a dynamic flow of subjective relishing.204 Now all
these psychic states, by virtue of their being mind-located and
mind-born and being grasped exclusively by internal sense-organ (that
is, the mind) constitutively and epistemically happen to be internal and
yet they constitute the aesthetic object could be understood only in
terms of Utpala’s ontology of externality primarily in terms of
knowability (grāhyatā), and secondarily in those of the twin levels of
sense-perceptibility, as regards the external objects and the internal
states of mind. This explains why rasa-experience is regarded as the
nearest kith and kin of the soteriological experience
(brahmāsvāda-sahodara) but not identical with it. Not only this, the
entire rasa- or nāṭya-experience is viewed as perception-like
(pratyakṣa-kalpa), mental determinate ascertainment (adhyavasāya) or
introspection (anuvyavasāya) or ideation (saṅkalpa) and not the
perception as such.205 It may be taken as a general characterstic of all
kinds of art experience. In so doing the ontological reality is not
compromised, nor its efficacy in producing joyous reactions in the
spectator. Utpala’s recourse to “special effort” (prayatna-viśeṣa) in
recreating a spectacle through concentrated prolonged attention without
a break has definite bearing on the aesthetic phenomenon. Pandey has
shown in detail206 that the aesthete’s visual relation with the dramatic
presentation is only a conduit to the aesthetic object. His real concern
is the object recreated and perceptively reappraised in the imagination.
The artefact given, the object present, the content posited by the
artist, actor and poet or by music, poetry and drama is reconstructed
and revalued by the spectator mentally. This is what Abhinavagupta has
called “introspection” (anuvyavasāya) after Utpala.207 The real
implication behind Utpala’s prayatna-viśeṣa-doctrine is fully brought
out by Abhinavagupta when he says that the precise purpose behind
undertaking a dramatic act is to enable even those spectators, whose
aesthetic susceptibility is yet to develop fully, to directly savour
rasa.208 The same thing applies to the meditation in the religious
domain. The deity visualized or contemplatively actualized in meditation
is not that drawn and painted in vermilion outside but one that figures
in the vivid imagination or mental apperception of the worshipper. Hence
Abhinavagupta notices a strong replicative parallelism between the two
processes of meditation and drama and, for that matter, the entire
performing art.209 Utpala’s present theorization lies in the very root
of Abhinavagupta’s purported distinguishing the epistemic object from
the aesthetic object, ingeniously formulated by Pandey in terms of
dyadic and triadic relationship respectively.210 In the epistemic sphere
we have only a dyadic relation, i.e. subject–object relation, whereas in
the aesthetic sphere the relationship is triadic as it consists of
subject, object and the imaginative construction. It is the third
element, i.e. imaginative construction, that transforms the object into
a “medium” (mādhyama or upāya) of the aesthetic experience. This holds
good in respect of meditation and contemplation as well.

As noted earlier, Bharata in his famous rasa-sūtra is primarily
concerned with rasa as an aesthetic object, i.e. something to be
presented on stage (pradarśya, rūpya), that is the object of
relish/taste produced by dramatic presentation (āsvādya). The most
remarkable feature of this aesthetic object according to Bharata is that
it represents an organic unity of the diversity of determinants,
consequents and transient mental states (anekasya ekatā). Another point
that he makes is that rasa as an aesthetic object is a configuration and
as such is different from the basic mental state, called sthāyin, which
is only one of the several constituents. The third aspect stressed by
Bharata is that this unity of permanent mental state (sthāyī) in the
multiplicity of determinants, etc. consists in (or is the outcome of)
“combination”, “blending” or “fusion” (saṁyoga) of these
constituents.211 The fourth and perhaps most meaningful purport is
Bharata’s implied insistence on the uniqueness and novelty of the
aesthetic object, which though a combined product of its constituents is
not contained in them and is different from them and is produced anew.
In order to make his proposition intelligible on all these counts
Bharata resorts to the analogy of a concoction (pāka) or specially
concocted ancient Indian drink known as ṣāḍava (and the like:
ṣāḍavādayaḥ),212 made up of six flavours.

There is an amazing convergence of approach between Bharata and Utpala
so far as their basic paradigm of unity-in-multiplicity is concerned. In
fact, this convergence extends to all fronts. Utpala resorts to the same
analogy of the pānaka in his Vr̥tti for explaining his concept of a
unique particular, svalakṣaṇābhāsa (lit. self-defined manifestation), as
configuration of several distinct universal manifestations
(sāmānyalakṣaṇa) and how the idea of unity or singularity is generated
from the combination of diverse constituent ābhāsas and how the
resultant ābhāsa discharges an altogether new function, different from
the respective functions of its erstwhile constituents.213 Utpala
interprets this unity in terms of unilocality (sāmānādhikaraṇya) which
he defines as unity of what is multifold. A thing or an objective entity
(vastu) owes its being to the manifestation of the sameness of locus.214
In ĪPK 2.3.7 and Vr̥tti thereon, Utpala is focused on two things: one,
the idea of oneness (aikyabuddhi) which as a category of knowledge
directly involves unity of reflective awareness (ekavimarśaḥ) on the
part of the knowing subject in the first place and the singleness of
functional efficacy on the objective side in the second place;215 and
two, the idea of oneness is solely sourced to the process of mingling,
blending, or mixing embodied in or represented by svalakṣaṇa.216
Utpala’s immediate overriding motive is to look for the raison d’être
governing the process of “mixing up” or “getting mixed” which is
conveyed by the adjective aviruddha qualifying ābhāsānām in the
kārikā.217 As such, only those constituents that are mutually compatible
or lack inter se contrariety get mixed up. With this formulation Utpala
reframes the terms of mixing up which to him is not a simple exercise of
joining or piecing together of diverse entities at a given spatial
locale but a sort of chemical compounding where one constituent is
capable of entering deep into another constituent
(parasparānupraveśakṣamāḥ — Vr̥tti) and thereby transforming each
participating constituent from within. The ensuing efficacy from such a
fusion, Utpala maintains (as Abhinavagupta shows with specific reference
to the former’s Vivr̥ti), is nothing short of a unique aestheticizing
flavour (camatkāra)218 which is fully instanced by the example of the
pānaka in the Vr̥tti.219 In his Vivr̥ti on ĪPK 1.4.2 Utpala enlarges on
this issue220 where he renders “combining together” (saṁbhūya) as mutual
delimitation (anyo’nyāvaccheda). For Utpala, this process of mutual
delimitation is an ongoing dynamic process which could happen by turn,
by succession or by reversal of the adjunctive roles among the
constituents (parasparaṁ paryāyāvacchedaḥ) enabling the same group of
universals, which though mutually exclusive and distinct (parasparaṁ
bhedaḥ) yet set in relationship of either “qualifier and qualified” or
of “principal and subordinate”, to produce a multiplicity of particulars
by shift in delimitational emphasis. The Vivr̥ti converts “absence of
contradiction” (avirodha) in the Kārikā into compatibility or congruity
(ānuguṇya) serving as the sole basis of mutual delimitation among the
components.221 Abhinavagupta in his detailed analysis brings out some
salient implications in Utpala’s conceptualization and applies it to the
pānaka. The group of universals that become svalakṣaṇa suffer two kinds
of delimitations: primary, by time and space (which are ābhāsas in
themselves: deśakālābhāsāvaccheda) and secondary, by companion
constitutive universals (annyo’nyāvaccheda). Thus the intrinsic nature
of a thing (bhāva) that is determinately grasped or constructed always
remains expanded (vikasitasvabhāva) and shines in its original universal
splendour once the reference to time and space is forsaken. The
secondary delimitation (anyo’nyāvaccheda) results into control or
restriction of the capacity of one constituent by another
(anyonyaśaktiniyantraṇā) thereby paving way for the rise of a single
particular which even though subjected to a synchronous
inter-delimitation occasions a different and a fresh function. Thus
pānaka, produced out of the combination of six flavours, produces
flavour of ṣāḍava, etc. having a novel original flavour (apūrva
rasa).222 Just as the action of an expert cook is primarily helpful in
preparing a delicious concoction, the Power of Necessity (niyati-śakti)
is equally important in the rise of a particular.

For Utpala the analogy of the pānaka seems to be immensely valuable and
advantageous, since he goes much deeper into allied implications, if we
go by the Vivr̥ti-Vimarśini. In his Vivr̥ti on 2.3.7 and also on 2.3.8223
he re-emphasizes his stand that the constituents of a thing by virtue of
its being a configuration are necessarily coordinated and synthesized in
a flexible principal–subordinate/primary–secondary relationship and
never so on an equal footing. This he sees occurring due to the
interplay of subjective involvement. In the illustration in hand, i.e.
pānaka, a person who owing to the preponderance of bile or phlegm, etc.
experiences only one, sweet or sour, flavour and has no feel of several
flavours present would squarely fail to savour the real flavour of the
pānaka. Even the direct perception of the presence of different
ingredients in the mixture would be of no help, because all our mental
operations grounded in unity–multiplicity syndrome are subjective
functions. Hence a person who has never tasted pepper, jaggery, etc.
before and is tasting the pānaka alone (for the first time), would not
be able to distinguish the difference in taste even after the perception
of varied components. But the one who has past experience of the variety
of formative flavours would instantly recognize the identicality and
difference of the present drink with reference to his previous
impressions. Analysing the three experiences as above Utpala concludes
that the unitary particularity of the product is result of the two
factors: one, subjective, which consists in the reflective appraisal of
the perception (anubhavavimarśabalāt), and two, objective, which
consists in the respective contributions of the components towards
producing a whole (kāryabalād api ekābhāsaḥ). Utpala warns that the rise
of a new flavour in the form of the pānaka from pepper, etc. owing to
their association with different substances like jaggery, etc. must not
be confused with the chemical change in the form/colour that one notices
in the catechu mixed with lime in a betel leaf (tāmbūlīdale
cūrṇakasitakhadirāṇām), because the expert drinker is always able to
discern the flavourical nuances caused by respective causal substances
such as pepper. Thus the pānaka analogy is not resorted to illustrate
the element of unilocality (sāmānādhikaraṇya: unity of diversity) but to
bring home the uniqueness of the unitary configuration. Thus at the
level of pānaka the attributive–substantive relationship does no longer
survive: “jaggery is indeed curd”, “pepper is indeed jaggery” — neither
such a phenomenon is there (prakhyā), nor is one determinately so
grasped (upākhyā). What shines and what is so perceived is pānaka alone
in its unique singularity.

From illustration (dr̥ṣṭānta) we are well poised to move on to the issue
to be illustrated (dārṣṭāntika), i.e. aesthetic object: rasa. We could
now be confident that Abhinavagupta sees Bharata configure rasa, the
object of aesthetic relish, which is the sole presentable and the
unitary total effect of the dramatic action on the pattern of svalakṣaṇa
and the process of saṁyoga (combination) unifying the basic emotion
(sthāyin) with other constituents (vibhāva, etc.) on the model of
sāmānādhikaraṇya (unity of many: anekasya ekatā — Vr̥tti). As we saw in
Utpala, so we see again in Abhinavagupta, that to him the analogy of a
concoction, pāka (instantiated by pānaka in the present case), embodies
a model of a proper and complete coordination (samyak yojanā),224 not
just an assemblage of cooperative factors. If we look at the language
employed by Abhinavagupta, it simply resonates Utpala. In
Abhinavagupta’s reformulation this combination has three essential
elements, viz. (i) the vibhāva etc. constituents unite not on horizontal
plane but in a dynamic configuration of primary–secondary relationship
or turnwise “leading or subordinate position” (following Gnoli 1968: 72)
(guṇapradhānatayā paryāyeṇa); (ii) the combination could be in either of
the two modes: a proper holistic coordination or a focused
one-pointedness attained in respect of the constituents; and (iii) this
combination/unification/mixing is a mental activity taking place in the
mind of the spectator. And exactly replicating the pattern this
configuration leads to the rise of the aesthetic object, which is unique
and novel in the sense that it is qualitatively different from the basic
emotion.225 By emphasizing that this aesthetic object is so called
because it constitutes the object of aesthetic relishing, Abhinavagupta
also brings out the transworldly causal efficacy (arthakriyā), inherent
in this rasa (i.e. rasa-svalakṣaṇa, to understand logically), called
rasanā or carvaṇā.226 It is obvious that Abhinavagupta is wholly
transporting Utpala’s ontological/epistemological notion of svalakṣaṇa
as an aesthetic svalakṣaṇa in the form of rasa. In so doing he exploits
the entire semantic and functional potentiality of Bharata’s idea of
saṁyoga as a bidimensional central pivot. Saṁyoga (combination),
therefore, emerges on the one hand as “perfect coordination” (samyak,
i.e. samyak yojanā) being responsible for the rise of rasa as an object,
and on the other hand as “focused one-pointedness” (aikāgrya) being
responsible for the rise of rasa as an experience (rasanā, rasānubhūti
or carvaṇā). As seems logical, saṁyoga ensures yojanā (coordination) on
the objective side (āsvādya), i.e. content of aesthetic experience, and
spontaneous freshness (apūrvatā) on the subjective side (āsvāda), i.e.
the experience itself.227 So far transworldliness or the non-ordinary
character of this experience is concerned it is not the outcome of the
productive process but a legacy from the non-ordinary character of the
determinants, etc. Thus viewed closely, Abhinavagupta’s reformulation of
Bharata’s rasa as the content of aesthetic relishing is a verbatim
restatement of Utpala’s metaphysical position where obstruction-free
awareness element (nirvighnasaṁvedana) represents prakāśa aspect,
gustation element (carvaṇā) represents camatkāra, i.e. vimarśa aspect,
constituting experience and gocaratā element (cognizability) represents
objective aspect, i.e. svalakṣaṇa, constituting content. Besides, we may
look into one more factor. Freedom from obstruction (vītavighnatā), i.e.
absolution from maculation (nirmalatā) being the defining essence of
prakāśa has been discussed in detail earlier. To this we may trace the
theory of rasa-obstacles (rasavighna), numbering seven. The main role of
the determinants, etc. is to serve as the means for elimination of these
obstacles.228 However, the secondary source for elimination of these
obstacles, particularly the seventh obstacle called “presence of doubt”
(saṁśayayoga) is ascribed to “combination” (saṁyoga). If we go back to
the notion of svalakṣaṇa in Utpala, we are instantly seized of the
catalystic role played by inter se compatibility (avirodha, ānuguṇya)
among the constituents in giving rise to a unitary consciousness. The
principle of ānuguṇya governing the mutual coordination has even
otherwise far-reaching consequences, which manifest themselves in the
aesthetic category called propriety (aucitya) constituting the most
important aspect of rasa formation (aucityopanibandhas tu rasasyopaniṣat
parā: DhĀ: 180). What is important is that avirodha, ānuguṇya or aucitya
are not contemplated as ethical or moral concepts but are raised as
ontological and logical ones.

In his notion of a unique particular (svalakṣaṇa), Utpala gives us the
ontological basis underlining universalization or generalization
(sādhāraṇīkaraṇa), a process so vital to our understanding of the rasa
experience. As I have repeatedly said, Utpala’s Vivr̥ti has come down to
us only in a very small portion and the same on ĪPK 2.3.7-8 is not
extant, yet ĪPVV on these two kārikās read with the Vivr̥ti and Vr̥tti on
1.4.2 as well as with the Vr̥tti on 2.3.8 makes it clear in no uncertain
terms that the constituent ābhāsas are universals and they owe their
particularization to delimitation caused by time and space. In other
words the intrinsic nature of an objective entity or ābhāsa remains
expanded,229 uncurtailed, i.e. universal, and it is this nature that is
grasped by determinate knowledge. We have seen that rasa experience,
though eschewing any categorization in terms of the ordinarily known
epistemic modalities, remains a kind of non-ordinary mental
determination, a vikalpa or for that matter a vimarśa-viśesa.230 As such
it grabs the universal even when it is grasping the individual by
disregarding objects’ association with time and space. Thus we are able
to notice the paradigmatic dynamics of contraction–expansion into play.
The ābhāsa, the ontological referent of epistemic operation, as such,
happens to be in the expansive, i.e. universal, mode of being, which
gets contracted as particular when touched by time and space, gets
decontracted as universal when dissociated from time and space. The
universalization becomes possible because the subjective and the
objective, the experience and the experienced, both are ontologically
universal.231

Pratibhā: The Power of Visualization

In retrospect we might go back to Pandey’s demarcating the aesthetic
domain from the epistemic in virtue of triadic relationship, the third
element being imaginative construction,232 which could be attributed to
the power of visualization. Pandey presents it as the third constituent
of aesthetic personality and calls it pratibhā: “This power of clear
visualization of the aesthetic image in all its fullness and life is
technically called pratibhā.”233 Though, as all the students of Indian
philosophy are aware, the notion of pratibhā is a pan-Indian phenomenon,
the system of Utpala does claim a profoundly superior formulation.234
Kaviraj notes four salient features of the Āgamic approach, in the main
represented by the Trika and Tripurā systems. One, in common with the
other systems that the word pratibhā literally means “flash of light”, a
revelation, and stands for wisdom characterized by immediacy and
freshness; two, it represents Highest Divinity known as Parā Saṁvit or
Citi-Śakti, the power of self-revelation and self-illumination of the
supreme spirit with which it is essentially and eternally identical;
three, it is identical with vāc and vimarśa; and four, pratibhā is
identified with the supreme subject. It is in this context that Kaviraj
cites Utpala’s ĪPK 1.7.1.235 We will notice that this kārikā remains
central to the whole of Utpalan discourse on pratibhā.

It appears that Abhinavagupta’s theorization of pratibhā has been deeply
imprinted by the two equally powerful sources of inspiration, which
despite their apparently separate origins complemented one another. One
is indeed Ānandavardhana,who seems to identify the rasa as the suggested
meaning and ascribes it to the exclusive role played by extraordinary
pratibhā which acts as the single defining factor of a great poet’s
excellence. Exegeting the same in the Locana Abhinavagupta highlights
the following aspects of genius:

(i) The poetic Muse (Sarasvatī)236 is the principle of vāc;

(ii) (thanks to vāc) the flash of genius237 (i.e. genius always bursts
as a flash of light);

(iii) shines forth to the reader with immediacy because of its being
completely informed with rasa and in this sense there is an extremely
close affinity between the experience of the audience and that of the
hero and the poet;

(iv) (and this) genius is an intelligence (prajñā) capable of creating
ever new things reminding us of his teacher’s Bhaṭṭa Tauta’s famous
statement;238 and

(v) by special genius Ānanda means a faculty which is capable of
composing poetry brimming with purity and beauty because of its
immersion in rasa.239 The greatness of a poet is gauged by the way this
special vibrating genius is expressed by the words of a poet. More or
less a similar strain is seen in the ABh also. Pratibhā is just another
name of divine principle of the supreme speech.240 It marks the first
stir or moment in the poet’s creation.241 It is of the nature of
experience characterized by immediacy and spontaneity.242

The other source is definitely Utpala. The word pratibhā in Utpala’s
diction is semantically and etymologically very rich. The root √bhā from
which the word pratibhā is derived with prefix prati conveys the sense
of both, i.e. to illuminate (bhāsana) and to appear (bhāna). Thus
combining the twin nuances of the foundational notions of prakāśa and
vimarśa, pratibhā conveys the sense of the reflective light,
counter-manifestation, luminous consciousness and is conceptualized as
revelatory apperception, intuition or even genius. As such pratibhā is
the capacity of manifesting or reflecting a thing in the consciousness
and at the same time of being reflectively aware of such a
manifestation. In other words, manifesting (bhāsana) and reposing in
consciousness (saṁvidviśrānti) go hand-in-hand in the notion of
pratibhā. Etymologically the prefix prati (again, counter, facing,
turning back) injects an element of recognition usually taking place
when an object is redirected towards consciousness or vice versa.

Endowed with such a prolific semantic legacy Utpala’s treatment of
pratibhā takes place in three directions. In the first place, in the
Vivr̥ti243 Utpala brings in the notion of pratibhā in the context of
verbal testimony (āgama) as the source of knowing. Utpala seems to
suggest that even the failure of the mental or verbal activities to pass
the test of pragmatic efficacy is due to the will of the Lord. And thus
what remains undisturbed and constant in the face of distractions by the
Obscuring Will (nirodhecchā) goes by the name of pratibhā. Exegeting
this solo citation from Utpala, Abhinavagupta takes it as enunciation of
āgama in terms of pratibhāna,which is nothing but śabda-bhāvanā (verbal
creative energy/ potential linguistic seed). In fact by deliberately
inserting the definitive expression eva (indeed) Abhinavagupta seems to
underscore the continuity of Bhartr̥hari’s pratibhā as āgama even in the
Trika system. By exegeting pratibhā as pratibhāna Abhinavagupta further
seems to highlight immediacy in the intuitive formulation of āgama.
However, this formulation is not immediately relevant from the aesthetic
point of view and may therefore be ignored at the moment.

The second direction that we notice in the Vivr̥ti, again on the
testimony of Abhinavagupta, could be said to have aesthetic
implications. Pratibhā is generally viewed as being the seminal source
of all artistic creativity. Throughout the history of literary
criticism, pratibhā unquestionably remains the principal kāvya-hetu
(source of poetry) and has been variously described as seed (bīja),
fitness or potentiality (yogyatā), trace of latent impression (saṁskāra)
or power or potency (śakti). For example Mammaṭa describes it as
kavitvabījarūpaḥ saṁskāraviśeṣaḥ. In the Vivr̥ti on ĪPK 4.1.8 (note the
Vr̥tti and Kārikā are silent) Utpala introduces the notion of seed
ultimately being reduced to a kind of residuum in the form of the
absolutic autonomy. Abhinavagupta demonstrates that Utpala is
visualizing a sort of ascending hierarchy in terms of gradual
dissolution of this potentiality through the planes of Rudra, Śiva and
Īśvara (i.e. Parama Śiva). All the worldly objects that survive only in
the condition of seeds in the plane of Rudra (representing void,
dissolution or negation) are variously described by words such as
“potentiality” (yogyatā), etc. Now this potentiality (yogyatā) that
marks the plane of duality (i.e. Rudra) gets further dissolved into
duality–non-duality (i.e. Śiva). This in turn gives rise to absolutely
abstracted state of objectivity in the God’s consciousness
(īśvarasaṁvidi) whose seedhood could only be conceptualized in terms of
the Absolutic autonomy. Hence it must be considered as a special or
particular form of potentiality.244

Developing the theme of seedhood to its logical end, Utpala seems to
have discovered the precise reason for naming this state of objectivity
as “seed” and not as “thisness” or “objectivity as such”. Had awareness
of thisness been distinct, then in all fairness the proper description
would be “all this” or “universe” and not the “universal seed” (or ’the
seed of universe’). Thus something in the form of a seed (bīja), latent
impressional trace (saṁskāra), potentiality/fitness (yogyatā) or
intrinsic prowess/potency (śakti) though always a matter of inference
for the ordinary people like us, yet capable of being distinctly
manifest to the all-knowing yogins, it always rests in I-ness or
I-consciousness (ahantā). But let there be no mistake, this I-ness is
not pure absolute I-ness but, owing to the emergence of universal
potentiality, it may be likened to the unmanifest or latent state of
each one’s respective accepted agenda for future course of action as
belonging to a sovereign, a learned scholar, a poet, an artist or an
artisan and so on. Hence in common discourse it is regarded as śakti
(power/potentiality).245 In this formulation Utpala’s central thrust is
on four aspects of pratibhā:

(i) it stands for the absolute autonomy of the artist;

(ii) it is a potentiality of a unique genre;

(iii) it resides in I-consciousness yet it is not absolute subjectivity
or I-ness, rather it is an abstracted creative potentiality embodying
the whole course of future creation in a latent but thoroughly
structured form; and

(iv) the entire objectivity in an enfolded state spells out its canvas.

However, the most important theorization of pratibhā, which could be
understood as constituting the third direction, is found in ĪPK 1.7.1
and Vr̥tti and Vivr̥ti thereon, partly resonating in ŚSĀ 12.22-23 and
18.11. The foremost question that confronts a student of Utpala is as
regards the exact motivation of Utpala. What is it that drove Utpala to
introduce the notion of pratibhā in an apparent digression from his
original formulation of consciousness as citi (consciousness),
pratyavamarśa (self-affirming consciousness) or parāvāc (supreme speech)
to viewing it as intuitive luminosity, or inner manifestive awareness
(prakāśa) moving theoretically from vimarśa to prakāśa, so to say? This
prakāśa is conceptualized as pratibhā (lit. reflective light,
counter-manifestation) generally rendered as intuition, intuitive light
or luminous consciousness. The immediate answer that one gets in the
opening remarks of Abhinavagupta, both in the ĪPV (I: 346-47) and ĪPVV
(II: 338-39) is that out of the two integral aspects of the Absolute,
Maheśvara, the vimarśa-formulation of consciousness has been primarily
addressed to the enunciation of the śakti aspect, whereas the
prakāśa-formulation is being resorted to discuss the śaktimān aspect as
constituting the sole substratum of these śaktis, i.e. powers. And the
precise reason for choosing the notion of pratibhā is that it
constitutes the intrinsic nature or defining essence (svarūpa) of that
āśraya (substratum), i.e. Maheśvara.246 Pratibhā is also chosen to
validate and logically substantiate the nature of the substrate247 (i.e.
ātman = the individual self) of the innate faculties of knowing and
acting belonging to a living individual (jñānaṁ kriyā ca bhūtānāṁ
jīvatāṁ jīvanaṁ matam — ĪPK 1.1.4). Abhinavagupta’s explanation seems to
have the backing of Utpala. Explaining the phrase ātmasaṁśrayā in the
Vivr̥ti, Abhinavagupta intends to suggest that Utpala is trying to
logically uphold Bhaṭṭa Candrānanda’s contention that pratibhā,
consisting of reflective illumination (pratīpa-bhānaṁ) of the object,
though spoken of as belonging to the object, yet its necessary repose in
the consciousness remains its ultimate true nature.248 The other
endorsement comes directly from the Saṁbandha-Siddhi of Utpala, where he
asserts that all cognitive activity relating to object, necessarily and
without exception, finds its locus in the light of Śivahood
(śivatābhāsa) which is replete with consciousness and devoid of
finitizations and invokes this particular kārikā (ĪPK1.7.1).249 In
addition, even the organizational scheme of the Kārikā text of the
seventh āhnika lends support to Abhinavagupta’s rationalization.
Maheśvara, being the final support of the powers (śaktis) is also the
final substrate of all worldly transactions (vyavahāra), maculate and
immaculate. The opening kārikā of the āhnika (i.e. 1.7.1) posits
pratibhā as constituting the precise essence of Maheśvara and depicts it
as “inlaid with the succession of myriad objects”.250 However, in the
concluding kārikā (i.e. 1.7.14) the entire predication of pratibhā is
transposed to Maheśvara251 who serves as the only locus for the direct
grasp of all the transactions getting actualized.

Let us now revert to 1.7.1252 to see as to what it says about pratibhā.
This kārikā is extremely tricky one, since all the three — the Kārikā,
the Vr̥tti and the Vivr̥ti — seem to offer three different
interpretations. For the sake of easy grasp they may be summarized as
under:

1. Kārikā: Which is this pratibhā that is the knowing subject,
Maheśvara.253

2. Vr̥tti: This pratibhā is the knowing subject and Maheśvara.254

3. Vivr̥ti:

(a) Which is this pratibhā that is the absolute (Maheśvara) knowing
subject?255

(b) Which is the knowing subject Maheśvara that is pratibhā?256

Before proceeding further let us look into Utpala’s notion of pratibhā.
Utpala has used this term once before in ĪPK 1.6.3
(tadatadpratibhābhājā). The Vr̥tti there understands it in terms of
“inner manifestive awareness that encompasses objective totality”
belonging to the knowing subject.257 Here in this kārikā the Vr̥tti
explains pratibhā as “manifestation that does subsist internally”
(antaḥsthita evābhāsaḥ).258 The citations from the Vivr̥ti do not explain
or define the word, but Abhinavagupta’s Vivr̥ti-Vimarśinī almost always
formulates it as the “inward form of the substratum (consciousness)” or
the “inward form of the manifestation” wherever the word pratibhā is
cited from the Vivr̥ti/Vr̥tti/Kārikā.259 At this point it might not be
totally off the mark to surmise that the word antarābhāsa occurring in
1.6.8260 does bear on pratibhā, though there is no direct averment to
this effect. Even the Vr̥tti thereon underlines the conceptual
affinity.261 I also believe that Abhinavagupta’s formulation in terms of
“introvert form of manifestation” is a legacy from Utpala himself if we
care to recapitulate what Utpala has said in the Saṁbandha-Siddhi262
while citing 1.7.1. One can also notice the imprint of Dharmakīrti on
the mode of presentation.

The notion of pratibhā is a strong strategic mechanism in the Śaiva
armour. In its immanent aspect (viśvamayatā), Śiva constitutes the whole
world-creation as externalization of the internal, hence the entire
world must subsist within Śiva. While autonomy of consciousness is the
tool for externalizing the internal, the inner manifestive
consciousness, i.e. pratibhā, constitutes the nature of the ground
consciousness so as to lend ontological authenticity to even the
external which is essentially internal. Since pratibhā is the plenary
ground consciousness, it is capable of providing the berth for even
constructing the “other” or “not-that” (atad) as contradistinguished
from “that” (tad) and thereby accounting for not only perceptual but
also determinate cognition.263

Therefore the central thrust of the Kārikā lies in equating intrinsicity
of the external manifestation with the knowing subject, i.e. the self,
that is what constitutes essential nature, and that is what goes by the
name of Lordliness (aiśvarya).264 According to the Kārikā, the beauty of
this inner manifestive awareness is that though it is impressed with the
succession of entire objectivity it remains identical with the knowing
subject which is devoid of succession, delimitation and consists of
consciousness. This knowing subject is the Supreme Lord, i.e.
Maheśvara.265

The instance in the Vr̥tti is substantially altered. The Vr̥tti does away
with the subject yā (which) [i.e. pratibhā] about which the predicate
saḥ (he/that) makes affirmation or predication (i.e. pramātā,
maheśvaraḥ).266 Rather it is focused on highlighting the intended
outcome, i.e. purport (phalanirūpaṇa), of the Kārikā. By purposely
inserting definitive particle eva the Vr̥tti can now speak of the total
identity of the internally resting light imprinted with the succession
of the entire objective variety with the knowing subject, the “self” in
our common parlance, for two reasons: that it pervades the time span of
the entire gamut of cognitions and that it consists of consciousness
eschewing succession and delimitation. The same is Maheśvara by virtue
of his being the creator of the object(s) of cognition(s) [prameya] that
constitutes his limbs.

One can see that this is a very complex and comprehensive theorization
of pratibhā which encompasses both the dimensions of consciousness
subjective as well as agential, cognitive as well as creative. It also
encompasses the individual self and the macrocosmic Self, Maheśvara. The
internally subsisting light of all objects transpires to be both the
knowing self, ātman, in virtue of its being the knower and pervader of
all cognitions throughout their temporal subsistence and Maheśvara in
virtue of being the author of all the objects of cognitions constituting
His own body or limbs. In the ĪPVV, exegeting the Vivr̥ti, Abhinavagupta
wants the reader to comprehend the precise implication of the phrases
ābhāsa eva ātma and sarvasaṁvitkālavyāpī and the compound tattat°, etc.
in the Vr̥tti, namely that this inward manifestation of all the objects
within the intuitive light inlaid with their respective succession is
not an ontological proposition for viewing the universal objectivity as
the expansion of the Lord’s power (tacchakti-vikāsa), but a cognitive,
recognitive to be more precise, mode of the discovery of powers
(śaktyāviṣkaraṇa) consisting in the successive manifestation
(avabhāsana) and manifestation preceded by creation (nirmāṇapūrvaka
ābhāsana) as dwelt in detail by the immediately preceding two kārikās,
e.g. 1.6.9 and 1.6.10.267 By underlining this connectivity Abhinavagupta
suggests that Utpala is able to account for novelty268 or newness with
each instance of manifestation and thereby to provide the logical basis
for the phenomenon of ever arising newness with pratibhā. In fact, what
Abhinavagupta wants to emphasize is that both knowing and creating are
possible only with reference to avabhāsana (manifestation) and not with
reference to pure light.269 In pratibhā, it is possible as all objects
are internally manifest.

The Vivr̥ti once again changes the main stance of the Kārikā and proposes
two different but complementary syntactical constructions. In the first
formulation the Vivr̥ti dissolves the compound into two, e.g. akramā and
anantacidrūpaḥ.270 Abhinavagupta follows Vivr̥ti in his Vimarśinī in
separating akramā from ananta°.271 The akramā refers to pratibhā meaning
thereby that though intuitive light is coloured by succession of the
objective manifestation, it is trans-sequential in itself. As against
Kārikā272 and Vr̥tti,273 in the Vivr̥ti Maheśvara describes or qualifies
pramātā.274 Thus pratibhā is Maheśvara pramātā because it constitutes
the introvert essence and thereby establishes the substratum.275 This
formulation is duly adopted by Abhinavagupta in his Vimarśinī.276 As
regards the second formulation,277 the Vivr̥ti is seized with the problem
as to why the Kārikā has pronoun saḥ (he) in masculine gender referring
to pratibhā which is introduced with the pronoun yā (who) in the
feminine gender. Utpala’s search for an answer ends with reversing the
order of the Kārikā in order to bring out its inherent thrust: now
pramatā and maheśvara could be viewed as pratibhā.278 This formulation
forcefully presents intuitive light in its fully developed form as duly
nourished by the knowing subjectivity and absolute autonomy. The
allusion to pratibhā in the masculine is to highlight full nourishment
of pratibhā.279 In this conceptualization, one can notice the seeds of
the two modes of pratibhā: the bhāvayitrī (appreciative genius) and
kārayitrī (creative genius), widely subscribed to by the large number of
literary critics.

The idea of pratibhā as light illuminating entire objectivity is a
continuing theme with Utpala. In the eighteenth song of the ŚSĀ, Utpala
visualizes the Lord as pratibhāmaya (consisting of light) Who reveals
Himself to all living beings as light in all things.280 What makes the
invocation interesting is its directness and capacity to strike a close
personal bond. In the two verses of the twelfth song called
rahasyanirdeśa (speaking of the mystery), Utpala spells out the
following characteristics of pratibhā:281

(i) pratibhā represents appreciative insight or semantic insight282
arising on listening to the profound statements — this marks the first
step leading to the rise of competence;

(ii) the second step relates to realizing the meaning in practice (habit
of uninterrupted worshipping);

(iii) the third step represents the accomplishment of the listener’s
purpose; and

(iv) the fourth stage represents dawn of luminous reality as
constituting the essence of objects interacted with.283

Without elaborating I will draw the reader’s attention to
Abhinavagupta’s discussion under 1.1.1 for a comparative overview on how
a meaning is generated and then communicated.284

Insights in Music

Another significant part of Utpala’s contribution in aesthetics is
related to music, some aspects of which were initially discussed in the
beginning of this paper.285 As I have been saying, our only source of
information remains Abhinavagupta. The information gathered from some
other sources already mentioned earlier does not throw any specific
light on his theoretical insights. The material available in the form of
allusions, citations and some Abhinavan observations in the ABh portray
him as a gifted musicologist, a master theorist about the technique and
practice of music, both vocal and instrumental, but offers no clue to
his views on dance or the philosophy of music. The ancient concept of
music comprised all the three elements: vocal, instrumental and
dance.286 Utpala, indeed, was conversant with dance form (besides vocal
music) as is clear from his ŚSĀ,287 but there is no evidence that he
ever theorized about them. As regards his philosophy of music we are in
the realm of sheer conjecture, perhaps only two observations, without
much fear of incongruity might be made. In the first place, music too
would fall under the rubric of the spotless, immaculate transaction
(nirmala vyavahāra) in virtue of its being a cultural activity, and in
the second place, this would of necessity be viewed as an outflow of
Parā Vāc, the supreme speech, in its alternative conceptualization as
nāda or paranāda, resonance or supreme resonance, undergoing the
identical quadripartite evolution through parā, paśyantī, madhyamā and
vaikharī as extensively shown and nurtured by Abhinavagupta in the third
āhnika of the Tantrāloka.288

Since I lack core competence that is required for a critical evaluation
of Utpala’s specific contribution to music, my role in this section
remains virtually compendious and compilatory. Precisely it was for this
very reason that the geyādhikāra (chapters 28-36) that is the “Book on
Music” of the NŚ and Abhinavagupta’s commentary thereon have largely
remained unattended to this day in any language.289 In the
Abhinavabhāratī, overall Utpala or his views have been mentioned seven
times.

The first reference is found in the 28th āhnika devoted to the
discussion of jātis and its characterstics (lakṣaṇas). Bharata has
initiated discussion on the sādhāraṇa, i.e. the interval that exists
between the two overlapping notes. Out of the two sādhāraṇas —
jātī-sādhāraṇa and svara-sādhāraṇa — the latter is of two types: kākalī
and antarasvara, and of both the grāmas.290 In order to show the
difference of opinions and that he abides by the opinion expressed by
his grand-teacher Utpaladeva, Abhinavagupta invokes the views of
Utpala.291 According to Anupa Pande, Utpala held that the svaras have
two kinds of forms, prākr̥tā and vaikr̥tā (natural and deformed). Any of
the notes may acquire a deformation or vikr̥ti. But she cautions that
“this idea is not clearly mentioned in the text. It seems to foreshadow
the medieval practice, only the distortion here presupposed the system
of grāmas and mūrcchanā and not a fixed tonic with varying thāṭs”.292

Going forward, Bharata in NŚ 28.64-65 holds that jātis based on notes
should never be made auḍuvitā. But in jātis the destruction (i.e.
omission) of all notes is prescribed. However, madhyama is never to be
made a destructible (i.e. one which can be omitted) note. The
indestructible madhyama, therefore, is to be remembered as the most
important of all notes in the law of gāndharva and sāman.293 However,
according to Abhinavagupta, Dattila, Viśākhilācārya and some others did
not agree with Bharata. Instead they held that dhaivata was
indispensable in the ṣaḍja grāma, pañcama in madhyama grāma and madhyama
in both the grāmas.294 It is at this point Abhinavagupta cites Utpala to
underscore the irrelevance of these contesting viewpoints and clarify
Bharata’s prescription.295

According to Lath, this is an extremely valuable observation by Utpala.
In order to bring out its full significance he refers to it twice in his
important work. Since Utpala’s view was cited in the context of Dattila
and Viśākhila who took a variant stand from Bharata, Lath has the
following comment to make:

Two other notes besides the madhyama were indispensable in gāndharva,
though in a more limited sense: pañcama was indispensable in the
madhyama-grāma and dhaivata in the ṣaḍja-grāma. The reason is again
obscure. Perhaps there was no reason; it just so happened that in the
limited number of melodies accepted in gāndharva pañcama was never
actually dropped from jātis of the madhyama-grāma and similarly dhaivata
was always found to be used in jātis of the ṣaḍja-grāma. The rule that
these notes should not be dropped could be a generalization of musical
practice and not a rule governing structures. This is what Utpaladeva
has suggested.296

Later, he continues:

Utpaladeva has suggested that madhyama was called indispensable in jātis
because it just happened to be only note which was never actually
dropped. There seems to be quite some truth in this observation, because
in many jāti-born forms which shared a common musical scheme with the
jātis, madhyama could be dropped.297

Raghavan298 draws our attention to Utpala’s view which is cited under NŚ
29.28. The 29th adhyāya deals with the instrumental music relating to
the stringed instrument. According to Bharata, the musical figures
consisting of svaras, in theatric songs (dhruvās), generate excessive
charm when they are ascending and not confined to themselves.299 The
ascending svaras (ārohiṇaḥ svarāḥ) are those whose ascendance is
directly visible. Their excessive charm is due to the fact that each
syllable (akṣara) accompanies each svara and each svara accompanies each
syllable (akṣara).300 This was the view which was upheld by Utpala
against those who believed that the musical figures consisting of svaras
ought to be restricted to only a particular part.

Immediately hereafter Utpala’s authority is again invoked under NŚ
29.30. It is referred to by Pandey301 and Raghavan302 both. According to
Pandey the context relates to the ornaments (alaṁkāra) of song. Pandey
is right, since according to the context the musical figures consisting
of svaras here pertain to the second variety involving songs. Utpala is
cited in order to eliminate any doubt that even within the given context
of song-presentation (gītāprayoga) the musical figures that are solely
based on varṇas, by virtue of being constituents of the words (pada) (of
a melody), relate to svarālāpa alone and not to the rendering of the
song as such. The semblance of musical figure in a song is only a
derivative product of the residual impression of varṇas and hence
considered secondary.303

Relying upon the phrase vyācakṣate in the next citation Pandey suspects
that probably Utpala was a commentator of the NŚ or “on some parts of
it” (Pandey 1959: 540) which was debated by Raghavan (1981: 122). He
surmised that Utpala interpreted Bharata’s text, i.e. the last line of
the NŚ 31.26 (trayo bhedā hi tālasya dviguṇād [dviguṇā Raghavan]
dviguṇāḥ smr̥tāḥ), in the former’s independent work on music, an issue
which we have already visited at the outset of this paper. I am however
in favour of treading the middle path. Whether or not Utpala wrote an
independent work on music, Abhinavagupta’s copious allusions to him from
the opening chapter (i.e. 28th chapter) of the Geyādhikāra through 32nd
chapter as an authority whom he broadly follows, makes it a sensible
proposition to believe that Utpala might have commented upon the
Nāṭyasāstra’s section on music or at least a sizeable portion of it. Let
us leave the issue at that. Raghavan highlights one more significance of
this citation, i.e. to show that Abhinavagupta was not a blind follower
of his grand-teacher: on occasions he also used to differ from him.

Utpala’s statement and Abhinavagupta’s disagreement or corrective review
comes in the ABh on NŚ 31.26,304 which discusses the basic
tāta-structures in gāndharva music. Yathākṣara (lit. “corresponding to
the number of syllables”: sarvathākṣarasaṁkhyayā tulyā — ABh IV: 162) is
the technical name for the basic tāla-units. Caccatputaḥ305 and
cācapuṭaḥ are the two basic tāla-prototypes or yathākṣaras. Bharata
calls them yonidvaya (NŚ 31.7), because they were the base on which
other tāla or kalā modes were constructed.306 The terms caccatpuṭaḥ and
cācapuṭaḥ, meaningless by themselves, constituted word formulas (pada)
which, when analysed letterwise (akṣara) and metrically on the basis of
mātrās contained in each syllable, yielded the basic prototype of the
yugma and ayugma modes of grouping kalās. The yathākṣara syllabic
arrangement in yugma (caccatpuṭaḥ) was — guru, guru, laghu, laghu, pluta
and the pattern of tāla in terms of kalās was: one kalā + one kalā +
half a kalā + one and a half kalā. This pattern was to be applied in the
ekakala mode. Bharata gives three alternative beat arrangements (NŚ
31.11-15) for the caccatpuṭaḥ (yugma mode). The first alternative he
calls the śuddha alternative (NŚ 31.117), the only beat formation that
was further expanded with the addition of other beats to form dvikala
and catuṣkala modes. Kalā signified a unit of time. The five nimeṣa
mātrā was the standard of measuring kalā as a time unit in gāndharva. In
order to render an ekakala yathākṣara tāla into a dvikala, number of
metric yathākṣara mātrās were doubled and divided uniformly in terms of
gurus instead of the divisions into pluta, laghu, etc.: ‘ekā prakr̥tir
iti’ । gururūpo yo bhedaḥ so ’traikasvabhāve
laghuplutādicchedavibhāgaśūnyaḥ so ’tra prakr̥tir mūlabhūtaḥ (ABh on NŚ
31.7). Each guru as before was equal to one kalā; but in dvikalā two
such kalās made a single unit accounting for the mode’s naming as
dvikala. One unit of two kalās in the dvikala mode was termed the
padabhāga, and four such padabhāgas made a larger unit of tāla called
mātrā, which term in this sense had a strict technical connotation
confined to tāla-structures in gāndharva. The dvikala padabhāga had two
kalās. The catuṣkala was double the dvikala: dvirbhāvād dvikalasyāpi
vijñeyo ’tha catuṣkalaḥ । (NŚ 31.40). It had four kalās. Consequently,
the total number of kalās in a catuṣkala caccatpuṭaḥ was sixteen (4
padabhāgas of 4 kalās each).307

According to Abhinavagupta, the precise intention of Bharata is to show
that doubling (dvaiguṇya) of metric yathākṣara mātrās was the sole
factor for distinguishing the three mārgas, and not the tempo etc. as
such. Bharata speaks of three layas (tempos), viz. druta (fast), madhya
(medium) and vilambita (slow). These corresponded to the three mārgas:
citra mārga (druta laya), vr̥tta or vārttika mārga was in madhya laya
(medium tempo) and the dakṣiṇa mārga related to vilambita laya (slow
tempo). In the three mārgas there were three different styles of
applying the kalās. Thus in the citra mārga, the mode of
kalā-application was ekakala, in the vr̥tta mārga it was dvikala and in
the dakṣiṇa mārga it was catuṣkala.308 But what separated the three
mārgas was the doubling and on this ground even ekakala, that is,
principal yathākṣara mode, would also attract doubling. But a section of
musicologists differed. In their opinion, the first type, i.e. ekakala
or citra mārga alone, could boast of doubling proper, whereas the
remaining two, viz. dvikala and catuṣkala, for that matter vr̥tta and
dakṣiṇa mārgas, could be said to have doubling in successive order
(kramadviguṇau). It is only in this sense that all the tāla structures
could be said to be double (dviguṇa). It is at this point that Utpala’s
view is alluded to. Utpala had different explanation. According to him
though the precise reason for holding tālas to be of three kinds (viz.
ekakala, dvikala and catuṣkala) was due to mutually partaking of their
threefold character in between themselves, their threefold modal
outgrowth depended on the process or phenomenon called doubling. In
fact, the word yathākṣara owes its usage to the letterwise metrical
correspondence of the basic tāla pattern, hence by single doubling of
the metric yathākṣara mātrās (i.e. in ekakala mode) it could be expanded
into dvikala and by two doublings into catuṣkala (because the two kalās
in dvikala mode formed a single unit and two dvikalas formed a
catuṣkala). By virtue of being catuṣkala, and their being no more
divisions, there was no further multiplication. This view of Utpala
evoked a somewhat discordant note from Abhinavagupta who seems to extend
the scope of doubling to vīṇā (Indian lute) as well by ruling out
impossibility of doubling in the vīṇā.309

The next quote to which attention is drawn by Pandey310 and Raghavan311
occurs in the ABh on NŚ 32.4-6. The 32nd chapter deals with theatric
songs, i.e. dhruvā.312 Pandey notes the dhruvā connection of this quote.
Just in the immediately preceding verses, Bharata has laid down that the
components of the saptarūpa or gītakas, suitably transformed, resulted
in the dhruvās.313 Once transformed into dhruvās these gītaka components
acquired independent forms with their own character. Yet as explained by
Abhinava, there remained a cause and effect relationship between the old
and the new formations. Hence the components of the gītakas which had a
particular arrangement ordained for the achievement of adr̥ṣṭa, could be
reorganized with a new end in view: they could be suitably regrouped to
express rasas and moods. They were to this end, reorganized according to
the metrical structure of the song being sung. In this new regrouping, a
causal relation with the original gītaka composition, though present,
was not immediately perceived. The new group, moreover, could become the
base for futher formations.314

In the kārikās under current reference, i.e. NŚ 32.4-6, Bharata hands
out a list of such gītaka components converted into dhruvās such as
mukha saying that these formed the limbs of all the five types of
dhruvās and giving details of their specific functional use at the
different dramatic moments on the stage.315 The phala or end result of
an object (i.e. the purpose it serves, the fruit it bears) is connected
with its function which Abhinavagupta calls its dharma.316 The function
of gītakas, turned and transformed into dhruvās, was closely connected
with nāṭya. As to the doubt, what would be the end result of these
gītaka components — seen (dr̥ṣṭa), that is, identical with that of
dhruvās, or unseen (adr̥ṣṭa), that is which is present as a cause but is
not actually felt, i.e. one identical with the former gītakas.
Abhinavagupta thinks both the options — simultaneous pursuit of the
collective fruits or going in for either fruit alternatively — would be
futile because of attendant anomalies. Hence he resorts to the final
dictum of his grand-teacher Utpaladevapāda, who squarely held that their
precise purpose/function/end result was to evince their absolute
dependence upon or inspiration from their causal former status,
characterized by enduring continuity due to which they are transformed
into dhruvās and can be so discerned by the wise (prajñaḥ prakalpayet)
or by sharp intellect (prajñopakalpayet). The reason — dhruvā being an
effect, a product (kārya) — the original characterstic (dharma) inheres
in it like its cause.317

Incidently the last quote I could lay my hands on is found in the ABh on
NŚ 32.414.318 The kārikā and Abhinavagupta’s commentary are absolutely
technical and I have not been able to understand them.319 The 32nd
chapter deals with dhruvās and the kārikā under reference is from that
section of the chapter which particularly handles the method of
performing dhruvās (dhruvāprayoga). Bharata intends to initiate
discussion about how and when avanaddha instruments are to be used in
course of performing dhruvās320 in the pūrvaraṅga. Prāveśikī, as is
evident from the name, was used to indicate the entry of the characters
on the stage. According to Bharata the three encirclings (circular
movements, parivarta) were to be performed without the accompaniment of
the avanaddha instrument. It was only in the fourth encirclement
(parivarta) that the use of the avanaddha instrument was to be resorted
to. Abhinavagupta notes that it was Bharata’s view, because there were
others who enjoyed bhāṇḍa-less performance only in the initial circular
round, the next three were to be accompanied with bhāṇḍa (i.e. avanaddha
instrument).321 The question that with bhāṇḍa in use what was the
specific beat to begin the dhruvā singing was answered by the kārikā we
are directly concerned with. There could be one of three approaches
described as sannipātagraha, tarjanīgraha or ākāśagraha. The first
sounded beat was formed with both hands synchronously, the second by the
rhythmic strikings of the index finger and the third was a kind of empty
(comparable to khālī in modern Indian singing) beating, i.e. sounded
beating devoid of any specific lakṣaṇa. Abhinavagupta refers to the
existence of two contesting opinions in this regard. Some stated that
sannipātagraha was the proper beating for ekakalatāla, ākāśagraha for
dvikalatāla and tarjanīgraha for catuṣkalatāla. However, Abhinavagupta
firmly abided with the interpretation of Utpaladeva, his grand-teacher,
who held that bhāṇḍagraha precisely applied to singing (as if)
descending from ether, i.e. nothing, in the absence of precise guiding
rule as regards the specific tāla mode such as ekakala.322

Knowing fully well that these pages by no means exhaust Utpala’s
aesthetic insights in totality, I have to close it for now. I firmly
believe that there is enough in Utpala that needs to be explored
further. For instance Pandey makes an extremely important observation323
with regard to Abhinavagupta’s theory of aesthetics that in aesthetic
experience it is not the emotive aspect but the mental that has
preponderance and explains it in the light of Abhinavagupta’s treatment
in the ABh. However, I find that the seeds of this thesis could be
traced to Utpala. Similarly, it will be interesting to see as to what
Utpala has to say on beauty as an object, more so because aesthetic
experience is essentially beauty experience. I very much wanted to work
and enlarge on these issues but they need to form the subject matter of
some future paper.

* When professors Torella and Bäumer graciously asked me to contribute a
paper on Utpaladeva’s contribution and suggested that I revisit my paper
on error (“Theory of Error According to Abhinavagupta”, JIPh, 14, 1986),
I instead opted for exploring Utpala’s contribution to aesthetics, if
any. Little did I realize then that the area I chose demanded a lot more
than I could possibly give to it.

Abbreviations and Bibliography

Texts

Abhinavagupta, Abhinavabhāratī on the Nāṭyaśāstra [ABh], [see Bharata].

———, Īśvarapratyabhijñā of Utpaladeva with the Vimarśinī of
Abhinavagupta [ĪPV(KSS)], vols. I and II, ed. M.S. Kaul Shāstrī, KSTS
XXII-XXXIII, Bombay, 1918-21.

———, Īśvarapratyabhijñāvimarśinī [ĪPV]. [See Bhāskarakaṇṭha, Bhāskarī.]

———, Īśvarapratyabhijñāvivr̥tivimarśinī [ĪPVV/or Br̥hatī Vimarśinī], ed.
M.S. Kaul Shāstrī, vols. I-III, KSTS LX/LXII/ LXV, Bombay, 1938-43.

———, Locana on Dhvanyāloka [DhĀL] [see Ānandavardhana].

———, Parātriṁśikāvivaraṇa [PTV], ed. M.R. Shāstrī, KSTS XVIII, Bombay,
1918 [see Jaidev Singh].

———, Śrīmadbhagavadgītā with the commentary Gītārthasaṁgraha [BhGAS],
edited with notes by Pandit Lakshman Raina Brahmachārī, Srinagar, 1933.

———, Tantrāloka [TĀ] with the Viveka [TĀV] of Jayaratha, 8 vols.,
enlarged edition, eds. R.C. Dwivedi and Navajivan Rastogi, vol. I
(Introduction) by Navajivan Rastogi, Delhi, 1987.

Ānandavardhana, Dhvanyāloka [DhĀ] with Vyākhyā of Abhinavagupta [DhĀL],
eds. Durgaprasad and Kashinath Panduranga Parab, repr. 1983 (from 1935
edition of Nirnayasagar Press), Delhi, 1983 [see Ingalls and Pathak].

———, Dhvanyāloka and Locana with Kaumudī by Uttuṅgodaya and Upalocana by
Kuppusvami Śāstrī [Kaumudī on DhĀL], Uddyota I, eds. S. Kuppuswami
Sastri, T.V.R. Dikṣitar, T.R. Chintamani, Madras, 1944.

Bharata, Nāṭyaśāstra of Bharatamuni [NŚ] with the commentary
Abhinava-Bhāratī [ABh], in 4 volumes: vols. 1-3 edited by M. Ramakrishna
Kavi and vol. 4 by M. Ramakrishna Kavi and J.S. Pade), vol. I (chaps.
1-7), 2nd revised edn., ed. K.S. Ramaswami Sastri, GOS-XXXVI, Baroda,
1956; vol. II (chaps. 8-18), 2nd revised edn., eds. V.M. Kulkarni and
Tapasvi Nandi, GOS-68, Baroda, 2001; vol. III (chaps. 19-27), 2nd
revised edn., eds. same, GOS-124, Baroda, 2003; vol. IV (chaps. 28-37),
2nd revised edn., eds. same, (with slight variation, Tapasvi Nandi’s
name appears as T.S. Nandi), GOS-145, Baroda, 2006.

Bhartr̥hari, Vākyapadīya of Bhartr̥hari [VP] with the Vr̥tti and the
Paddhati of Vr̥ṣabhadeva, Kāṇḍa I, ed. K.A.S. Iyer, Poona 1966.

Bhāskarakaṇṭha [Bhāskara], Bhāskarī [Bhās.]. A commentary of
Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vimarśinī of Abhinavagupta [ĪPV], vols. I-II, ed.
K.A.S. Iyer and K.C. Pandey, The Princes of Wales Saraswati Bhavana
Texts Nos. 70-83, Allahabad, 1938-50.

Bhaṭṭa Nārāyaṇa, Stavacintāmaṇi [SC] with Vivr̥ti by Kṣemarāja
[SC-Vivr̥ti], ed. M.R. Shastri, KSTS X, Srinagar, 1918.

Dharmakīrti, Pramāṇavārttika [PV] with the commentary Vr̥tti of Acharya
Manorathanandin, critically edited by Swami Dwarikadas Shastri,
Varanasi, 1968.

Jayaratha, Tantrālokaviveka [TĀV] (see Tantrāloka under Abhinavagupta).

———, Alaṁkārasarvasva-vimarśinī [AS-Vimarśinī] [see Ruyyaka].

Kṣemarāja, Nirṇaya on Spandakārikā [SK] [see Vasugupta].

———, Vimarśinī on Śivasūtra [see Vasugupta].

———, Vivr̥ti on Śivastotrāvalī [ŚSĀ-Vivr̥ti] [see Utpaladeva].

———, Vivr̥ti on Stavacintāmaṇi [SC-Vivr̥ti] [see Bhaṭṭa Nārāyaṇa].

Kālidāsa, Abhijñānaśākuntalam [AŚ], in Kālidāsa-granthāvalī, ed. R.P.
Dvivedi, Varanasi, 1976.

Mammaṭa, Kāvyaprakāśa [KP] (see Kane).

Ruyyaka, Alaṁkārasarvasva [AS] of Rājānaka Ruyyaka with the commentary
(Vimarśinī) of Jayaratha [AS-Vimarśinī], ed. Paṇḍit Girijāprasād
Dvivedi, 2nd edn., Kāvyamālā 35, Bombay, 1939.

Somānanda, Śivadr̥ṣti [ŚD] with the Vr̥tti by Utpaladeva [ŚD-Vr̥tti], ed.
M.S. Kaul Shastri, KSTS No. LIV, Srinagar, 1934 [see Utpaladeva].

Śrīvidyācakravartin, Alaṁkārasarvasva-sañjīvinī, ed/tr. (Hindi) R.C.
Dwivedi, Delhi, 1965.

Utpaladeva, Siddhitrayī [Ajaḍapramātr̥siddhi with the Vr̥tti by Harabhaṭṭa
Śāstrī; Īśvarasiddhi; Saṁbandhasiddhi [SS]; all under the title
Siddhitrayī] .

———, (and) Pratyabhijñā-kārikā-Vr̥tti, ed. (with notes) M.S. Kaul
Shastri, KSS, XXXIV, Srinagar, 1921.

———, The Śivastotrāvalī (ŚSĀ) with the Vivr̥ti of Kṣemarāja [ŚSĀ-Vivr̥ti],
ed. with Hindi commentary by Rājānaka Lakṣmaṇa, Chowkhamba Sanskrit
Series, no. 15, Varanasi, 1964.

———, The Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikā of Utpaladeva [ĪPK] with the Author’s
Vr̥tti [ĪPVr̥/Torella1994], critical edition and annotated translation,
R.Torella, Serie Orientale Roma, LXXI, Rome, 1994.

———, Śivadr̥ṣṭi-Vr̥tti (Padasaṅgati) [ŚD-Vr̥tti] (see Śivadr̥ṣti under
Somānanda).

———, Īśvarapratyabhijñāvivr̥ti [Vivr̥ti] [see ĪPVV underAbhinavagupta
/Torella 2007a-b-c].

Vasugupta, Śiva-Sūtra [ŚS] ascribed to Vasugupta, in Śivasūtravimarśinī
by Kṣemarāja, ed. J.C. Chatterjee, KSTS I, Srinagar, 1911.

———, Spandakārikās (SK) of Vasugupta with the Nirṇaya by Kṣemarāja,
ed/tr. M.S. Kaul Shastri, KSTS XLII, Srinagar, 1925.

Vijñāna-Bhairava [VBh] with the Uddyota by Kṣemarāja up to verse 23 and
with the Vivr̥ti by Śivopādhyāya thereafter, ed. M.R. Shastri, KSTS VIII,
Bombay, 1918.

Translations and Studies

Bailly, C.R., 1987, Shaiva Devotional Songs of Kashmir: A Translation
and Study of Utpaladeva’s Śivastotrāvalī, SUNY series, Albany.

Bhattacharya, K.C., 1958, Studies in Philosophy, vol. II, ed. Gopinath
Bhattacharya, Calcutta.

Brihaspati, Kailash Chandradeva, 1991, Bharata Kā Saṅgīta Siddhānta,
Hindi Samiti Granthamāla 28, 2nd edn., Lucknow.

Chaturvedi, R.S., 1986, The Śivadr̥ṣṭi of Śrī Somānanda Nātha with the
Vr̥tti of Śrī Utpaladeva, edited with Sanskrit Commentary and Hindi
translation, Varanasi.

Das, S.K. (ed.), 1996, The English Writings of Rabindranath Tagore, vol.
2, New Delhi: Sahitya Akademi.

Gnoli, R., 1957, “Śivadr̥ṣṭi by Somānanda”, East and West, 8.

———, 1959, “Vāc. II secondo capitolo della Śivadr̥ṣṭi di Somānanda”,
Rivista degli Studi Orientali, 34.

———, 1968, The Aesthetic Experience according to Abhinavagupta,
Chowkhamba Sanskrit Studies, vol. LXII, 2nd edn., Varanasi.

Ingalls, D.H.H. (ed.), 1990, The Dhvanyāloka of Ānandavardhana with the
Locana of Abhinavagupta, tr. D.H.H. Ingalls, J.M. Masson and M.V.
Patwardhan, edited with an Introduction by D.H.H. Ingalls, Harvard
Oriential Series, 49, Harvard (MSS) and London.

Iyer, K.A.S., 1964, The Vākyapadīya of Bhartr̥hari with the Vr̥tti Chapter
1, English translation, Poona: Deccan College.

———, 1969, Bhartr̥hari. A Study of the Vākyapadīya in the Light of the
Ancient Commentaries, Poona: Deccan College.

Janaki, Kumari S.S., 1965, Alaṁkāra-Sarvasva of Ruyyaka, with the
Sañjīvanī Commentary of Vidyācakravartin, Text and Study by Kumari S.S.
Janaki, Delhi.

Kane, P.V., 1951, The Sāhitya-Darpaṇa of Viśvanātha (Paricchedas I, II,
X Arthālaṁkāras), with exhaustive Notes and the History of Sanskrit
Poetics, 3rd edn., Bombay.

Kaviraj, G.N. [Kaviraj, Gopinath], 1933, “Kāśmīrīya Śaiva Darśana kī
kucha Viśeṣatāyeṅ”, in Kalyāṇa, Śivāṅka, vol. 8, Gita Press, Gorakhpur
(Saṁ. 1990), 1933: reprinted in Bhāratīya Saṁskr̥ti aura Sādhanā, vol. 1,
Patna, 1963.

———, 1924, “The Doctrine of Pratibhā in Indian Philosophy”, ABORI,
1923-24, Poona: reprinted in Aspects of Indian Thought, 1966, 2nd edn.,
Burdwan, 1984.

Kaw, R.K., 1967, The Doctrine of Recognition (Pratyabhijñā Philosophy),
Vishveshvaranand Institute Series, no. 40, Hoshiarpur.

———, 1975-76, Pratyabhijñākārikā of Utpaladeva, parts I-II, Sharada
Peetha Indological Research Series, nos. 11-12, Srinagar.

Kotru, N.K., 1985, Śivastotrāvalī of Utpaladeva, Sanskrit Text with
Introduction, English Translation and Glossary, Delhi.

Lath, M.,1978, A Study of Dattilam: A Treatise on the Sacred Music of
Ancient India, New Delhi.

Masson, J.L. and M.V. Patwardhana, 1969, Śāntarasa and Abhinavagupta’s
Philosophy of Aesthetics, Poona: BORI.

Pande, Anupa, 1997, Abhinavabhāratī (Abhinavagupta’s Commentary on
Bharata’s Nāṭyaśāstra Chapter XXVIII: English Translation with
Historical Critical Explanations), Allahabad.

Pandey, K.C., 1935, Abhinavagupta: An Historical and Philosophical
Study, Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Studies, vol. I, Varanasi.

———, 1950, Comparative Aesthetics, vol. I: Indian Aesthetics, Chowkhamba
Sanskrit Series Studies, vol. II, Varanasi.

———, 1959, Comparative Aesthetics, vol. I: Indian Aesthetics, 2nd edn.,
Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Studies, vol. II, Varanasi.

———, 1963, Abhinavagupta: An Historical and Philosophical Study, 2nd
edn. revised and enlarged, Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Studies, vol. I,
Varanasi.

Pathak, Jagannath, 2003, Dhvanyaloka of Sri Anandavardhanacharya with
the Lochana Sanskrit Commentary of Sri Abhinavagupta and the Prakasa
Hindi Translation of Both the Texts and Exhaustive Notes, repr. edn.,
Vidyabhawan Sanskrit Granthmala, no. 97, Varanasi.

Raghavan, V., 1981, Abhinavagupta and His Works, Chaukhamba Oriential
Research Studies, no. 20, Varanasi.

Rastogi, N., 1977-78, “Recognition in Pratyabhijñā School: A Study in
Epistemology”, Annals of Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute (Diamond
Jubilee Volume), 58: 841-61.

———, 1986, “Theory of Error according to Abhinavagupta”, Journal of
Indian Philosophy, 14: 1-33.

———, 1987, “Gopinath Kaviraj on Kashmir Śaivism”, in Navonmeṣa: M.M.
Gopinath Kaviraj Commemoration Volume, eds. Jaideva Singh, G.G.
Mukhopadhyaya and H.N. Chakravorty, Varanasi, pp. 30-57.

———, 2009, “Vak as Pratyavamarśa: Bhartr̥hari from Abhinavan
Perspective”, in Bhartr̥hari: Language, Thought and Reality, (Proceedings
of the International Seminar, Delhi, 12-14 December 2003), ed. Mithilesh
Chaturvedi, Delhi, pp. 301-41.

———, 2012, Abhinavagupta kā Tantrāgamīya Darśana:
Itihāsa-Saṁskr̥ti-Saundarya aura Tattva-cintana,
Dārśanika-cintana-sr̥jana-granthamālā: 3 of the Akhila Bhartiya Darshan
Parishad, Sagar.

———, “Abhinavagupta kī Saundarya-dr̥ṣti”, in Rastogi 2012: 363-98.

———, “Pratibhāna aura Rasānubhava”, in Rastogi 2012: 299-420.

———, (2013a) Kāśmīra Sivādyavāda meṁ Pramāṇa-cintana, ed. Jitendra B.
Shah. Ahmedabad: L.D. Institute of Indology.

———, “Quintessentiality of Camatkāra in Rasa-experience: Revisiting
Abhinavagupta” in Rastogi (ed.) 2013b.

———, 2013b, (ed.) Abhinavā: Perspectives on Abhinavagupta. Essays in
Memory of K.C. Pandey, ed. Navjivan Rastogi, Delhi: Munshiram
Manoharlal.

Singh, Jaideva, 1988, Parātrīśikāvivaraṇa: The Secret of Tantric
Mysticism, English translation with notes and running exposition by
Jaidev Singh, Sanskrit text corrected, notes on technical points and
charts dictated by Swami Lakshmanjee, Delhi.

Torella, R., 1988, “A Fragment of Utpaladeva’s
Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti”, East and West, 38 (nos. 1-4): 137-74.

———, 1992, “The Pratyabhijñā and the Logical-Epistemological School of
Buddhism”, in T. Goudriaan (ed.), Ritual and Speculation in Early
Tantrism: Studies in Honor of André’ Padoux, New York, pp. 327-45.

———, 1994, ĪPVr̥ (See Utpaladeva)

———, 2004, “How Is Verbal Signification Possible: Understanding
Abhinavagupta’s reply”, Journal of Indian Philosophy, 32: 173-88.

———, 2007a, “Studies on Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti. Part I:
apoha and anupalabdhi in a Śaiva garb”, in K. Preisendanz (ed.)
Expanding and Merging Horizons: Contributions to South Asian and
Cross-Cultural Studies in Commemoration of Wilhelm Halbfass, Vienna, pp.
473-90.

———, 2007b, “Studies on Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti. Part II:
What Is Memory?”, in Indica et Tibetica. Festschrift für Michael Hahn
zum 65. Geburtstag von Freunden und Schülern überreicht, herausgegeben
von K. Klaus und J-U. Hartmann, Wien, pp. 539-63.

———, 2007c, “Studies on Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti. Part
III: Can a Cognition Become the Object of another Cognition?”, in D.
Goodall, A. Padoux (eds.) Mélanges tantriques … la mémoire ď Hélène
Brunner, Pondicherry, pp. 475-84.

———, 2007d, “Studies on Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti. Part IV:
Light of the Subject, Light of the Object”, in B. Kellner et al. (eds.)
Pramāṇakīrtiḥ: Papers Dedicated to Ernst Steinkellner on the Occasion of
his 70th Birthday, Wiener Studien zur Tibetologic und Buddhismuskunde,
Heft 70.1-2, Wien, pp. 925-39.

———, 2008, “From an Adversary to the Main Ally: The Place of Bhartr̥hari
in the Kashmirian Śaiva Advaita”, in M. Kaul and A. Aklujkar (eds.)
Linguistic Traditions of Kashmir: Essays in Memory of Paṇḍit Dinanath
Yaksha, Delhi, pp. 508-24.

———, 2012a, “Observation on Yogipratyakṣa”, in Saṁskr̥ta-Sādhutā —
Goodness of Sanskrit: Studies in Honour of Professor Ashok N. Aklujkar,
ed. Chickafumi Watanabe, Michele Desmarais, and Yoshicika Honda, Delhi,
pp. 470-87.

———, 2012b, “Studies in Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti. Part V:
Self-awareness and Yogic Perception”, in Voegeli, F. et al. (eds.)
Devadattīyam: Johannes Bronkhorst Felicitation Volume, Worlds of South
and Inner Asia 5, Peter Lang, Berne 2012, pp. 275-300.

———, forthcoming, “Inherited Cognition: Prasiddhi, āgama, Pratibhā,
śabdana (Bhartr̥hari, Utpaladeva, Abhinavagupta, Kumārila and Dharmakīrti
in Dialogue)”, in V. Eltschinger and H. Krasser (eds.) Proceedings of
the Panel on Āgama and Apologetics, XIV World Sanskrit Conference, Kyoto
2009, Vienna (copy courtesy author).

Vyas, S.P., 1989, Siddhitrayī of Rājānaka Utpaladeva, ed. and tr. into
Hindi, Kashi Sanskrit Series, Varanasi.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 1 “Utpalācārya’s method and point of view was followed by the next
generation not only in the sphere of philosophy as did Lakṣmaṇagupta,
Abhinava’s teacher in philosophy, but also in the sphere of poetics, [.
. .] as did Bhaṭṭa Indurāja and Bhaṭṭa Tauta, Abhinava’s teachers in
Dhvani and Nāṭyaśāstra, respectively.” (Pandey 1935: 78.)

2 Pandey 1935: 398; 1950: 92-94, 98, 140, 278; 1959: 40, 84, 98, 103-11,
152-53, 327-28, 539-40; 1963: 710, 924, 927.

3 Kane 1951 (3rd edn.; prior editions 1910, 1923): 132 (Notes X.37).

4 “Abhinavagupta’s Notion of Camatkāra in Aesthetical Experience”
written for the National Seminar on Gopinath Kaviraj, Calcutta.

5 Gnoli 1968: XLV-XLVI.

6 Raghavan 1981 (being the collection of his papers written between
1932-70): 121-23.

7 Lath 1978: 101, 195 (n 2).

8 bhaṭṭendurājasya sākṣāt svaguror guravo ’mī iti paramagurutvaṁ
pratyabhijñāprasthānapravartayitr̥̥̄ṇām utpaladevapādānām । — Kaumudī on
DhĀL: 175. K.R. Pisharoti (Journal of G.N. Jha Institute, 1: 445-52)
shows that Uttuṅgodaya was alive in ad 1480 (vide Kane [1951: 199]).

9 pratyabhijñeyaśabdenedam āha [. . .] yathoktam asmatparamagurubhiḥ
śrīmadutpalapādaiḥ । — Kaumudī on DhĀL: 175.

10 utpaladevapāda(dā)s tv asmatparamaguravo vyācakṣate [. . .] vayaṁ tu
manmahe । vīṇāyām api [. . .] । — ABh on NŚ 31.26, IV, p. 164.

11 Reproduced below is the relevant observation from Raghavan in full
(1981: 123):

“The Abhinavabhāratī is the only source of information as regards
Utpaladeva having written a work on music. Śārṅgadeva’s list and the
lists in other music works, cataloguing the saṅgītācāryas, do not
mention him. There seems to be however one reference, perhaps to this
work of Utpaladeva on music in the Śivatattva-Ratnākara of Basavarāja,
in his Saṅgīta Chapter. This work is a thesaurus like Someśvara’s
Abhilaṣitārtha-Cintāmaṇi otherwise called Mānasollāsa, to which the
Śivatattva-Ratnākara is much indebted. Chapter six of this work of
Basava treats of the fine arts. The concluding verses of this chapter
give the authorities of the Śāstras. The following refer to the Saṅgīta
Section —

dattilena kr̥taṁ nandibhr̥ṅgikohalakādibhiḥ ।

bharataṁ cādibharataṁ ca gītaratnākaraṁ tathā ।।

utpalādyaṁ parimalaṁ kr̥tiṁ śārṅgadharasya ca ।

Most likely the text of the last line is somewhat corrupt. Anyhow we
have a mention here, among authorities on Saṅgīta, of a name, Utpala.”
(In “Index” on p. 200, this work is shown as Utpalaparimala, but since
the Index [Authors, Works, Journals] was prepared posthumously, not much
value needs be attached to it.)

12 Torella 1994: Introduction, 2008: 508-24; Rastogi 2009: 324.

13 sā sarvavidyāśilpānāṁ kalānāṁ copanibandhinī ।

tadvaśād abhiniṣpannaṁ sarvaṁ vastu vibhajyate ।। — VP 1.117 (125)

[“It is this which is the basis of all the sciences, crafts and arts.
Whatever is created due to this can be analysed and communicated.” — tr.
Iyer, p. 112]. For Vr̥ṣabha’s analysis of Bhartr̥hari’s inherent art
process, see Rastogi 2009: 314-15 (specially n 69).

14 VBh 73: gītādiviṣayāsvādasamasaukhyaikatātmanaḥ । yoginas
tanmayatvena manorūḍhes tadātmatā ।।

15 ŚS 3.9-11.

16 SpK 2.5.

17 NŚ 1.11: krīḍanīyakam icchāmo . . .

18 SC 59 and 9 respectively. For a contextual construction see Rastogi
2012: 386-87.

19 rūpaprasārarasato garhitatvam ayuktimat । — ŚD 1.12ab

20 In confining myself to the secular, I am guided by Abhinavagupta, who
fervently believes that the realm of aesthetics, though trans-mundane,
is not religious nor yogic. In the yogic there is absolute joy, bliss,
but no beauty experience, since beauty experience, in art or even in
nature, involves some intervening role of medium (see ABh, 1: 285). The
outcome of such an approach is visible in considering rasa-experience as
a kith and kin of the Absolutic experience (parabrahmāsvādasavidha) but
not the absolutic, religious or spiritual experience proper. For
detailed treatment see my “Abhinavagupta kī Saundarya-dr̥ṣṭi” in Rastogi
2012: 365-66.

21 Bhattacharya 1958: Editor’s Introduction.

22 yato ’tisundaro ’si । — ŚSĀ 18.21

23 tvam eva lalitaḥ pūjānāṁ kila bhājanam । — ŚSĀ 17.42

24 It is only in the late post-Utpala era that the Vaiṣṇava Vedānta
systems revert to such designations.

25 ŚSĀ 1.5, 22; 2.26; 5.16, 22; 9.1; 16.4-5; 17.42, etc.

26 ŚSĀ 5.23.

27 jñānī hi bhaktaḥ । — Vivr̥ti cited in ĪPVV 1, 29. Abhinavagupta
glosses: jñānitvam eva nāma bhaktir iti yāvat.

28 Glossing bhaktyā from Vivr̥ti (cit. in ĪPVV 1, 24) Abhinavagupta says:
satye pūrṇānandasvarūpe satatasamāveśaprābalyaṁ vidyālakṣaṇaṁ bhaktiḥ
tayā । — ĪPVV 1, 24.

29 jayabhaktimadālolalīlotpalamahotsava । — ŚSĀ 14.23. Mark the pun in
the word utpala “lotus” and “person named Utpala”.

30 bhaktimadena samāveśodrekeṇa ālolā spr̥haṇīyā vyāptā ca līlā
parispando yasya tathābhūtasya utpalasya etannāmnaḥ asmatparameṣṭhino
mahotsavaḥ । — Vr̥tti on the above, p. 229.

31 Kaviraj 1933 (repr. 1963): 11. Also see Rastogi 1987: 40-44; 2012:
181, 344-47.

32 NŚ I (2nd edn.): 332-35.

33 kas tarhy atra sthāyī । ucyate, iha tattvajñānam eva tāvan
mokṣa-sādhanam iti tasyaiva mokṣe sthāyitā yuktā । — ABh on NŚ I: 336.

34 Ibid.: 336-37.

35 ata eva īśvarapraṇidhānaviṣaye bhaktiśraddhe [. . .] aṅgam iti na
tayoḥ pr̥thag rasatvena gaṇanam । — ABh on NŚ I: 340.

36 Abhinavagupta brings out the implication of “yayā” in the Vivr̥ti as:
tadbhāvaṁ tadāsvādalābhena tadāveśavaivaśyaṁ gataṁ mānasam eṣām iti
bhakteḥ svarūpam uktam । alabdhatadāsvādasyāpi tatra prāptigrahaḥ
śraddheti । — ĪPVV I: 27.

37 “alaṁkāra śāstra meṁ mukhya bhakti śānta rasa ke antargata hai aura
gauṇa bhakti bhāvamātra hai । bhaktiśāstra meṁ śānta rasa svayaṁ hī
bhakti viśeṣa hai aura mukhya bhakti to rasasvarūpā hai ।” — Kaviraj
1933 (1963): 11.

38 Kaviraj does not name Utpala, but the whole argumentation revolves
round Utpala’s presentation.

39 Kaviraj 1933: 10.

40 kadā navarasārdrārdrasambhogāsvādanotsukam । — ŚSĀ 9.1. Kṣemarāja
glosses navarasārdrārdrasambhoga°: navarasena ārdrārdraḥ
nūtanabhaktiprasareṇa sātiśayaṁ spr̥haṇīyo samāveśātmā sambhogaḥ । —
ŚSĀ-Vr̥tti: 115; also see Rastogi 2012: 346.

41 itthamatyarthabhinnāvabhāsārthakhacite vibhau । samalo vimalo vā ’pi
vyavahāro ’nubhūyate ।। — ĪPK 1.7.14. My translation is influenced by
Pandey and Torella both. The word khacite is semantically very rich. In
Abhinavagupta’s exegesis it is uparakte (coloured). Both interpretations
— khacite and uparakte — carry pictorial and sculptural shades in their
meaning. Cf. ĪPV I: 390; ĪPVV II: 404: khacite svarūpānanyathābhāvena
uparakte. Torella also refers to it (1994: 146, n 28), but does not
discuss it.

42 māyāśaktyā bhedaviṣayo ’yaṁ sarvo vyavahāras tathājñānināṁ śuddho
’jñānāndhānāṁ tu malinas tattadabhinnārthāvabhāsabhāji bhagavati
saṁbhāvyate ’nubhavena । — Vr̥tti on ĪPK 1.4.14

43 na kevalam ete kāryakāraṇabhāvasmaraṇabādhāvyavahārāḥ
sakalalokayātrāsāmānyavyavahārabhūtā ekapramātr̥niṣṭhāḥ, yāvat
avāntaravyavahārā api ye krayavikrayādayaḥ samalāḥ,
upadeśyopadeśabhāvādayaś ca nirmalāḥ, te ’pi ekapramātr̥niṣṭhā eva
bhavanti । — ĪPV I: 389.

44 One could venture to describe it as nirmalo ’vāntaro vyavahāraḥ in
the light of Abhinavagupta’s treatment.

45 samalo māyāndhānāṁ krayavikrayavivādādiḥ nirmalaḥ
pratyabhijñātātmaparamārthānāṁ [. . .] viśeṣadr̥śi [. . .] śuddhātmanām
upadeśadīkṣānityanaimittikādyanuṣṭhāna- dhyānasamādhānādivyavahāraḥ [. .
.] vyavahārarūpatā sā hi bhedābhedaprāṇitasamanvayātmā sarvathā
bhedatirodhau tirodhīyate eva, tathāpi pratyabhijñātayāvatparamātmanāṁ
sa vyavahāraḥ svaparātmani malaśodhanabodhanaikadha(read gha)natvāt
vimala eva yuktaḥ । — ĪPVV II: 405

46 The basis for my conjecture is provided by the following phrases in
the ĪPVV: siddhāḥ, [. . .] niṣkalāḥ, [. . .] tadartham eva siddhaśabda
eṣāṁ viśeṣaṇam, tadā ca ādiśabdenaiva niṣkalātmano grahaṇam । — ibid.

47 “tathājñāninām” iti vr̥ttau samastaṁ padam । “saṁbhāvyate” iti vr̥ttāv
uktaṁ mūḍhānāṁ jhaṭiti tathābhimānābhāve ’pi uktopadeśapariśīlanadiśā
prakāśate eva ayam arthaḥ iti darśayitum । — ibid.

Utpala entertains the similar viewpoint in his ŚSĀ 12.24: vyavahārapade
’pi sarvathā pratibhātv arthakalāpa eṣa mām । bhavato ’vayavo yathā na
tu svata evādaraṇīyatāṁ gataḥ ।। [“Even in the realm of worldly
transaction let this mass of objects shine to me as thy limb in all
respects and not that it evokes regard for its own sake.”] [Also see n
281 below.]

48 tad uktaṁ śivavijñānopaniṣadi — “grāhyagrāhakasaṁvittiḥ sāmānyā
sarvadehinām । yogināṁ tu viśeṣo ’yaṁ saṁbandhe sāvadhānatā ।।” — VBh
106; iti । “kevalam” iti saty api sārvatrike māyāvyāpāre idamadhikam ity
arthaḥ । — ĪPVV I: 405.

49 anubhūyate ca sopadeśaiḥ avadhānaparaiḥ yena eṣāṁ yaiva saṁsāradaśā
saṁmatā vyavahāradaśā saiva pramātr̥tattvaprakhyātmikā śivabhūmiḥ ।
yaduktam ’saṁbandhe sāvadhānatā’ iti । — ĪPV I : 391

50 adhikāriṇo ’dhikā ’sti pratipattiḥ । — ABh I: 278. This idea of
adhika reminds me of Tagore’s notion of the “Surplus” that seeks its
outlet in the creation of art. Vide, Das 1996: 352. Except drawing
attention to the semiotic resemblance between the two ideas across the
vast historical spectrum there is neither my intention nor effort to
compare the two.

51 apravartitapūrvo ’tra kevalaṁ mūḍhatāvaśāt ।
śaktiprakāśen-eśādivyavahāraḥ pravartyate ।। [(“What in reality happens)
is only that the use in practical reality of notions and expressions
(°vyavahāraḥ) like ‘Lord’, which due to the condition of obfuscation was
not brought about earlier (apravartitapūrvaḥ) is promoted through
bringing to light of the powers”. — tr. Torella.] It may be noted that
īśādivyavahāra, in effect, amounts to nirmalatāvyavahāra.

52 kintu mohavaśād asmin dr̥ṣṭe ’py anupalakṣite । śaktyāviṣkaraṇeneyaṁ
pratyabhijñopadarśyate ।। [“However, since He, though being directly
perceived (dr̥ṣṭe ’pi) is not discerned for what He is because of
delusion, precisely for this reason, by bringing his Powers to light,
the recognition (pratyabhijñā) of Him is shown.” — tr. ibid.]

53 ĪPK 3.2.4.

54 yaḥ prasādalava īśvarasthito yā ca bhaktir iva mām upeyuṣī । tau
parasparasamanvitau kadā tādr̥śe vapuṣi rūḍhim eṣyataḥ ।। — ŚSĀ 8.1
[“When will that small amount of grace/ Abiding with the Lord / And that
small amount of devotion / That has come to me / Unite to become like
that unique form — / The blissful body of Śiva?” — tr. Bailly].

55 sarvathā nairmalyātmā prasādo bhagavadrūpatā । — ĪPVV I: 25-26

56 prasādo nirmalībhāvas tena saṁpūrṇarūpatā ।। ātmanā tena hi śivaḥ
svayaṁ pūrṇaḥ prakāśate । — TĀ 13.286-87

57 svecchāvabhāsitāśeṣalokayātrātmane namaḥ । śivāya śaśvad-
acchannasvacchasvacchandavr̥ttaye ।। — Benedictory verse of the Vivr̥ti,
cited in ĪPVV I: 3. Lokayātrā here stands for vyavahāra: yātrāḥ
prāptayaḥ parasparasaṁbandhāḥ । — ibid.

58 tena “śaśvad” iti kālaparicchedāsaṁbhavaḥ । “acchanna” iti
svarūpānatirekaḥ । “svaccha” iti anatiriktatve ’pi
atirikta-tābhāsasaṁbhavaḥ । “svacchanda” iti vimarśasvātantryayogaḥ ।
“vr̥tti”-padena eṣāṁ rūpāṇāṁ bhagavati śaktimati tādātmyāvabhāsa uktaḥ ।
[. . .] vr̥ttir vartanaṁ svarūpaspanditam eva yasya, sa eva [. . .] śivaḥ
parameśvaraḥ tasmai namaḥ iti [. . .] । — ĪPVV I: 7.

59 prabhur īśādisaṁkalpair nirmāya vyavahārayet ।।

Vr̥tti: svātantryāt [. . .] īśvaraḥ śivo veditā ity evamādivikalpair
ābhāsayati bhāvanādivyavahārārtham.

60 evam ekā kriyā saiṣā sakramāntarbahiḥsthitiḥ ।
ekasyai-vobhayākārasahiṣṇor upapāditā ।। — ĪPK 2.4.5. ĪPV adds (II:
160): sa caikaḥ āśrayaḥ saṁvidrūpatvena svacchatvasvatantratvābhyām
ubhayam apy antarbahīrūpaṁ sahate iti.

61 mohān manyamānasya moho ’pasāryate । — ĪPV II: 144. See for related
discussion, Rastogi 2012: 338-39.

62 tad āha “atiśayanirantara” iti । nairantaryam avadhānasya
vijātīyacittavyavahārābhāvo nairmalyam । — Vivr̥ti on ĪPVr̥ 1.4.2 (Torella
2007b: 548, text). It may not be difficult to revisit our initial
allusion to the notion of attentiveness in relationship in this regard.

63 śuṣkendhanāgnivat svacchajalavat sahasaiva yaḥ । vyāpnoty anyat
prasādo ’sau sarvatra vihitasthitiḥ ।। — KP VIII, cited in Kane 1951:
309.

64 kintu mohavaśād asmin dr̥ṣṭe ’py anupalakṣite । śaktyāviṣkaraṇeneyaṁ
pratyabhijñopadarśyate ।। [“However, since He, though being directly
perceived (dr̥ṣṭe’pi) is not marked (precisely noticed) because of
delusion by bringing (His) powers to light, this recognition (of Him) is
shown.” — tr. Torella, with modification]. This kārikā is sometimes
numbered as 1.1.2 taking ādiśloka (opening verse) separately from the
upodghāta (preface, foreword, introduction).

65 vītavighnatā, prakāśa and mohāpasāraṇa.

66 pratyabhijñāna, vimarśa, camatkāra and hr̥dayaṅgamatā.

67 dr̥ḍhaniścayarūpaṁ pratyabhijñānamātram । — ĪPVr̥ 1.2.3. Here “firm
ascertainment” (dr̥ḍhaniścaya) is not just an epistemic event, but
something more fulfilling — going direct to the heart. We discuss it
later.

68 ĪPK 4.1.17: aparijñātaḥ; 4.1.12: parijānataḥ and 4.1.3:
svasvarūpāparijñānamayo ’nekaḥ pumān mataḥ. Here Utpala construes
aparijñāna as finitization (parimitatvakaraṇa of the infinite,
pervasive) and reduces it to apratyabhijñāna: etad eva viśvātmanaḥ
parimitatvakaraṇam apratyabhijñānam ucyate । — Vr̥tti on 4.1.3. Thus in
Utpala’s view aparijñāna is the fragmented knowledge of the Universal
Self and pratyabhijñāna, by reverse implication, amounts to the
knowledge of the unfragmented, infinite or limitless reality. In fact,
defragmentation here qualifies knowledge or knowledge act.

69 ĪPK 3.1.7: tasyaiśvaryasvabhāvasya paśubhāve prakāśikā । vidyāśaktiḥ
[. . .] ।। Prakāśikā, vidyāśaktiḥ is glossed with svātmanaḥ
pratyabhijñānaṁ vidyayā in the Vr̥tti. It may be read in conjunction with
vidyābhijñāpitaiśvaryaḥ (ĪPK 3.2.2) glossed by the Vr̥tti as
ātmatattvābhijñayā. Abhinavagupta also connects abhijñā with
pratyabhijñā in ĪPV on 3.2.2 (II: 247): pratyabhijñāpadaṁ prāpitam
aiśvaryaṁ yasya saḥ.

70 This is the meaning assigned by Abhinavagupta. Though Utpala
frequently uses the word anusandhāna in the sense of unification,
co-ordination, mutual expectancy but expressly not in this sense.
However, Abhinavagupta assigns this meaning in an exclusive literary
context, explaining the word pratyabhijñeyam used by Ānandavardhana (DhĀ
1.8), on the explicit testimony of his master Utpala’s ĪPK 4.1.17.
According to him it is not a mere mechanical knowledge of the already
known but a kind of reconstructing, reinventing or reinterpreting,
capable of numberless possibilities providing the metaphysical basis for
the theory of dhvani “suggested meaning”. The format acquired by this
pratyabhijñāna is “this is such or of this kind” and not the usual kind
“this is the same thing”: pratyabhijñeyaśabdena idam āha [. . .] idam
ittham iti viśeṣato nirūpyamāṇaṁ sahasraśākhībhavati । yad uktam
asmatparamagurubhiḥ śrīmadutpalapādaiḥ “tais tair apy upayācitaiḥ [. .
.] tatpratyabhijñoditā ।।” (ĪPK 4/1/17) iti । tena jñātasyāpi viśeṣato
nirūpaṇam anusandhānātmakam atra pratyabhijñānam । na tu tad evedam idam
ity etāvanmātram । (DhĀL, pp. 35-36). Such a construction, if I may say
so, reminds us of the attributive recognition (dharma-pratyabhijñāna)
being the second variety in Śivopādhyāya’s twofold classification into
the substantive and the attributive recognitions. What must not be
missed is that Śivopādhyāya traces this division to ĪPK 4.1.12 (sarvo
mamāyaṁ vibhavaḥ, etc.) and its confirmation to ĪPV (II: 303), cf.
VBh-Vr̥tti, p. 96. By naming them as dharmi- and dharma-pratyabhijñāna
the attention of the scholars was drawn to this by me about three
decades back (Rastogi 1977-78: 856).

According to Abhinavagupta, Ānandavardhana prescribes this careful
inspection and constant investigation of word and meaning as mandatory
aspect of a great poet’s education. This is no doubt Ānanda’s primary
intention, as also confirmed by Abhinavagupta. But Jagannath Pathak
(2003: 96, n 2) shows that Ānanda’s language could be understood to
secondarily imply that it should be part of the qualified reader’s or
critic’s education as well.

This is becoming a very lengthy note, but for the benefit of the readers
I am reproducing below Ingalls’s translation of the DhĀ and Locana (pp.
124-25), of the relevant portion:

“K 1.8. [DhĀ (kārikā)]: This meaning and whatever particular word has
the capability of conveying it are the meaning and the word which should
be carefully scrutinized (or recognized, pratyabhijñeyau) by a great
poet.

A [Ānandavardhana (prose)]: The suggested meaning and the particular
word that has the capability of conveying it, not just any word: this
word and meaning should be scrutinized (or recognized) by a great poet.
It is by the proper use of the suggested sense and the word that
suggests it that a great poet deserves his name, not by mere structuring
of the denoting word and the denoted meaning.

L [Locana] should be scrutinized (or recognized): [. . .] And by the
suffix’s use in this mandatory sense he indicates that this [seeking out
of the suggestive word and sense] forms of [a poet’s] education. By
using the word pratyabhijñeyau he would indicate that although poetry
may flash forth (parisphurati) of its own accord in the way described
[by Bhāmaha 1.5] “poetry comes to the man of genius, and at that only
sometimes”; still, it increases in a thousand ways if that man will keep
considering his poem carefully, thinking, “this should be like this”
[i.e.: “I should say such and such, and not such and such”, in this way
always seeking the suggestive word and sense] (Brackets mine as this
constitutes editors’ explanation and not Abhinavagupta’s text). The
matter was put forth as follows by my teacher’s teacher, the renowned
Utpala: “As some lover brought by many prayers to a lady’s side, only to
find that she does not recognize him when he is come and so all hope of
making love to her [? read ‘him’] is gone; just so is God, although he
be our very soul, misprised within us and cannot share with us his
glory. Therefore I have written this book called Recognition.”

One sees from this that pratyabhijñā (recognition, scrutiny) is a
careful inspection of and continuous reflection upon an object although
that object is already [in some sense] known. This is what is meant by
pratyabhijñā and not the mere recognition that consists in noting that
“this is the same thing I saw before”.

Two more points merit attention here. One, no special effort is needed
to see that this kind of formulation of recognition seems to be implicit
in or inspired by the very theorization of recognition in “noticing” the
already “perceived” which hitherto remained “unnoticed” in the
immediately preceding section. Two, it also reconnects us with the
“doctrine of viśeṣa” alluded to during the course of configuring
aesthetic activities as forming human transaction of the pure category.
I have tried to show it elsewhere (Rastogi 2012: 151) that the idea of
pratyabhjñā, though not found directly in Kallaṭa, Vasugupta or
Vijñāna-Bhairava, was acquiring shape in particular direction. The idea
of a thing perceived indistinctly at first becoming distinct later on
keen re-observation due to exertion of one’s inner strength in SpK 3.4
(yathā hy artho ’sphuṭo dr̥ṣṭaḥ sāvadhāne ’pi cetasi । bhūyaḥ sphuṭataro
bhāti svabalodyogabhāvitaḥ ।।) and the acute mindfulness distinguishing
the yogic perception as regards subject–object relationship in VBh 106
(grāhyagrāhakasaṁvittiḥ sāmānyā sarvadehinām । yogināṁ tu viśeṣo ’sti
saṁbandhe sāvadhānatā ।।) seem to have had direct bearing on the
evolution of the notion of Pratyabhijñā into this particular mode.
Otherwise there was apparently no reason for Ānandavardhana, who was a
fellow courtier of Kallaṭa in the court of Avantivarman to have resorted
to this specific conceptualization of dhvani (i.e. yatnataḥ
pratyabhijñeyau tau śabdārthau mahākaveḥ ।। — DhĀ 1.8) and for
Abhinavagupta to have opted for this particular formulation of
Pratyabhijñā directly invoking the authority of Utpala from outside the
skirts of poetics in a solitary allusion to him throughout the Locana.
It seems that Abhinavagupta views this kind of abstraction as
constituting general parameter of real knowing. In the opening remarks
of the 16th chapter of the Gītārtha-Saṁgraha he describes such a
knowledge as vicāra, vimarśa or parāmarśa that is constituted by rise of
knowing marked by reasoning and reflection post-instruction: bodhaś ca
nāma śrutimayajñānānantaram ’idam ittham’
ityevaṁbhūtayukticintābhāvanāmayajñānodayena
vicāravimarśaparāmarśādirūpeṇa [. . .] bhavati । (BhGAS, p. 157) and
connects it with the reflection in totality coming later in the Gītā
(XVIII: 63: vimr̥śyamevamaśeṣeṇa) — ibid. Therefore in all fairness,
credit must be given to Abhinavagupta for demonstrating that from tad
evedam (“it is indeed that”) to idam itthaṁ (“it is like this”) to idam
etādr̥k (“it is such and such” — ĪPK 2.3.1). Utpala is intent upon
providing a unified level field from metaphysics to epistemology to
aesthetics transforming whole cognition into recognition and perception
of poetic meaning into the recognitive apperception of poetic meaning
through the discovery of poetic word. (See Rastogi 2012: 170 and also
Rastogi [2013a]: chapter on pramāṇa.)

71 The manner in which Utpala demonstrates the notion of Pratyabhijñā
highlighting its aesthetic nuance reminds us of the analogous
linguo-semantic treatment meted out to the word recognition in English.
Recognition comes from Latin verb cognoscere, to know, understand; thus
recognize is to know again, and incognito, unknown. Similarly the same
Latin verb cognoscere gives us connoisseur, gourmet, cognoscente,
aesthete (sahr̥daya). (Vide Reader’s Digest Family Word Finder, 1975, p.
174.)

72 kevalam asya svasaṁvedanasiddhasyāpi (glossing dr̥ṣṭe’pi) īśvarasya
māyāvyāmohād ahr̥dayaṅgamatvād [. . .]। Abhinavagupta remarks that this
causal ablative glosses the locative anupalakṣite which is therefore a
nimittasaptamī: nimittasaptamyarthas tu ahr̥dayaṅgamatvāt iti
hetupañcamyā vyākhyātaḥ । — ĪPVV I: 80 (see also Torella 1994: 3, text
note 22)

73 It may be noted in passing that Abhinavagupta in the ĪPV faithfully
echoes the Vr̥tti in treating anupalakṣite as hr̥dayaṅgamībhāvam aprāpte.
Abhinavagupta also sees a close connection between ĪPK 1.1.3 and 4.1.17
(the kārikā that Abhinavagupta cites to interpret Ānandavardhana’s
dhvani and uses here as an illustration) in holding that this appeal to
heart (or heart’s conviction) leads to the effective realization of the
internal causal efficiency which consists in pleasure or joy essentially
in the nature of relish equated with repose in the subject. The
actualization of this kind of causal efficiency depends upon emergence
of absolute conviction in one’s being ontologically full and complete.
Recognition remains the sole tool for effecting such a conviction:
anupalakṣite sarvathā hr̥dayaṅgamībhāvam aprāpte ata eva
pūrṇatāvabhāsanasādhyām arthakriyām akurvati,
tatpūrṇatāvabhāsanātmakābhimānaviśeṣasiddhaye pratyabhijñā [. . .] — ĪPV
I: 58; dvividhārthakriyāsti, bāhyā cāṅkurādikā,
pramātr̥viśrānticamatkārasārā ca prītyādirūpā [. . .]
pramātr̥viśrāntisārārthakriyā pratyabhijñānena vinā na dr̥ṣṭā [. . .]। —
ibid., II: 312-13. Also see ĪPV I: 220; ĪPVV II: 216.

I want to show that Abhinavagupta’s entire art speculation develops
around the central notion of heart. The total, dynamic and interactive
involvement of heart at every stage of art creation, experience and
appreciation, the starting point of his theory of art, is what
Abhinavagupta takes straight from Utpala. We must acknowledge that the
idea of arthakriyā envisaged right above is Abhinavagupta’s own
reduction and apparently would run counter to Utpala’s known stand that
internality being conceived in terms of identity with the subject would
have no space for causal efficiency which could logically be justified
in the realm of differentiated external reality only (āntaratvāt
pramātraikye naiṣāṁ bhedanibandhanā । arthakriyāpi bāhyatve sā
bhinnābhāsabhedataḥ ।। — ĪPK 1.8.6). In Abhinavan synthesis, however,
all cultural pursuits — viz. philosophical, spiritual, religious,
aesthetic and the like — comprise nirmala vyavahāra. And in virtue of
their constituting vyavahāra per se they, of necessity, must have some
arthakriyā, some immediate purpose to achieve. In so doing they graduate
from the domain of differentiated reality to the domain of
differentiated–undifferentiated reality tilted more towards the
undifferentiated, enlivened as they are by the underlining unity
furnished by this arthakriyā — it is arthakriyā because it is actuated
by conviction in or perception of one’s holistic and absolute identity,
which could now be theorized as internal — by reason of its being of the
nature of repose in the experiencing subject, standing for pleasurable
and joyous experiences. It is to be noted, by employing ādi (in
prītyādirūpā) Abhinavagupta renders pleasurable experience into a much
broader and more inclusive category so as to cover all experiences in
evenly situated varied contexts.

74 On the issue at hand Utpala’s inputs may be culled from three sources
(ĪPK, ĪPVr̥, ĪPViv) duly coordinated by the ĪPVV:

(A) ĪPK 1.1.3

ĪPK: dr̥ṣṭe ’py anupalakṣite [. . .] upadarśyate ।

Vr̥tti: svasaṁvedanasiddhasyāpi [. . .] ahr̥dayaṅgamatvād [. . .]
upadarśyate ।

(a) (upadarśyate from kārikā is repeated in the Vr̥tti without
explanation.)

(b) According to ĪPVV I: 80, dr̥ṣṭe ’pi anupalakṣite is construed as
dr̥ṣṭasya anupalakṣitatvāt and glossed with svasaṁvedanasiddhasyāpi
ahr̥dayaṅgamatvāt ।

Vivr̥ti: (tat katham uktam) “asminn īśvare dr̥ṣṭe ’pi” iti । (āha)
“dr̥ṣṭaśabdo ’yam” iti । [. . .] (tata eva ṭīkāyāṁ) (I: 79-81, 85-87)
“dr̥ṣṭasyāpi” ityādi “ahīyata” ityantaṁ (mukhyatayā dr̥ṣṭāntaviṣayam । [.
. .] “svasaṁvedanasiddhasya” ity (api vr̥ttau gauṇaṁ draṣṭavyaṁ) [. . .]
(nimittasaptamyarthas tu) “ahr̥dayaṅgamatvāt” iti (hetupañcamyā
vyākhyātaḥ) । [. . .] (nanu dr̥ṣṭaṁ ca anupalakṣitaṁ ceti katham
ityāśaṅkyāha) “dr̥ṣṭasyāpi” iti । [. . .] (hr̥dayaviśrāntir
hr̥dayaṅgamatvaṁ ca nāma kim ity āha) “prakāśam upārūḍhānāṁ”
(pramātr̥prakāśabalena prakāśamānānām, na tu svayam । etad artham eva
uktaṁ) “pramātrāveśāt” iti । [. . .] (kathaṁ ca parāmarśo hr̥dayam ity
āha) “parāmarśalakṣaṇo hi” iti । [. . .] (evaṁ mukhyatayā dr̥ṣṭāntapakṣe
sūtravr̥ttyarthayojanaṁ ṭīkākr̥tā kr̥tam) [. . .] (etad eva dārṣṭāntike
yojayati) “evam asya” iti । [. . .] “pūrṇa” iti [. . .] (tasya
upalakṣaṇaṁ) [. . .] । (kiṁ tadupalakṣaṇam ucyate ityāha) “tat” iti । [.
. .] (nanu kathaṁ tad evaṁbhūtam anāsvāditapūrvam aiśvaryam
āsvādagocarībhavati ity āśaṅkyāha) “hr̥daya” iti । “bhavet” iti
(saṁbhāvyam eva asya bhavanam iti) । [. . .] (upa samīpe iti
hr̥dayasaṁgamanena pradhānatayā darśyate) [. . .] (tena vr̥ttau
sūtrānusāreṇaiva) “upadarśyate” iti (uktam) ।

(B) ĪPK 1.5.14

ĪPK: saiṣā (sāratayā) hr̥dayaṁ (parameṣṭhinaḥ ।)

Vr̥tti: saiva (pratyavamarśātmā citikriyāśaktiḥ । sā) svātmapratiṣṭhārūpā
hr̥dayam [. . .] nigadyate ।

(a) (Vr̥tti brings forward citiḥ pratyavamarśātmā from ĪPK 1.5.13
construing citiḥ as citikriyāśaktiḥ).

Vivr̥ti: “sāratayā” iti (sūtre yad anuvadanaṁ hetutayā hr̥dayatve

(II: 203-06) sādhye, tat vyācaṣṭe) “yathā” iti “cetanaṁ pratiṣṭhā” iti
(saṁbandhaḥ) “cetanāvatām api” iti “yathā” iti (saṁbandhaḥ) । [. . .]
(prakr̥te yojayati) “tathaiva” iti । [. . .] (sā parā vimarśaśaktiḥ
parameśvarasya) “pratiṣṭhā” iti (anena śabdena, parameśvarasya)
“hr̥dayam” iti (anena ca śabdena vācyā) । [. . .] “hr̥dayam eva” iti (na
atra upacaritam hr̥dayatvam, apitu mukhyameveti bhāvaḥ ।

(a) Abhinavagupta (ĪPVV I: 81) connects “hr̥dayaṁ” in the Vr̥tti and
“parāmarśalakṣaṇo hi” in the Vivr̥ti with ĪPK 1.5.13 and 1.5.14 reading
them together following the Vr̥tti on 1.5.14.

75 nanu dr̥ṣṭaṁ anupalakṣitaṁ ceti katham ity āśaṅkyāha “dr̥ṣṭasyāpi” iti
। hr̥dayaṁ vimarśaḥ tatprāptiparyantaṁ darśanam upalakṣitam। tasmin sati
samucitavyavahāropayojanam, nānyathā mārgadr̥ṣṭe tr̥ṇādāv eva । tena
hr̥dayena saha sātmatā, ātmarūpatā, sākalyāt ātmarūpatādhyavasāyo vā । —
ĪPVV I: 81-82

76 etadartham evoktaṁ “pramātrāveśāt” iti [. . .] kathaṁ ca parāmarśo
hr̥dayam iti । āha “parāmarśalakṣaṇo hi” iti । [. . .]
samastāṁśasvīkāreṇa vimr̥śāmi iti vartamānaṁ dharmirūpasāram, ābhāsate
iti tu bhāgamātram । — ibid.: 82

77 etadupalakṣaṇaṁ hr̥dayasya āvarjanaṁ tadunmukhīkaraṇaṁ satyam
etadrūpam iti hr̥dayaṅgamatvaṁ ca ucyate । — ĪPVV I: 81-82

78 atas tadvyavahāramātram api neha sādhyate api tu upāṁśucchannaṁ
sthitaṁ tat, upa samīpe hr̥dayasaṁgamanena pradhānatayā darśyate । [. .
.] tena vr̥ttau sūtrānusāreṇaiva “upadarśyate” iti uktam । — ibid.: 87.
Abhinavagupta in order to lend further precision compares upadarśana
with “urging or prompting to be fully concentrated” (avadhāna-dāpana,
lit. causing one give attention to): avadhānadāpanārūpeṇa tulyam । —
ĪPVV I: 87

79 niviḍanijamohasaṁkaṭakāriṇā [. . .]
sattvodreka-prakāśānandamaya-nijasaṁvidviśrāntilakṣaṇena [. . .] bhogena
। — ABh I: 277

80 (ahr̥dayaṅgamatvād) asādhāraṇaprabhāvābhijñānakhyāpanena
(dr̥ḍhaniścayarūpapratyabhijñānamātraṁ) upadarśyate । — ĪPVr̥ on 1.1.3.
The word prabhāva is somewhat peculiar. Ordinarily it indicates impact,
influence. However, according to Abhinavagupta, it stands for
distinctive trait solely responsible for precise identification in the
first place and also for the exclusive function to be discharged by that
entity: prabhāvaḥ — prakarṣeṇa yadvaśāt bhāvyate, anyavilakṣaṇatayā ca
kartavyaṁ bhāvayati iti । — ĪPVV I: 86. Literally the word should denote
prabhutā (lordliness) or the highly abstracted, that is the essential,
state of being — prakr̥ṣṭa bhāva, i.e. svabhāva. In this case, powers of
the self or Lord — knowledge and action, jñāna and kriyā — transpire to
be his/His abstracted essence. The word asādhāraṇa provides exclusivity.
It appears that Utpala inherited this word (i.e. prabhāva) from his
teacher Somānanda: yathā nr̥paḥ sārvabhaumaḥ prabhāvāmodabhāvitaḥ । — ŚD
1.37cd. Utpala glosses prabhāva as aiśvarya in his Padasaṁgati:
aiśvaryacamatkāravāsitaḥ । — p. 29

81 My deduction is based on Abhinavagupta’s reformulation of “noticing”
(upalakṣaṇa) in terms of “bringing about camatkāra” (camatkārāpatti)
while explaining the word pūrṇa in the Vivrt̥i: (“pūrṇa” iti [. . .]
vimarśas tatsvabhāve yaś camatkāraḥ [. . .] tasya yā āpattiḥ [. . .] vā
yā camatkārāpattiḥ [. . .] tayā upalakṣitaḥ । — ĪPVV I: 85) and Utpala’s
other presentations. See p. 150 and n 142 also.

82 sā cāvighnā saṁvit camatkāraḥ । [. . .] — ABh I: 278.

83 bhuñjānasya adbhutabhogaspandāviṣṭasya ca manaḥkaraṇaṁ camatkāra iti
। — ibid.

84 camatkāras tajjo ’pi kampapulakollukasanādir vikāraḥ । — ibid.

85 Direct: (a) Vr̥tti on ŚD 1.7cd, 1.37cd; (b) ĪPVr̥ 1.5.11; 4.1.1, 6; (c)
ĪPViv 1.5.11, 14; 2.4.20; (d) ŚSĀ 1.22; 13.14; 5.15.

Indirect: ĪPVV on ĪPK 1.1.3, 1.5.11, 13; 2.4.20; 2.3.7-8.

86 (a) yadā tu tasya ciddharmavibhavāmodajr̥mbhayā। — ŚD 1.7cd; ŚDVr̥ p.
10: āmodaś camatkāraḥ; (b) yadā nr̥paḥ sārvabhaumaḥ prabhāvāmodabhāvitaḥ
।। — ŚD 1.37cd; ŚDVr̥: 29: prabhāvāmodabhāvitaḥ [yathā]
aiśvarya-camatkāra-vāsitaḥ.

87 vibhavāmodabāhulyam asyāthavoktā nimittatā । — ŚDVr̥ on 3.95ab; ŚDVr̥:
139-40: [viśvātmatāprasaraṇarūpavibhavā]’’svādo [’parisamāpto . . .].

88 yāti vyāptiṁ tathābhūtāṁ śāmyad āmodasatkriyām । śāntānandavapuḥ
svacchaḥ urarīkr̥tadr̥kkriyaḥ ।। — ŚD 7.20. Utpala’s commentary on this
portion is lost, hence no view can be formed as to Utpala’s stand. As
regards Somānanda, it pertains to the stage following the state of
“lysis in the perfect consciousness” (cillaya) where the
blissful/refined activity in the form of āmoda gets somewhat subdued or
calms down.

89 Compare pratyavamarśaḥ svātmacamatkāralakṣaṇaḥ (ĪPV I: 250) which is
glossed by Bhāskara: svātmacamatkāralakṣaṇaḥ aham iti
svaviṣayāsvādarūpaḥ । — Bhās. I: 250. In Somānanda this state represents
the initial moment of will, i.e. consciousness (ŚD 1.8).

90 Soma’s bhāvitaḥ is glossed with vāsitaḥ (infused/informed with,
perfumed by, seasoned with, steeped in).

91 tathā prabhuḥ pramodātmā krīḍaty evaṁ tathā tathā ।। — ŚD 1.38 cd.

92 ŚD 1.12ab; also see above nn 86-88.

93 harṣānusārī spandaḥ krīḍā । — ŚDVr̥: 29

94 tasyāmodaś camatkāras tathāsvarūpaparāmarśarūpas tasya jr̥mbhā
viśvātmatayā vikasanam । yad uktaṁ mayā stotre “[. . .] viśvam āmr̥śasi
rūpamāmr̥śan । yatsvayaṁ nijarasena ghūrṇase [. . .]” (ŚSĀ 13.15) iti ।
ghūrṇanaṁ jr̥mbhoktā । — ŚDVr̥: 10. I confess my inability to
satisfactorily render ghūrṇana in English. There is a word in Hindi,
i.e. jhūmanā, which seems quite close to ghūrṇana. Jhūmanā represents a
rhythmic swinging movement of head and body indicating rapturous and
ecstatic state of mind. This particular formulation could have been
avoided but for the fact that Abhinavagupta makes a lot of this
formulation while discovering certain interconnectivities to which I
will have occasion to point out (p. 148), and also the reason that this
verse immediately follows the verse (i.e. ŚSĀ 13.14), where Utpala makes
a pointed reference to the notion of camatkāra. Moreover, Kṣemarāja in
his Vivr̥ti faithfully recaptures Utpala’s spirit and word in the ŚDVr̥
under reference: tathāsvarūpam āmr̥śan, nijaṁ svarūpaṁ camatkurvan
nikhilaṁ viśvam āmr̥śasi āsvādanena ānandaghanaṁ ghaṭayasi । yaś ca
svayaṁ nijena cidrasena ghūrṇase pūrṇatvāt samucchalattayā spandase । —
p. 206.

95 mahāmantramayaṁ naumi rūpaṁ te svacchaśītalam । apūrvāmodasubhagaṁ
parāmr̥tarasolvaṇam ।। — ŚSĀ 2.26. āmoda is glossed with parimala by
Kṣemarāja: apūrveṇa āmodena, alaukikena vyāpinā parimalena hlādinā
svarūpeṇa — ŚSĀ-Vivr̥tī, p. 34. Kṣemarāja’s immediate justification would
lie in complying with Utpala’s implied imagery of “clean, cool, fragrant
and pleasant” form of Śiva. However, camatkāra would be more natural
with mahāmantramaya and parāmr̥tarasolvaṇa rūpa of the Lord.

96 antarbhakticamatkāracarvaṇāmīlitekṣaṇaḥ । namo mahyaṁ śivāyeti
pūjayan syāṁ tr̥ṇāny api ।। — ŚSĀ 5.15 [“With my eyes closed / Repeatedly
savouring (lit. chewing) the relish of my inner devotion / May I worship
even the blades of grass thus: / Homage to Śiva, that is me.”] — tr.
Bailly with minor modifications.

97 yatsamastasubhagārthavastuṣu sparśamātravidhinā camatkr̥tim । tāṁ
samarpayati tena te vapuḥ pūjayanty acalabhaktiśālinaḥ ।। — ŚSĀ 13.14
[“That which bestows on all objects of beauty / The property of giving
marvellous taste at the mere touch — / By that very principle do those
endowed with / Unwavering devotion / Worship your form.” — tr. Bailly
with minor modifications].

As I have indicated earlier, I do not equate camatkr̥ti with wonder —
notwithstanding some amount of marvelling inherent in it — as regards
the Kashmir Śaivite scheme. Here, for the expression subhagārthavastuṣu,
Kotru’s translation “to all objects of fascinating significance” (p. 80)
is closer to Kṣemarāja and Rājānaka Lakṣmaṇa (pp. 204-05:
subhagaprayojanāny eva samastāni vastūni teṣu viṣayabhūteṣu — Kṣemarāja;
sundara prayojana vālī sabhī vastuoṅ ke viṣaya meṁ — Rājānaka Lakṣmaṇa),
but Bailly’s rendering “on all objects of beauty” seems to me nearer to
Utpala. In this case I will construe the text as subhageṣu arthavastuṣu
as compared to subhagārtheṣu vastuṣu, presumably adopted by Kṣemarāja
and Rājānaka Lakṣmaṇa.

98 prakāśasya mukhya ātmā pratyavamarśaḥ taṁ vinā artha-bheditākārasya
apy asya svacchatāmātraṁ na tv ajāḍyaṁ camatkr̥ter abhāvāt । [Reflective
awareness is the primary essence of light. In the absence of that,
though light might have form(s) differentiated by objects, it would have
mere lucidity but no sentience (lit. non-insentience), because of the
lack of savouring.]

99 (nanu vimarśābhāvāt jaḍatā syāt iti vaktavye) “camatkr̥ter abhāvāt”
iti (kathaṁ vr̥ttiḥ/camatkr̥tir hi bhuñjānasya yā kriyā bhogasamāpattimaya
ānandaḥ, sa ucyate ity āśaṅkyāha) “sa eva ca” iti (yaḥ prakāśasya
prāṇatvena uktaḥ) । [. . .] (tasmāt yuktam āha) “camatkr̥ter abhāvāt” ।
[. . .] “viśeṣaprītiḥ” (ity atra) “viśeṣapratītir” iti (apareṣāṁ pāṭhaḥ)
। “ata eva” iti (yato vimarśa eva camatkāraḥ, sa eva ca ajāḍyaṁ tato
hetoḥ) [. . .] pramātary eva viśrāmyati । — ĪPVV II: 177-79

100 Mark the discussion that begins with citation from the Vr̥tti:
(“camatkr̥ter abhāvāt” iti kathaṁ vr̥ttiḥ) ends in “tasmāt yuktam āha
camatkr̥ter abhāvāt.” Vide note above.

101 This formulation of camatkāra comes from Abhinvagupta, but I am
tempted to ascribe it to Utpala. The Vivr̥ti does not define camatkāra.
In fact, despite the frequent positing of the term camatkāra nowhere it
is defined directly by Utpala except once in the Vr̥tti (4.1.6) in terms
of activity replete with supreme light (of consciousness) and bliss or
the luminous blissful activity (paramaprakāśānandamayī kriyā) (see n 141
also). Abhinavagupta’s formulation comes as an intermediary remark
contextualizing the citations from the Vivr̥ti between camatkr̥ter abhāvāt
and sa eva ca. The force of sa eva ca (i.e. “and that very ānanda”, that
is the same as the activity of a savouring agent: bhuñjānasya kriyā),
whose instant referent is Abhinavagupta’s definitive explanation, lends
support to my conjecture, howsoever hypothetical it might appear to be.
Besides, Utpala’s single “once only” formulation alluded to above might
also be relied upon as lending direct support.

102 See n 99 above.

103 etad uktaṁ bhavati । — ĪPVV II: 177.

104 ananyāpekṣa(read °kṣi°)tā ca eṣaiva yat svātmīyavimarśe ’ham iti
bhoktr̥tāmaye avicchinne bhuñjānatātmani camatkāre rūḍhiḥ ।

— ĪPVV II: 175

105 pramātr̥bhāgam eva pradhānatayā vimr̥śan bhuñjāna iti ucyate । — ĪPVV
II: 178

106 tatra vītavighnatvād eva asau rasanā carvaṇā nirvr̥tiḥ pratītiḥ
pramātr̥tāviśrāntir eva tata eva hr̥dayena parāmarśalakṣaṇena prādhānyāt
vyapadeśyā vyavasthitasyāpi prakāśabhāgasya vedyaviśrāntasya anādaraṇāt
sahr̥dayatā ucyate । — ibid.

107 nirvighnāḥ svādarūpāś ca rasanātad(emend rasanāḥ tad°)gocarīkāryāś
cittavr̥ttayo rasā nava [. . .] । — ibid.: 179. This seems to be the
portion of the text which Abhinavagupta identifies by uktam anyatra in
his ĪPVV on 2.4.20 (III: 251): °vighnavirahita eva āsvādo rasanātmā
camatkāra iti uktam anyatra. See n 116 below.

108 Rastogi: “Quintessentiality of Camatkāra in Rasa-experience:
Revisiting Abhinavagupta”, in Rastogi (ed.), 2013b: 438.

109 saṁvedanarūpatānāntarīyakatvena avasthitasya svatantrasyaiva
rasanaikaghanatayā parāmarśaḥ paramānando nirvr̥tiś camatkāra ucyate । —
ĪPVV I: 179. I venture to make a conjecture here that by equating
camatkāra with nirvr̥ti, Abhinavagupta is trying to restore Utpala’s
connection with Somānanda. Similarly, equation with paramānanda connects
him with the VBh and Bhaṭṭa Nārāyaṇa’s SC. See in the sequel, specially
n 145 below.

110 Vide nn 99 and 100.

111 Ibid.

112 vāstave ’pi cidekatve na syād ābhāsabhinnayoḥ ।
cikīrṣālakṣaṇaika-tvaparāmarśaṁ vinā kriyā ।। [Even if the unity of
consciousness is maintained to be the only ultimate reality, there
cannot be action, for two entities divided as regards the nature of
their manifestation (ābhāsabhinnayoḥ), without a preliminary act of
thought which grasps and establishes the unity (ekatvaparāmarśaṁ)
characterized by the desire to act. — tr. Torella]

113 jaḍasyāpy asti bhavati ity asyām api sattākriyāyāṁ bubhūṣāyogena
svātantryābhāvāt akartr̥tvam । [An insentient reality cannot even be the
agent of the action of being — “(it) exists, is” — since it does not
possess the freedom that is manifested through “willing to be”
(bubhūṣāyogena). — tr. Torella, with modification]

114 (tat kathaṁ vr̥ttau uktaṁ) “svātantryābhāvāt” iti । (atra āha)
“svātantryam” ityādi [. . .] (tac ca jaḍānāṁ nāsti iti yuktaiva yuktiḥ)

“svātantryābhāvāt” iti । (prakāśasya ca paradaśāyāṁ camat-kāramātrātmā
yo vimarśas tad eva svātantryaṁ) [. . .]; parāparatve tu [. . .]
aparadaśāyāṁ tad eva [. . .] iti darśayati) “prakāśo’pi” (ityādinā)
“cikīrṣaiva” (ityantena) । “camatkāro hi” iti । [. . .] “camad”* iti [.
. .] [. . .] camatkāra iti uktam anyatra । — ĪPVV III: 251.

* The editors of the KSS edition do not print camad in bold and take it
as part of Abhinavagupta’s text. It could be so, but since camad is
immediately coming after camatkāro hi and is followed by iti, then
followed by Abhinavagupta’s extensive hermeneutics of the word, I
tentatively take it as a part of Utpala’s text with a question mark.

From here onwards the next leg of the Vivr̥ti begins. The relevant
portion is given below: “evam” iti [. . .] (paradaśāyāṁ nāsti
icchāvyavahāra iti [. . .] uktvā [. . .] śivadr̥ṣṭimatāvalambanena āha)
“athavā” iti । [. . .] “saiva hi iti ।” (camatkāritā hi [. . .] sarvatra
icchā । ) [. . .] “ādi”**grahaṇāt (abhilāṣamalaṁ) [. . .] (evam anyad
anusartavyam) “tadabhāvaś ca” iti (svātantryābhāvasya nimittam ukta
icchābhāva iti saṁgatiḥ ।) — ĪPVV III: 251-52.

** As per printed edition ādi is part of Abhinavagupta’s commentary. But
this has no meaning — it has to be a part either of the Vr̥tti or the
Vivr̥ti. Since it is not there in the Vr̥tti, its presence in the Vivr̥ti
should be presumed.

115 For detailed discussion on Abhinavagupta’s exegetical and semantic
analysis of the word camatkāra see Rastogi: “Quintessentiality of
Camatkāra in Rasa-experience: Revisiting Abhinavagupta”, in Rastogi
(ed.), 2013b: 436-37.

116 kāvyanāṭyarasādāv api [. . .] °vighnarahita eva āsvādo rasanātmā
camatkāra iti uktam anyatra । — ĪPVV III: 251. Uktam anyatra refers to
Abhinavagupta’s ĪPVV on 1.5.11. See n 107 above.

117 prakāśasya ca paradaśāyāṁ camatkāramātrātmā yo vimarśas tad eva
svātantryaṁ, na tu icchārūpaṁ; parāparatve tu tadicchārūpam
iṣyamāṇonmeṣāt, aparadaśāyāṁ tad eva apūrṇam iti darśayati “prakāśo ’pi”
ityādinā “cikīrṣaiva” ityantena । — ĪPVV III: 251

118 camatkāramātrātmā yo vimarśas tad eva svātantryam । — ibid.

119 rasyataikaprāṇo hy asau na prameyādisvabhāvaḥ । tarhi sūtre
niṣpattir iti katham? neyaṁ rasasya । api tu tadviṣayarasanāyāḥ ।
tanniṣpattyā tu yadi tadekāyattajīvitasya rasasya niṣpattir ucyate na
kaścid atra doṣaḥ । — ABh I: 285. For translation see Gnoli 1968: 85-86
(and also fn 1, 86).

120 “evam” iti parimāṇaśūnye paradaśāyāṁ nāsti icchāvyavahāra iti
śāntaśivādipravādābhiprāyeṇa uktvā sadā śaktirūpāviṣṭa eva śiva ity
evaṁbhūtadarśanāśrayaśivadr̥ṣṭimatāvalambanena āha “athavā” iti ।
sarvatra hi camatkāra eva icchā, sa ca parabhūmāv api asti । yad uktaṁ
’tade(read tadi)cchā tāvatī (ŚD 1.3) । — ĪPVV III: 251-52. Compare this
with Utpala’s ŚDVr̥: 7: parāvasthāyāṁ punaḥ pūrṇo ’ham ity eva
svasvabhāvaḥ prakāśate, tāvatprakāśatvāt tad eva jñānaṁ,
saṁrambharūpatvāt saiva kriyā, tatsvabhāvatvena tadabhyupagamād icchāpi
sthitaiva tad icchā tāvatīti.

121 Vide preceding note.

122 “saiva hi” iti । camatkāritā hi bhuñjānarūpatā svātmaviśrāntilakṣaṇā
sarvatra icchā । — ĪPVV III: 252

123 See ĪPVV III: 252. Gnoli 1968: 60-61, n 4 cites and translates this
portion in full. For our immediate purpose it is not necessary to go
over these details.

124 ādigrahaṇād abhilāṣamalo yatra bhāvāntaraṁ sāmānyākāram api
vāsanāvaśeṣamātreṇa āste, yathāha ’bhāvasthitāni jananān-tarasauhr̥dāni’
(Abhijñāna-Śākuntala 5.2) । autsukyaṁ ca [. . .] । evam anyad
anusartavyam । — ibid.

125 [. . .] sa eva sādhāraṇībhāvaḥ sutarāṁ puṣyati । ata eva
sarvasāmājikānām ekaghanatayā pratipattiḥ sutarāṁ rasaparipoṣāya । —
ABh, I: 279.

126 sarveṣāmanādivāsanācitrīkr̥tacetasāṁ vāsanāsaṁvādāt । — ibid.

It is to be noted that Abhinavagupta illustrates both these places (vide
nn 124 and 126) with the same verse (5.2) of Abhijñāna-Śākuntala
highlighting their interconnection.

127 sthāyitvaṁ caitāvatām eva । jāta eva jantur iyatībhiḥ saṁvidbhiḥ
parīto bhavati । — ABh I: 282

128 “tadabhāvaś ca” iti svātantryābhāvasya nimittam ukta icchābhāva iti
saṅgatiḥ । — ĪPVV III: 252

129 iyatā vr̥ttir ubhayathā gamitā — bubhūṣāyogena yat svātantryaṁ tasya
abhāvāt; ayogena ca yaḥ svātantryābhāvas tataḥ । — ibid.

130 camatkāro hi svātmani ananyāpekṣe viśramaṇam । evaṁ bhuñjānatārūpaṁ
camat-tvaṁ, tad eva karoti saṁrambhe, vimr̥śati na anyatra anudhāvati । —
ĪPVV III: 251

131 camatkāritā hi bhuñjānarūpatā svātmaviśrāntilakṣaṇā sarvatra icchā ।

— ibid.: 252

132 “ekā” iti । [. . .] tat sarvaṁ (i.e. grāhyagrāhakabhāvam) kroḍīkr̥tya
avatiṣṭhamānā, na tu śaktimadrūpaparamaśivadaśā iva
anunmiṣitagrāhyagrāhakādivaicitryā, ata eva bhagavataḥ svābhogaṁ prati
ya āsvādaś camatkāro nijābhogaparāmarśātmā, tanmayī ।

— ibid. II: 189-90

133 ā samantāt bhogaḥ saṁvedanānantarbruḍitānantabhāvasaṁskāra-
madhyanimagnasya cidbhāvasya unmeṣaṇātmakapālanacar-vaṇavyāpāro
’nveṣaṇātmā । — ibid.: 25

134 yad āha “viśvam āmr̥śasi rūpam āmr̥śan” । (ŚSĀ13.15) — ibid.: 190.

135 Vide n 94 above.

136 na ca kadācid api parameśvara evaṁ tadrūpaśūnyaḥ । yad āhuḥ
parameṣṭhipādāḥ — “śānte śivatvaṁ [. . .] °śaktitritayasaṁgamaḥ ।।” (ŚD
3.55cd-56) evaṁ “parā” iti vyākhyāya [. . .] । — ibid.: 190

137 See ibid.: 206.

138 [. . .] “pratiṣṭhārūpā” iti [. . .] pratiṣṭhārūpeti prathamayā
“sāratayā” iti śabdena vidhir api sūcita iti vyākhyātam । [. . .] pūrvam
ardham anūdyamānārthatayā “sāratayā” iti ca hetutayā vyācakṣate । —
ibid.

139 “parameṣṭhinaḥ” iti (vyākhyāya) “sāratayā” iti (sūtre yad anuvadanaṁ
hetutayā hr̥dayatve sādhye, tat vyācaṣṭe) “yathā” iti “cetanaṁ pratiṣṭhā”
iti (saṁbandhaḥ) “cetanāvatāmapi” iti “yathā” iti (saṁbandhaḥ) [. . .]
(prakr̥te yojayati) “tathaiva” iti । “viśvacetanasya” iti (bhagavataḥ
paramaśivasya ity arthaḥ । sā parā vimarśaśaktiḥ parameśvarasya)
“pratiṣṭhā” iti (anena śabdena parameśvarasya) “hr̥dayam” iti (anena ca
śabdena vācyā) । — ĪPVV II: 205.

It may be seen, Utpala is here revisiting his ĪPK 1.1.4 (tathāhi
jaḍabhūtānāṁ pratiṣṭhā jīvadāśrayā । jñānaṁ kriyā ca bhūtānāṁ jīvatāṁ
jīvanaṁ matam ।।). The reader will do well to remember that, according
to Abhinavagupta, 1.1.4 marks the technical starting point of the ĪPK
text (vide ĪPV I: 61 thereon: “tathāhi” iti yuktyupakramaṁ dyotayati।).

140 “anyathā” iti । vimarśaśaktyā vinā mayūrāṇḍarasasya yā
nīlapītādinirbharatā sā yathā kāraṇatā, na tu kartr̥tā tathā bhagavato
’pi aśeṣaviśvanirbharatā syāt, na ca kāraṇatāmātraṁ yuktam iti bhāvaḥ ।
— ĪPVV II: 205.

141 As I pointed out in the n 101 above, Utpala’s treatment is quite in
line with his singular speaking definition of agency in terms of action
whose essence is “savouring” (camatkāra) characterized by supreme
luminosity and joy: īśvarasya anantakartr̥tā camatkārarūpā kriyoktā
paramaprakāśānandamayī । (Vr̥tti on 4.1.6). I am grateful to Torella for
bringing this portion of the Vr̥tti to light. I however take
camatkārarūpā as qualifying paramaprakāśānandamayī kriyā. Even
otherwise, when camatkārarūpā is taken as an adjective of anantakartr̥tā,
it has to be predicated by kriyā. It may be remembered that the Vivr̥ti
does not take cognizance of this formulation in the Vr̥tti and also that
the context here lacks any aesthetic reference. It is however immaterial
since the primary conceptual focus of Utpala remains consistently the
same.

142 “pūrṇa” iti [. . .] yaś camatkāra ānandātmā paramo bhogaḥ । — ĪPVV
I: 85-86; see n 81 above.

143 “camatkr̥tirūpatvāt” iti ānandātmakaparamabhogaparyantā viśrāntir eva
hi viśuddhaṁ svātantryaṁ yatra pratighātaleśakr̥tam asvātantryaṁ manāg
api na śakyaṁ yena ’ātmānam ata eva’ iti (1.5.15), “svātantryāmuktam”
(1.5.16) ityādi vicitraṁ nirmāṇaṁ vakṣyamāṇam abhivyanakti । tataḥ [. .
.] hr̥dayaṁ sā bhagavataḥ । [. . .] “hr̥dayam eva” iti na atra upacaritaṁ
hr̥dayatvam, api tu mukhyam eveti bhāvaḥ । — ĪPVV II: 205-06

144 The Vr̥tti is glossing aham idam ity akhaṇḍāmarśabr̥ṁhitaḥ from the
Kārikā with akhaṇḍitagrāhakākhaṇḍitagrāhyamelanāca-matkāropabr̥ṁhitaḥ. I
will refer the reader for text and translation to Torella (1994: 73,
210) and also to the copious citations from the Vivr̥ti glossing the
Vr̥tti text. In his excellent translation Torella connects camatkāra with
each of the three components of the lengthy phrase (mahāpadaṁ as
Abhinavagupta calls it) namely akaṇḍitagrāhaka, akhaṇḍitagrāhya and
tanmelanā (“savouring” of the undivided perceiving subject, of the
undivided perceptible object and of the fusion of the two). I am however
inclined to think slightly differently. I take akaṇḍitagrāhaka as the
Vr̥tti’s explanation of ahaṁ, akhaṇḍitagrāhya as that of idam and
tanmelanācamatkāraḥ as that of akhaṇḍāmarśa. Unfortunately there is no
citation from the Vivr̥ti in ĪPVV on this kārikā on camatkāra, nor does
Abhinavagupta offer any comment, hence this interpretation may be of
only tentative value.

145 Initially I had my reservations going over and over again over
Abhinavagupta’s thorough insights, I am now convinced that he sees
Somānanda as Utpala’s inspiration behind initiating the latter’s notion
of camatkāra and also that Abhinavagupta’s comprehensive build up of
camatkāra as quintessence of his own aesthetic theory is fully
sanctioned and endorsed by his core scholastic tradition. See also n
109.

146 Torella translates it as “conscious beautitude”.

147 (tat yuktam uktaṁ) “tathā svayaṁ prakāśate” iti । — ĪPVV II: 181

148 evaṁ pāramārthikam aham iti prakāśasya nirvr̥tirūpaṁ vapuḥ । — ĪPVV
II: 181. In my rendering pāramārthikaṁ qualifies vapuḥ. Alternatively it
could also qualify ahaṁ.

149 Vide ibid.: 180-81.

150 Vide “camatkr̥ter abhāvāt” [. . .] “viśeṣaprītiḥ” [. . .] “anyathā”:
extracts from Vivr̥ti. — ĪPVV II: 179.

151 “anyathā” iti (yadi pramātari viśrāmyed ity arthaḥ । etac ca ‘kintu
mohavaśāt’ — 1.1.3 iti sūtre prakāśavimarśavailakṣaṇyaṁ nirūpitam eva)
“vimarśaḥ punar na kadācid idantābhūmim āskandati” (ity atra avasare) ।
“tathā ca” iti (yataḥ sarvo vimarśaḥ pramātary eva viśrāntim āśrayate
tena prakāreṇa ।) — ĪPVV II: 179-80. It should be noted that (i)
Abhinavagupta is demonstrating Utpala’s deliberate attempt to revisit
the contents of 1.1.3 and see 1.5.11 as continuation thereof; (ii) the
text, e.g. vimarśaḥ punar na kadācid idantābhūmim āskandati, appearing
as part of the ĪPVV, is actually from the Vivr̥ti and appears on p. 83,
vol. I of the ĪPVV; (iii) tathā ca from the Vivr̥ti recapitulates what
has been said in the Vivr̥ti on 1.1.3; and (iv) this tathā ca is
recaptured and re-endorsed by tathā in “tathā svayaṁ prakāśate” (II:
181) which is the starting point of the present discussion.

152 (tat katham uktaṁ) “vimarśo na kadācid idantābhūmim āskandati” (ity
āśaṅkyāha) “svato ’pi viśuddhasya” iti । [. . .] “śuddhasya” iti
(kartari ṣaṣṭhī) । śuddhatvena [. . .] (pramātur viśeṣa ukto ’ham ity
avicchedaprakāśaviśrāntilakṣaṇaḥ । ata eva camato bhuñjānasya karaṇaṁ
saṁrambho ’ham asau nīlāder bhokteti ।) [. . .] (atra hetuḥ) “jaḍa” iti
। (jaḍāt hi cetanasya vimarśakr̥ta eva viśeṣaḥ । — ĪPVV I: 83. Here, as
pointed out in the preceding note, the sentence vimarśaḥ [. . .]
āskandati is from the Vivr̥ti as is made clear by Abhinavagupta’s
cross-reference, though at both the places the editors of the KSS
edition print it as forming part of Abhinavagupta’s ĪPVV.

153 Vide n 147 above.

154 tac ca yatra āropyate, tad api nirvr̥timayam eva bhāti śarīraprāṇādi
। tad āha “aham ity api” iti । — ĪPVV II: 181

155 sā cāvighnā saṁvit camatkāras tajjo ’pi
kampapulakollaka-sanādirvikāraḥ camatkāraḥ । — ABh I: 279; also see n 84
above.

156 tathāhi duḥkham api ayam āsvādayamāno ’ntar eva viśrāmyati । tāṁ tu
antarviśrāntiṁ bāhyena arthī taṁ ca vinaṣṭam abhisamīkṣamāṇo
’nādaratiraskr̥tatvāt satīm api na abhimanute । upadeśaviśeṣadiśā tu
māyāvigalane tadbāhyarūpānādaraṇe saiva viśrāntir unmiṣati । tathā hi
śivadr̥ṣṭiḥ “duḥkhe’pi pravikāsena” ityādi । — ŚD 5.9c. The citation by
Abhinavagupta calls for a few comments. By suffixing ityādi (instead of
usual iti he implies inclusion of the immediately following related
discussion in the ŚD. The relative two verses run like this: duḥkhādinā
viśeṣaś cet tatrāpy aśivatā na ca । duḥkhe ’pi pravikāsena duḥkhārthe
dhr̥tisaṁgamāt ।। dr̥śyate bandhanaṁ teṣu dhr̥tiḥ kīṭādike tathā । nirvr̥tyā
yatra yogo ’sti tatraiva śivatā sphuṭam ।। — ŚD 5.9-10. [(Should someone
doubt that) pain will entail difference/change in the blissful nature of
Śiva. (The answer is) No, it will not lead to loss of śivatā (i.e.
essential nature of Śiva). Since in pain also endurance (dhr̥ti)
constantly marks the object/source of pain through the blossoming (of
the essential nature of Śiva). (I do not translate the third line).
Wherever there is contact with sublime blissfulness (nirvr̥ti) śivatā is
indeed visible right there.] The sole purpose behind this long quotation
is to underline the essential connection between nirvr̥ti and pravikāsa
and the rationale behind Abhinavagupta’s deliberate choice of this
passage from the ŚD while alluding to nirvr̥ti as a precursor idea of
Utpala’s camatkāra.

In fact, Somānanda in the current context is laying down the doctrine of
consciousness-expansion or, in other words, that of the expanded
consciousness which is going to prove central to Utpala’s and
Abhinavagupta’s aesthetic insights. Just a few, precisely two, verses
prior in the ŚD he delineates that all the instances and categories of
phenomenal existence, which even when constrained by contraction in
themselves, remain always endowed with expansiveness, joyfulness and
blissfulness (sarve svātmaparicchedavanto nityam avasthitāḥ ।
vikāsāhlādavantaś ca sarve nirvr̥tiyoginaḥ) ।। — ŚD 5.6 (See Torella
1994: 90, n 3, for alluding to this kārikā in a different context.) This
hemistich (duḥkhe ’pi pravikāsena) actually proved to be a catalyst of
whole chain of thought from Somānanda to Abhinavagupta in viewing
categories of all descriptions not only in the objective world but also
in the subjective realm as modes of expanded consciousness flooded with
joy. In the Parātriṁśikā-Vivaraṇa Abhinavagupta holds in unequivocal
terms that the states of anger, delusion, etc. happen to be an
expression of the absolutic consciousness and leans back on Somānanda
for support citing him thrice, the final quotation being: duḥkhe ’pi
pravikāsena sthairyārthe dhr̥tisaṁgamāt । — (ŚD 5.9cd) [In pain also the
purpose is steadiness through the efflorescence of the essential nature
by means of endurance” — tr. Jaideva Singh.] Abhinavagupta concludes
that the states of anger, etc. exist because of their being one with
savouring of/by consciousness (ciccamatkāra), otherwise they would not
be able even to attain their nature: [. . .] krodhamohādivr̥ttayo hi
paripūrṇabhagavadbhairavabhaṭṭārakasaṁvidātmikā eva । yad uktaṁ
śrīsomānandapādaiḥ [. . .] ’duḥkhe ’pi pravikāsena sthairyārthe
(duḥkhārthe KSS) dhr̥tisaṁgamāt ।’ ityādi । — PTV: 41-42. Moving forward,
Abhinavagupta continues to enlarge upon the concept lending to it more
depth on the aesthetic side. According to him, complete lack of
savouring, i.e. delight, means insentiency. Absorption in the profuse
delightful savouring alone marks the aesthetic susceptibility
(sahr̥dayatā). In grief also, there is the same savouring experience.
Grief, having fully thickened (vikāsam āpannaṁ: matured, expanded) due
to utter despair, turns into delightful experience (because of the
expansion of its essential nature as consciousness). At this point,
Abhinavagupta looks up to the same statement of Somānanda: duḥkhe’pi
pravikāsena (ŚD 5.9c): sarvato hi acamatkāre jaḍataiva
adhikacamatkārāveśa eva [. . .] sahr̥dayatā ucyate [. . .] duḥkhe ’pi eṣa
eva camatkāraḥ, [. . .] tad eva [. . .] vikāsam āpannaṁ iti
nairapekṣyavaśasaviśeṣacamatkriyātmaduḥkhasatattvam । taduktam ’duḥkhe
’pi pravikāsena’ iti । — PTV: 49.

Abhinavagupta’s obsession with this formulaton of Somānanda is so
deep-rooted that he leaves no opportunity towards dwelling on this idea
sourcing the same to precisely this kārikā. What makes it all the more
interesting is that he does so in the contexts provided by Utpala. Under
ĪPK 1.4.5 Abhinavagupta is discussing the Vivr̥ti’s relegation of the
notion of pleasure, propounded by the Pramāṇa-Viniścaya, as belonging to
the subject identified with intellect (buddhipramātā) who is not a real
subject (vāstavapramātā): (yad āha) “idam eva hi naḥ sukhaṁ yat sātaṁ
saṁvedanam” iti । (etat pratikṣipati) “na ca” iti । [. . .] “vāstava”
iti [. . .] (tata uktaṁ) “na sukhitvādi” iti । — ĪPVV II: 47-49. On the
contrary the real subject even during the worldly existence (where the
empirical subject gets occasional entrenchment in his intrinsic
spiritual identity) has a feel of inner joy even when he undergoes
painful experience. In fact, pain and pleasure become synonymous in such
a situation. Explaining the word tadā (then) Abhinavagupta quotes ŚD 5.9
and also highlights that this happens because of the specialized
training or teaching (upadeśabalena). In so doing he brings the insights
of the VBh and ŚD on the same axis: “tadā” iti
(vāstavapramātrāveśadaśāyāṁ, yadi vā) “tadā” iti (sukhaduḥkhotpādāvasare
yo lokasya tatra tatra । te hi “saṁbandhe sāvadhānatā ।’ [VBh 106] ity
upadeśabalena svarūpavimarśadraḍhimani viśrāmyantaḥ parānandena yujyante
। yathoktam ‘ānande mahati prāpte dr̥ṣṭe vā bāndhave cirāt ।’ [VBh 71]
ityādi ‘duḥkhe ’pi ca vikāse ’pi sthairyārthaṁ dhr̥tisaṁgamāt ।’ [ŚD 5.9]
ityādi ca) । — ĪPVV II: 50

157 tata eva hr̥dayena parāmarśalakṣaṇena prādhānyāt vyapadeśyā
vyavasthitasya api prakāśabhāgasya vedyaviśrāntasya anādaraṇāt
sahr̥dayatā ucyate । — ibid.: 178-79

158 pramātr̥bhāgam eva pradhānatayā vimr̥śan bhuñjāna iti ucyate । —
ibid.: 178.

159 From now on Abhinavagupta does not name Somānanda. My only reason in
believing that he is presenting his great grand-teacher’s view is
because of its contextual placement. It begins just after citation from
Somānanda as a part of the continuing narrative of Utpala that begins
with “tathā svayaṁ prakāśate” iti । [. . .] (tad āha) “aham ity api” iti
। and closes just after presentation of these views: (etad upasaṁharati)
“tadevam” iti । This is followed by (etat saṁvādayati) “tathā ca” iti
“bhartr̥harir ity avocat” iti (saṁbandhaḥ). Abhinavagupta wants us to
appreciate that Utpala is demonstrating full backing of the tradition
that he enjoys. The ideas of Somānanda figure as endorsement from his
own tradition and those of Bhartr̥hari as that from a different but
complementing ally.

160 ye tu śarīrādititīkṣavas te taditarasvargādigataśarīravāñchayā vā
taccharīrāvinābhāviniṣpratīkāraduḥkhajihāsayā aham iti camatkārādhyāsaṁ
tatra śarīre śithilayanti, śarīrāntare ca taṁ camatkārāgraham
abhisaṁcārayanti, pāramārthikīm eva tu camatkārānandadaśāṁ vītavighnam
eva avalilambiṣante mumūrṣudaśāpannāḥ । — ĪPVV II: 181-82.

161 ity ayam artho ’bhinavabhāratyāṁ nāṭyavedavivr̥tau vitatya vyutpādito
’smābhir iti । tatkutūhalī tām eva avalokayeta । iha tu
prakr̥tavighnakāritvāt na vitataḥ । — ĪPVV II: 179

162 [. . .] nirvighnāḥ svādarūpāś ca rasanāḥ tadgocarīkāryāś
cittavr̥ttayo rasā nava ity ayam artho ’bhinavabhāratyāṁ [. . .] vitatya
vyutpāditaḥ [. . .] । — ibid. The printed text is rasanātad° which I
separate as above. I am guided by Pandey’s MS reading cited in Pandey
1950: 94(n1), 422: [. . .] nirvighnāsvādarūpā ca rasanā ।
tadgocarīkāryāḥ [. . .]. । In the second edition he retains this reading
though he refers to the KSTS edition of ĪPVV [Pandey 1959: 141, 639]
without highlighting this deviation. Left to me, I prefer Pandey’s
reading which has rasanā as a generic term. Here rasanāḥ in plural takes
an analytic view of the same with reference to their respective content.
The plural in rasanāḥ is necessitated by plural in nirvighnāḥ and
svādarūpāśca which qualify and describe it.

163 ullekhasya sukhādeś ca prakāśo bahirātmanā । icchāto bhartur
adhyakṣarūpo ’kṣyādibhuvāṁ yathā ।। [It is by the will of the Lord that
what is pictured up in imagination and pleasure etc., shine externally,
exactly as do the (external) objects of sense-perception etc., which are
directly perceptible. tr. Pandey.]

164 [. . .] “sukhādeś ca” samastasya bharatādyuktasya
sthāyivyabhicāricittagaṇasya [. . .] yat prakāśanam । — ĪPVV II: 429

165 sukhaduḥkhaprāyās tu bharatādyuktarūpāḥ sthāyivyabhicārirūpā
ratinirvedādayo ’ntaḥkaraṇaikagocarībhūtā bahirātmanā bhānti ।

— ĪPV I: 419-20

166 tasmāt sūtrārthaṁ [. . .] samyag vyākhyāsye । — ĪPV, benedictory
verse 5

167 ullekhasukhaduḥkhalajjādīnāṁ [. . .] sākṣātkaraṇarūpo [. . .] । —
ĪPVr̥ on 1.8.9. It may be noted that though Abhinavagupta does not
specifically mention duḥkha in the ĪPVV while glossing sukhādeḥ,
Utpala’s intention becomes transparent in the Vr̥tti as above, which
takes duḥkha and lajjā both and even others, implied by ādi (sukhādeḥ).
Abhinavagupta’s remark (vide nn 164-65 above) is a kind of reproduction
of the Vr̥tti.

168 “atadrūpāc ca” iti lajjā hi na sukhaṁ, na duḥkhaṁ, cittavr̥ttiviśeṣaś
ca । evam utkaṇṭhādau vācyam । — ĪPVV II: 430

169 ullekhaḥ utprekṣayā likhyamāna ākāraḥ । — ibid.: 425

170 Vide ĪPVr̥ on 1.8.8. For text see n. 171 below.

171 “antaḥ” iti agalitasvabhāva eva ahantāyāṁ saṁskārarūpatayā sthita
ityarthaḥ । — ĪPVV II: 430

172 ullekhaś ca utprekṣaṇena svavyāpāreṇa utkīryeva arthād utkr̥ṣyeva
likhyamānaś citrakalpaś chāyāmātrarūpo vā । — ĪPVV I: 252

173 vikalpe yo ’yam ullekhaḥ so ’pi bāhyaḥ pr̥thakprathaḥ ।
pra-mātraikātmyamāntaryaṁ tato bhedo hi bāhyatā ।। — ĪPK 1.8.8; vikalpe
ghaṭādyullekhaś cakṣurādyagocaro ’pi pr̥thagābhāsād bāhya eva ।
ahaṁvimarśo hy āntaratvam, idam iti tu bāhyatā । evaṁ ca ghaṭānām ubhayī
bāhyatā bāhyāntaḥkaraṇadvayīvedyatā, sukhādes tv ekāntaḥkaraṇavedyataiva
। — ĪPVr̥ thereon. [Even the mental representation (ullekha) which occurs
in the discursive thought (vikalpe) is external, because it appears in
terms of separation (pr̥thakprathaḥ). Indeed, internality is unity with
the knowing subject (pramātraikyam), externality is separation.

The mental representation of the jar, etc. in the sphere of discursive
thought, though not the object of the senses such as light, is none the
less external so far as it is manifested as separate (from the subject).
Indeed, internality is the reflective awareness “I” (ahaṁvimarśaḥ),
externality is the reflective awareness “this”. Thus for things — such
as the jar and so on — there are two kinds of externality, i.e. they are
the objects of cognition through both the external and internal senses;
for pleasure and so on there is one, in that they are cognized only by
the internal sense. — tr. Torella.]

174 “iti” iti yat pūrvam uktaṁ tato hetor idam avasthitaṁ yad
anubhūyamānasya smaryamāṇasya samullikhyamānasya ca ghaṭābhāsasya
vāstavam ekatvaṁ yogyatayā ca dvitayī bāhyatā asty eva bāhyatayā
bāhyendriyavedyatayā ceti । — ĪPVV II: 429. Mark the parity between
anubhūyamāna and samullikhyamāna.

175 nanu bāhyatādvitvanivedane sūtroktabāhyatāvibhāgaprakhyāpanayā
avaśyavaktavye “ghaṭādīnām” iti viśeṣaṇasya kiṁ vyāvartyam ity āśaṅkya
yā vr̥ttiḥ “sukhādes tu” ityādikā, tāṁ vivr̥ṇoti “sukhādeḥ punaḥ” iti ।
“aviśeṣa”-padapr̥ṣṭhe “mātra”-grahaṇaṁ dhyānollikhitagaruḍādau
pramātrantarāsādhāraṇyāviśeṣe ’pi yad ullikhitam aparaṁ bāhyatvam asti,
tad api nāsti sukhādau iti prakaṭīkartum । — ĪPVV II: 429. [The editors
of the KSS edition do not print ghaṭādīnām, aviśeṣa and mātra in bold
and within inverted commas as is their wont in indicating the Vivr̥ti’s
or Vr̥tti’s text. It is difficult to figure out the exact phrase in the
Vivr̥ti as regards aviśeṣa and mātra, but there is no doubt that they are
from the Vivr̥ti.] The long quotation makes it very clear that
Abhinavagupta is very emphatic in pointing out to this subtle
distinction within the two orders of mental entities and that this
distinction was made by Utpala himself. Despite the fact that the image
that appears in meditation is not open to other percipients like other
mental episodes, it is qualitatively different from pleasure, etc. as
the latter lacks the characterstic of (even potential)
sense-perceptibility which the former is endowed with.

176 ullekhasukhaduḥkhalajjādīnāṁ cākṣuṣān(emend ṇ)āṁ rūpādīnām iva
īśvarasya śaktyā sākṣātkaraṇarūpo bauddhaḥ prakāśaḥ । — ĪPVr̥ on 1.8.9
[The manifestation (prakāśaḥ) of mental representations and pleasure,
pain, shame, etc. that takes place through the mind (bauddaḥ) is no
different from that which, having the form of direct perception due to
the power of the Lord concerns those realities that can be perceived by
the eye, such as forms/colours, etc. — tr. Torella with modification.]

177 Vide, nn 163 and 176 above.

178 dr̥ṣṭāntaṁ vyācaṣṭe “cakṣurādi” iti । — ĪPVV II: 430

179 gāḍham ullikhyamāne tu vikalpena sukhādike । tathāsthitis tathaiva
syāt sphuṭam asyopalakṣaṇāt ।। — ĪPK1.8.4 [However, when the
(manifestation) pleasure, etc. is reproduced owing to intensive
repetition through mental discursion (vikalpena) then that state (of the
subject) comes about (in the subject) because of the distinctively vivid
experience of that (asya, i.e. pleasure manifestation: sukhābhāsa) — tr.
Torella, with modifications. (I take the genitive asya as karma, not
kartā, of upalakṣaṇa).] Vr̥tti on the above: kutaścit prayatnaviśeṣāt
svatantravikalpollikhitaṁ sphuṭam eva sukhādijātaṁ vikāsādihetuḥ । —
[Reproduced through an autonomous mental discursion with certain
(kutaścid) particular (type of) effort (prayatnaviśeṣād) pleasure etc.
becomes completely vivid and causes joy (lit. expansion), etc. — tr.
Torella, with modifications.]

180 According to the Vivr̥ti, ullekhana is re-vivification, i.e.
re-living in the present: “pratyupasthāpyate” iti vartamānābhāsīkriyate
। — ĪPVV, II: 410

181 na hi tadā asau smaryamāṇaḥ, api tu vartamāna eva sukhādyābhāsaḥ । —
ibid.

182 sukhābhāsalakṣaṇaṁ yat sāmānyasmaraṇena upasthāpitaṁ, tad eva yataḥ
sphuṭīkaroti nirantaro vikalpaḥ । — ĪPVV, II: 411. Without going into
detailed discussion on the perception-like characteristics of memory due
to repeated attention and its identification with meditation
(dhyānādibhāvaṁ smr̥tir eva labdhvā cintāmaṇis tadvibhavaṁ vyanakti —
cited in ĪPV I: 154 on ĪPK 1.4.1) and the capacity of autonomous mental
construct to evoke a fresh new perceptual experience of its object again
owing to pointed unbroken concentration, it seems to me that the fence
between the two modes of cognition and their respective objects is very
hazy. Utpala revisits the problem in his Vr̥tti and Vivr̥ti both on 1.4.2
and Abhinavagupta in his ĪPVV thereon. Abhinavagupta addresses this
issue once again in his ĪPV where he refers to the element of “absence
of openness to other percipients” (anyasādhāraṇyānavabhāsāt — ĪPV I:
160) being the catalyst of distinction between extremely vivid memory
and autonomous mental construct in visualizing the deity. But as
Abhinavagupta himself would have it that “absence of openness to other
percipients” is equally common to the autonomous mental construct and
meditational activity (dhyānollikhitagaruḍādau
pramātrantarāsādhāraṇyāviśeṣe ’pi — ĪPVV II: 429) as well, this
criterion becomes suspect and calls for further scrutiny. What is
extremely intriguing is that Utpala remains non-committal about his
stand whether this perception-like modality he considers logically
determinate or indeterminate (tadā ca vikalpatā syāt nirvikalpatā veti
nāsmākaṁ grahaḥ — Vivr̥ti on 1.4.2, in Torella 2007b: 548). The reason
for my taking a special call in this context comes from Abhinavagupta
himself, when in the ABh on NŚ 6.31 during the course of mooting the
notion of camatkāra he notices some kind of homology between mental
ascertainment in the nature of perception, retrospecting (saṅkalpa) and
memory with a pointed reference to Kālidāsa’s usage of the word smarati
(“remembers”): sa ca sākṣātkārasvabhāvo mānaso ’dhyavasāyo vā saṅkalpo
vā smr̥tir vā tathātvena sphurann astu । yad āha “ramyāṇi vīkṣya” [. . .]
tac cetasā smarati [. . .] (Śākuntala 5.2) (see Gnoli 1968: 60-61, for
translation and explanatory notes). Also see Rastogi 2012: 400-01.

183 Utpala wants his reader to know that this vividness that depends
upon the sense-contact or sense-perception contemporaneous with the
object (tātkālikākṣasāmakṣyasāpekṣāḥ — ĪPK 1.8.1) can be brought about
by intensely continuous concentration or attention alone by taking
resort to certain particularly dedicated effort for this purpose.
Utpala’s deployment of the phrase kutaścid prayatnaviśeṣāt in the Vr̥tti
(perhaps explaining tathaiva in the Kārikā) and the way it is exegeted
by the Vivr̥ti leaves no doubt about his intention: “kutaścit” iti
(vyadhikaraṇatayā pañcamyarthaṁ vyācaṣṭe) “upadeśa” ityādinā “āhitam”
ityantena । (kandasauṣumṇapadādyanupraveśaḥ upadeśaviśeṣaḥ,
āsaṅgo’nurāgaḥ, anyo heturadr̥ṣṭādiḥ) — ĪPVV II: 410. Here the Vivr̥ti
refers to its happening due to definitive teachings of certain yogic
practices or due to deep attachment/love or due to some other factors
such as unseen destiny (adr̥ṣṭa). The word “etc.” (ādi) highlights the
open-endedness of the usage. There is a motive to such an approach. The
prayatnaviśeṣa, we will see, covers the pheomena of intense devotion,
meditation and visualization through art. What is necessary is that
whatever the effort, the projection must be vivid as if occurring in the
present before the eyes and that it must be noticed/grasped
distinctively. The word upalakṣaṇāt is a pointer to it. If we recall
upalakṣite in ĪPK 1.1.3, the heart-filling nature of this perceptual
experience will come to the fore.

184 I agree with Torella’s rendering of vikāsa as joy (in virtue of its
being the arthakriyā of sukha). Gnoli (1968: 46-47) translates it with
“expansion” while rendering Abhinavagupta’s portion of the ABh on Bhaṭṭa
Nāyaka. The three states of mind (citta), namely, fluidity, enlargement
and expansion (druti, vistāra and vikāsa respectively:
drūtivistāravikāsalakṣaṇena [. . .] bhogena । — ABh I: 177) form
important part of any literary theory on rasa-perception. What Utpala
wanted to imply by the word ādi (etc.) in vikāsādihetuḥ is anybody’s
guess today. Did he include druti and vistāra also? Nobody knows. The
ĪPVV does not offer any clue. However, two conclusions could be drawn
safely: (i) vikāsa here does pertain to joy or joyous state of mind
owing to the immediate centrality of sukha (pleasure, joy) in the
present discussion: sukhādes tu yāvatī arthakriyā vivakṣitā sā pūrṇaiva
। (ĪPVV II: 411); and (ii) Somānanda and Utpala are fully familiar with
this notion of vikāsa. Former’s preoccupation with this notion has been
discussed in connection with camatkāra with special reference to ŚD 5.9.
However, he directly relates vikāsa (or vikāsitā) with power of joy or
blissful sublimity. Utpala makes it abundantly clear that proclivity
towards unqualified joy is vikāsa or state of expansiveness:
tatkarmanirvr̥tiprāptir aunmukhyaṁ tadvikāsitā । — ŚD 1.20ab; Utpala
comments: karmāvacchinnā nirvr̥ttir aunmukhyam anavacchinnanirvr̥timātram
ānandaśaktir iti yāvat । tad aunmukhyaṁ vikāsitā cidāsthāpravikāsa ity
uktam — ŚDVr̥: 17. Utpala clearly has ŚD 1.15 in his mind: bodhasya
svātmaniṣṭhasya racanāṁ prati nirvr̥tiḥ । tadāsthāpravikāso yas tad
aunmukhyaṁ pracakṣate ।।

185 Vide p. 100 and n 3 above.

186 Kumari S.S. Janaki agrees with me. Janaki in fact clinches the
issue. She emphatically concludes that the only compelling reason behind
Ruyyaka’s recognition of ullekha as a distinct figure was Utpala’s
phenomenological thought as propounded in his ĪPK. For Ruyyaka actually
encountered “trouble to establish it as a separate figure distinct from
rūpaka, bhrāntimān, atiśayokti and śleṣa with all of which it is found
in combination. Ruyyaka’s difficulty in this aspect is quite evident
from his discussion of the figure of speech in the passage yas tapovanam
iti munibhiḥ etc. from Harṣacarita quoted by him in this context.
According to Ruyyaka, the peculiar feature of viewing the same object in
different ways is to be seen only in ullekha. Even if it is found in
combination with any other figure, there is only the possibility of a
saṁkara of different alaṁkāras. Even in that case the need to recognize
ullekha as a distinct figure is not obviated. [. . .] Taking this cue
from Ruyyaka, later writers like Vidyādhara (Ekāvalī, p. 227), Appayya
Dīkṣita (Citra-Mīmāṁsā, p. 67) and Jagannātha Paṇḍita (Rasa-Gaṅgādhara,
p. 358) accept two varieties of ullekha — śuddha and saṅkīr̥ṇa. The
question naturally arises as to how and why the same object could be or
is viewed in different ways. In this connection Ruyyaka quotes the
verse: “yathāruci [. . .] °sādhite” which is [. . .] a śloka from [. .
.] Utpaladeva.” — Janaki 1965: 97-98

187 ekasyāpi nimittavaśād anekadhā grahaṇam ullekhaḥ । —
Alaṁkāra-Sarvasva, sūtra 19, p. 58 (NŚ edition).

188 ĪPK 1.8.4 and 1.8.8-9

189 yatraikaṁ vastv anekadhā gr̥hyate sa rūpabāhulyollekhanād ullekhaḥ ।
— Alaṁkāra-Sarvasva, p. 59

190 na cekaṁ nirnimittam ullekhamātram api tu
nānāvidha-dharmayogitvākhyanimittavaśād etat kriyate । tatra
rucyarthitvavyutpattayo yathāyogaṁ prayojikāḥ । — ibid.

191 tad uktam yathāruci yathārthitvaṁ yathāvyutpatti bhidyate ।।
ābhāso’py artha ekasminn anusaṁdhānasādhite ।।

— Alaṁkāra-Sarvasva, p. 59

192 uktam iti śrīpratyabhijñāyām । — AS-Vimarśinī p. 59.

193 svātantryeṇa vikalpanaṁ ruciḥ । arthakriyābhilāṣaparatvam arthitvam
। vr̥ddhavyavahāraśaraṇatā vyutpattiḥ । — ibid. The language of Jayaratha
replicates Abhinavagupta’s ĪPV II: 94: ruci svātantryam, arthitvam
arthakriyābhilāṣaparavaśatāṁ, vyutpattiṁ vr̥ddhavyavahāraśaraṇatāṁ ca
(anatikramya bhidyate eva ābhāsaḥ).

194 rucyarthavyutpattayaś ca prāyaśaḥ samastavyastā yojayituṁ śakyante ।
— ibid.

195 ekasminn eva caikapratyavamarśasāmarthyopapādite vastuni
svecchāvaśād arthitvānurodhād vā naipuṇavaśād vā avabhāsabhedaḥ । —
Vr̥tti on 2.3.3

196 yathā ‘yas tapovanam iti munibhiḥ kāmāyatanam iti veśyābhiḥ
saṁgītaśāleti lāsakaiḥ’ ityādi harṣacarite śrīkaṇṭhākhyajanapadavarṇane
atra hy eka eva śrīkaṇṭhākhyo janapadas tadguṇayogāt
tapovanādyanekarūpatayā nirūpitaḥ । — AS p. 59. The conjecture that the
Kashmir Śaivists seem to be conversant with Ruyyaka’s illustration and
also his rhetorical innovation of ullekha might be right.
Bhāskarakaṇṭha’s following observation on ĪPK 2.3.3 implicitly appears
to suggest the same: [. . .] arthāt tasminn ekatra vastuni ābhāsā
bhidyante anyathā harṣacarite ekasya śrīkaṇṭhākhyajanapadasya
saṅgītaśālādibhāvena varṇanāyogāt ।

— Bhās. II: 94

197 Vide Kane 1951: 131-32 Notes.

198 anekadhā grahaṇam iti na punar anekadhā kalpanam । grahaṇaṁ hi
svārasikyām utpāditāyāṁ ca pratipattau saṁbhavati na tu svārasikyām eva
। yadāhuḥ ‘ataḥ śabdānusandhānavandhyaṁ tadanubandhi vā ।
jātyādiviṣayagrāhi sarvaṁ pratyakṣam iṣyate ।’ — AS-Vimarśinī: 58-59

199 anusaṁdhānaṁ nāma bahūnāṁ viśeṣāṇāṁ guṇapradhānatayā vyāmiśraṇena
vimarśanam । — cited from Samudrabandha in Kane 1951: 132, Notes.

200 ullekhanaṁ nirdhāraṇam । — AS-Sañjīvinī (p.70) on ullekhanād in AS

201 rucyarthitvavyutpattyanusāreṇa ekasminn apy anusandhānena sādhite
nirdhārite ’rthe ābhāsaḥ pratītir bhidyate, nānollekhātmikā jāyata ity
arthaḥ । — ibid., p. 71

202 Pandey 1950: 10, 22-24, 142-49.

203 atra āha — rasa iti kaḥ padārthaḥ । ucyate — āsvādyatvāt । — NŚ,
prose text post 6.31.

204 sā caikavr̥ttiḥ [. . .]
nirvighnasvasaṁvedanātmaka(harṣa)-viśrāntilakṣaṇena rasanāparaparyāyeṇa
gr̥hyamāṇatvād rasaśabdena abhidhīyate । — ABh I: 266-67 on NŚ 6.15;
sthāyiśabdavyapadeśye rase āsvādyatā [. . .] pratītiviśeṣo rasanākriyeti
। — ibid.: 289; sarvathā rasanātmakavītavighnapratītigrāhyo bhāva eva
rasaḥ । — ibid.: 281

205 (a) sa ca sākṣātkārasvabhāvo mānaso ’dhyavasāyo vā saṅkalpo vā [. .
.] । — ibid.: 278

(b) parimitavibhāvādyunmīlane ’pi parisphuṭa eva sākṣātkārakalpaḥ
kāvyārthaḥ sphurati । — ibid.: 287

(c) kāvyārthaviṣaye hi pratyakṣakalpasaṁvedanodaye rasodayaḥ — ibid.:
29. The reader may note that saṅkalpo vā in (a) reminds us of the
context of ĪPK 1.8.9 (icchāto bhartur adhyakṣarūpo) which relates to the
externality of even the creation of imagination: tasmāt sāṅkalpikānāmapi
bahirbhāve paramaśvarecchaiva hetuḥ — ĪPV I: 421. Likewise in (b) and
(c) the word kalpa mirrors yathā in the same kārikā. Also see Rastogi
2013a: section on mānasa pratyakṣa, 103-06.

206 Pandey 1950: 151, 154-62.

207 Cf. mano ’nuvyavasāyi sat । — ĪPK 2.2.3b; also see Rastogi 2012:
379.

208 tasya hr̥dayasaṁvādatāratamyāpekṣayā śrotr̥pratipattr̥sphuraṇaṁ
sphuṭāsphuṭatvenātivicitram । tatra ye svabhāvato nirmalamukurahr̥dayāḥ
[. . .] teṣāṁ [. . .] rasasañcayo nāṭyalakṣaṇaḥ sphuṭa eva । ye tv
atathābhūtās teṣāṁ pratyakṣ-ocitatathāvidhacarvaṇālābhāya naṭādiprakriyā
। — ABh I: 291

209 tatra ca naṭo dhyāyinām iva idaṁ dhyānapadam । na hi tatrāyam eva
sindūrādimayo vāsudevaḥ smaraṇīya iti pratipattiḥ । api tu
tadupāyadvāreṇa atisphuṭībhūtasaṅkalpagocaro devatā-viśeṣo dhyāyināṁ
phalakr̥t । tadvan naṭaprakriyādvāroditā-tisphuṭādhyavasāyaviṣayīkr̥to
niyatadeśakālādyaspr̥ṣṭo ‘ata idaṁ phalam’ iti vidhisthānīyo ’rtho
vyutpattiṁ vitarati । — ABh I: 286; also see Pandey 1935: 167-70.

210 Pandey 1935: 140-44.

211 vibhāvānubhāvavyabhicārisaṁyogād rasaniṣpattiḥ । — NŚ 6.31; also see
Pandey 1935: 10, 24, 31.

212 ko dr̥ṣṭāntaḥ । atrāha [. . .] yathā hi guḍādibhir dravyair
vyañjanair oṣadhibhiś ca ṣāḍavādayo rasā nirvartyante tathā
nānābhāvopagatā api sthāyino rasatvam āpnuvanti । — ABh I: 284-88;
ādayaḥ in ṣāḍavādayo implies reference to pānaka (a juice or drink
literally named “drink”), etc. as well. Cf. ABh. I: 285: pānakarasāsvādo
’pi kiṁ guḍamarīcādiṣu dr̥ṣṭa iti samānam etat.

213 pr̥thagdīpaprakāśānāṁ srotasāṁ sāgare yathā । avirud-dhāvabhāsānām
ekakāryā tathaikyadhīḥ ।। — ĪPK 2.3.7; — Vr̥tti: bhinnāḥ pradīpaprabhāḥ
avibhāgena bhāsante, nadīpravāhāś ca sindhubuddhau, pānake ca te te
rasāḥ, [. . .] parasparānupraveśakṣamāḥ [. . .]
tattadekakāryaikadravyābhāsena kalpante pratyakṣe eva । tad etat
sāmānādhikaraṇyam । [Just as the idea of unity of distinct rays of a
lamp and of currents in the sea is produced by their appearing as single
entity(ies), so does that of the manifestations which are not
incompatible with one another. — tr. Torella/Pandey with modification];
— [The individual rays of light in a torch appear as an undifferentiated
whole and the same hold for the currents of rivers in the notion of the
sea and for the various flavours in the pānaka [. . .], capable as they
are of interpenetrating, lend themselves to the manifestation, in the
direct experience itself, of the various unitary things having a single
unitary effect (tattadekakāryaikadravya°) — tr. Torella.]

214 sāmānādhikaraṇyābhāsavaśād vastu । anekasyaikatā hi
sāmānādhikaraṇyam । — Vr̥tti on 2.3.6

215 aikyabuddhis tadupalakṣitaś ca ekavimarśaḥ, ekā ca arthakriyā ।

— ĪPVV III: 117

216 Glossing ekakāryā aikyadhīḥ, Abhinavagupta says: ekena
svalakṣaṇātmanā melanena kāryā aikyadhīr vyākhyātarūpā iti sūtrārthaḥ ।
— ibid.: 117

217 yat tu uktaṁ niyamanidānam ityādi, tatra ucyate — yeṣām eva
avirodhaḥ teṣām eva miśratā । — ibid.: 116

218 nanu ekavicitracamatkārātmakārthakriyābh[read ā’bh]āve ’pi
pānakabuddhir dr̥ṣṭā । netyāha “avyutpanna” iti । — ĪPVV III: 117.
Perhaps this is the portion Pandey has in mind when he refers to
Abhinavagupta’s discussing camatkāra under this kārikā. Cf. Pandey 1935:
92. Pandey numbers this kārikā as 2.3.8, which seems to be a
typographical error.

219 See n 213 above.

220 Luckily this portion is available with excellent translation and
notes by Torella. I reproduce below the relevant extract from the
Vivr̥ti: sāmānyāny eva hi prabhūtāni saṁbhūya anyonyāvacchedena
vyavasthitāni sphuṭatābhāsatām āsādya deśādisāmānyābhāsāvacchedena
svalakṣaṇatāṁ bhajante । [. . .] svayam adeśakālabhedatve ’pi parasparaṁ
bhedaḥ parasparaṁ paryāyāvacchedaś ca sāmānyānām
anekasvalakṣaṇatāpattihetuḥ teṣāṁ cānuguṇyenaiva avacchedo bhavati [. .
.] । — cf. Torella 2007b: 547. The underlined words are those that are
cited and explained by the ĪPVV.

221 “saṁbhūya” iti parasparaṁ saṁmiśrībhūya । na ca dvandvapadār- thena
tulyakakṣyatā, api tu parasparaṁ viśeṣaṇaviśeṣyabhāvena paryāyato
guṇapradhānabhāveneti yāvat । — ĪPVV II: 26

222 tayor api ca deśākālābhāsayos tadavacchedāt (i.e. bhāvā- vacchedāt)
saṁkoca iti ṣaḍrasasaṁpādyamāne pānake yathā anyonyaśaktiniyantraṇayā
apūrvaṣāḍavādirasodayaḥ, tathā ihāpi svalakṣaṇābhāsodaya iti ca
yaugapadyena api anyonyāvacchedakārī upakārī rase ca yathā
kuśalasūdavyāpāraḥ pradhānatayā upayogī, tathā svalakṣaṇodaye
bhagavanniyatiśaktir yā sarvaṁ niyacchati । — ibid.: 27

223 “tathā śauklyena” dārṣṭāntikatā tathāśabdena sūcitā [. . .] “tataś
ca” iti arthakriyāviśeṣasaṁbhavāt । “anyadā” iti [. . .] । “tathāpi” iti
na samakakṣyatayā pratipattiḥ, api tu guṇapradhānabhāvena । [. . .] atra
dr̥ṣṭāntaḥ “yathā” iti । ananubhūyamāno ’neko rasaḥ [. . .] na tasya
pramātuḥ pānakarasaḥ pratipanno bhavati । nanu pratyakṣe ’pi yadi ekam
anekaṁ ca bhāti tarhi “taddvayālambanā etā mano ’nuvyavasāyi” (2.2.3)
iti katham uktam ityāśaṅkāṁ nikr̥ntati “kevalam” iti । yena pramātrā
maricaguḍādi na āsvāditaṁ kadācit, pānakam eva tu āsvādyate iti, tasya
sa bhinno raso vikalpena vyavahāryatāṁ na netuṁ śakyaḥ pratyakṣāvabhāto
’pi, aparasya śakyas tata ucyate [. . .] ekābhāsatā tu kutaḥ । āha
“ekābhāsaś ca” [. . .] na kevalam anubhavavimarśabalāt, kāryabalād api
ekābhāsa ity āha “arthakriyābhedaḥ” iti । “teṣām” iti vivekinām । [. .
.] nanu maricādīnāṁ guḍādidravyāntarasaṁparkāt rasāntaram eva udeṣyati
rūpāntaram iva tāmbūlīdale cūrṇakasitakhadirāṇām । naitad iha samam iti
darśayati “tadāvirbhāve vā” iti । [. . .] sāmānādhikaraṇye tu na ayaṁ
dr̥ṣṭāntaḥ । kva tarhi । āha “ekatāpatter upapattau” iti । nanu na
dr̥ṣṭāntamātrāt vastusiddhiḥ । [. . .] dr̥ṣṭāntena tarhi kim । āha
“maricādīnām” ityādi । [. . .] parasya asaṁbhāvanāṁ nirākartuṁ dr̥ṣṭānto
’yaṁ saty api hetau “nanu” iti । etadeva ghaṭayati “nahi” iti ।
maricaguḍadadhnāṁ na dharmadharmibhāvena guḍa eva dadhi maricam eva guḍa
iti vā na prakhyā, na upākhyā pānakabhūmau, gaṅgāyamunāvitastādīnāṁ
sāgare । — ĪPVV III: 118-20 containing excerpts from the Vivr̥ti.

224 pākarūpayā samyagyojanayā (tāvad alaukiko raso jāyate) । — ABh I:
288; pākakrameṇa samyagyojanārūpāt kuśalasaṁpādyāt saṁyogāt — ibid.;
also see Pandey 1935: 22

225 vibhāvādināmadheyavyapadeśyaiḥ [. . .] sāmājikadhiyi samyagyogaṁ
saṁbandham aikāgryaṁ vā āsāditavadbhir alau-
kikanirvighnasaṁvedanātmakacarvaṇāgocaratāṁ nīto ’rthaḥ [. . .]
sthāyivilakṣaṇa eva rasaḥ ABh I: 284. Abhinavagupta’s above-noted
explanation of saṁyoga is a bit intriguing. Gnoli takes all the three,
saṁyagyoga (perfect combination), saṁbandha (relation) and aikāgrya
(conspiration) together (Gnoli 1968: 78). I however beg to differ from
him, the reason being that with the use of vā, Abhinavagupta makes all
the senses optional or alternable. I have one more difference. I take
saṁyagyoga as a semantic analysis of saṁyoga — the adjective samyak
qualifying yoga, whereas saṁbandha (relation) and aikāgrya
(one-pointedness) as the alternative or optional meaning/explanation of
yoga.

226 kintv alaukikavibhāvādisaṁyogabalopanataiveyaṁ carvaṇā । — ABh I:
285; tena vibhāvādisaṁyogād rasanā yato niṣpadyate atas
tathāvidharasanāgocaro lokottaro ’rtho rasa iti — ibid.

227 alaukika evāyaṁ carvaṇopayogī vibhāvādivyavahāraḥ । kvānyatretthaṁ
dr̥ṣṭam iti ced bhūṣaṇam etad asmākam alaukikatvasiddhau ।
pānakarasāsvādo ’pi kiṁ guḍamarīcādiṣu iti samānam etat । — ABh I: 285;
upāyādīnāṁ vibhāvādīnāṁ laukikavailakṣaṇyāt । — ibid.

228 ABh I: 280-84. See Pandey 1950: 166-69; Gnoli 1968: 62-78 for
detailed treatment and translation.

229 vikasitasvabhāva eva bhāvo vikalpena vyavahriyate । — ĪPVV II:
26-27.

230 [. . .] sāmānyātmakam arthaṁ prakāśayaty eva smr̥tivyatiriktam
vikalpamātram । — ibid.: 19

231 tata eva na parimitam eva sādhāraṇyam, api tu vitatam । [. . .]
bhayakampayor eva vā tad atra sākṣātkārāyamāṇatve paripoṣikā
naṭādisāmagrī । yasyāṁ vastusatāṁ kāvyārpitānāṁ ca deśakālapramātrādīnāṁ
niyamehetūnām anyonyapratibandhabalād atyantam apasaraṇe sa eva
sādhāraṇībhāvaḥ sutarāṁ puṣyati । — ABh I: 279

232 Vide pp. 175-76 above.

233 Pandey 1935: 150-51.

234 I will refer the learned reader to the landmark article (pp. 1-2,
20-23) of Gopinath Kaviraj way back in 1923-24 titled “The Doctrine of
Pratibhā in Indian Philosophy” (ABORI, Poona) reprinted in the Aspects
of Indian Thought (pp. 1-43), 1966. Kaviraj specially notes the level of
profoundity shown by the Trika system.

235 “Thus in the Pratyabhijñāhr̥daya (p. 52) Kṣemarajā quotes a verse1
[1yā caiṣā pratibhā tattatpadārthakramarūṣitā । akramānantacidrūpaḥ
pramātā sa maheśvaraḥ ।।] in which pratibhā is identified with the
supreme subject, whose nature is infinite intelligence (anantacidrūpa),
indivisible and void of time-limitation (akrama). It is unalterable and
everywhere One, being the one Light whose reflection shines through
every state of modal consciousness.” — ibid.: 22-23. The kārikā cited by
Kaviraj is ĪPK 1.7.1

236 sarasvatī svādu tadarthavastu niḥṣyandamānā mahatāṁ kavīnām ।
alokasāmānyam abhivyanakti pratisphurantaṁ pratibhāviśeṣam ।। — DhĀ 1.6
[Sarasvatī, (working) within great poets, in pouring forth this sweet
matter (arthavastu) (viz. the emotions and flavors) reveals a special,
vibrant, genius (pratibhā), which is superhuman. — tr. Ingalls, etc.]

237 sarasvatīti vāgrūpā bhagavatītyarthaḥ । [. . .] abhivyanakti
pratisphurantam iti (parisphurantam variant), pratipattṝn prati sā
pratibhā nānumīyamānā, api tu tadāveśena bhāsamānā ity arthaḥ । yad
uktam asmadupādhyāyabhaṭṭatautena – ‘nāyakasya kaveḥ śrotuḥ samāno
’nubhavas tataḥ’ iti । pratibhā apūrvavastunirmāṇakṣamā prajñā । tasyā
viśeṣo rasāveśavaiśadyasaundaryakāvyanirmāṇakṣamatvam । [. . .] yeneti ।
abhivyaktena sphuratā pratibhāviśeṣeṇa nimittena mahākavitvagaṇaneti
yāvat । — DhĀL: 23-24

238 prajñā navanavonmeṣaśālinī pratibhā matā । tadanuprāṇanā
jīvadvarṇanānipuṇaḥ kaviḥ ।।

239 Abhinavagupta refers to Bharata’s NŚ 7.2: kaver antargataṁ bhāvaṁ
(bhāvayan bhāva ucyate) — bhāva is so called because it makes the inner
mental state of the poet known to the reader.

240 pratibhābhidhānaparavāgdevatā । — ABh I: 4.

241 (kaver yaḥ) pratibhātmā prathamaḥ parispandaḥ । — ibid. II: 296

242 [. . .] pratibhānāparaparyāyā sākṣātkārasvabhāvā । — ibid. I: 280

243 “niścalaiva” iti nirodhecchayā cālyamānā api avicalā । “prati-
bhāsaṁjñā” iti pratibhānalakṣaṇā iyaṁ śabdabhāvanākhya āgama eveti yāvat
। — ĪPVV III: 93. See for further discussion Rastogi, 2013a: sub-section
“śabdana-/Pratibhāna-Lakṣaṇa āgama” (pp. 174-80).

244 “sabījā api” iti bījam api vilīnaṁ pārameśvarasvātantryaśaktiśeṣatām
eti iti bījāvaśeṣā viśve bhāvā rudrabhūmau yogyatādiśabdābhidheyā iti
saṁbandhaḥ । [. . .] satyam, bhedarūpatve yā yogyatā sā vilīnā
bhedābhedarūpatvena parāparatayā, tayā tu yā īśvarasaṁvidi prathā
sphuṭā, tasyā avaśyaṁ sa eva bījabhāvo yat bhagavataḥ svātantryam iti
viśiṣṭaiva iyaṁ yogyatā । — ĪPVV III: 376

245 etadupasaṁhāreṇa spaṣṭayati “tad evam” iti । idantāvamarśa eva yadi
tatra sphuṭaḥ syāt, tadā viśvam eva tat bhavet na tu viśvabījam iti
ucitapadam । bīja-saṁskāra-yogyatā-śaktirūpaṁ ca asmadādīnāṁ
nityānumeyam api sarvajñapade ca sphuṭaprakāśanocitam eva iti ahantāyāṁ
viśrāmyati, na ca asau śuddhaiva ahantā viśvabījatāyāḥ parisphuraṇād
anabhivyaktatadrūpacakravarti-paṇḍita-kavi-śilpipra-bhr̥tigatasvasvakaraṇīyaviśeṣasphuraṇavat
। ata eva śaktivācoyuktyā atra vyavahāraḥ । — ĪPVV III: 377.

246 tatra ekena āśrayasya svarūpamātreṇa abhidhānam । — ĪPVV II: 338.

247 yad uktaṁ sarvasya jīvato jñānakriye siddhe iti tat katham [. . .]
svadarśanānusāreṇa tam ekam āśrayam upapādayiṣyan svarūpatas tāvad
upakṣipati । — ibid.: 339.

248 tata eva bhaṭṭacandrānandena “paśyato rūpam ālekhād bhāto
bhānānuṣaṅgi yat । pratīpabhānaṁ pratibhā bhāvānām” iti bhāvadharmatvena
abhidhāya api “ātmasaṁśrayā” iti saṁvidviśrāntataiva uktā । — ibid.

249 na kevalaṁ ca saṁbandhamayaikatāsparśiparimitamāyāpramā-
tr̥paryavasāyī vastuprakāśanavyāpāro yāvad
anantacinmaya-śivatābhāsaviśrāntaiva pratikṣaṇaṁ vastusaṁvitkriyā । na
ca saṁvidaḥ kramo ’sti ekaiva ekatraiva kṣaṇe arthaprakāśatā
saṁbandhaśivatāmayam eva svarūpam āviṣkaroti ity ucyate । tathā
cācāryadharmakīrtiḥ “bahirmukhaṁ ca tajjñānaṁ bhāty arthapratibhāsavat ।
buddheś ca grāhikā buddhir nityam antarmukhātmani ।” (Pramāṇavārttika
2.428) iti antarmukhā iti, ātmani iti ca svasaṁvedanam arthābhāsaśūnyam
apr̥thagbhūtaṁ coktam । tathā pratyabhijñāyām uktam “yā caiṣā pratibhā
tattatpadārthakramarūṣitā । akramānantacidrūpaḥ pramātā sa maheśvaraḥ
।।” (ĪPK 1.7.1) ity etat tatraiva vitatya pradarśitam । —
Saṁbandha-Siddhi, p. 9.

From n 248 and the citation from Pramāṇavārttika as above it is evident
that Utpala’s formulation of pratibhā was impacted by Bhaṭṭa Candrānanda
and Dharmakīrti, but this is beyond our immediate purview.

250 tattatpadārthakramarūṣitā.

251 [. . .] atyarthabhinnārthāvabhāsakhacite vibhau.

252 yā caiṣā pratibhā tattatpadārthakramarūṣitā । akramānantacidrūpaḥ
pramātā sa maheśvaraḥ ।। [And that (which is this) inner manifestive
awareness (pratibhā) inlaid with (rūṣitā) succession of myriad objects
is the knowing subject — free from succession, delimitation and having
consciousness as (his) nature — Maheśvara.] This kārikā is open to
different renderings depending upon what one follows, e.g. Kārikā, Vr̥tti
or Vivr̥ti. For now, it is following Kārikā as I have been able to
understand it.

253 yā eṣā pratibhā sa pramātā maheśvaraḥ ।

254 eṣā pratibhā pramātā maheśvaraś ca ।

255 yā pratibhā eṣā sa maheśvaraḥ pramātā ।

256 (yā) pramātā maheśvaraḥ sā pratibhā ।

257 antarlīnārthābhāsa abstracted from “antarlīnatadarthābhāsasya
atad-vyapohanena” (Vr̥tti on 1.6.3) and supported by Abhinavagupta’s
antaḥsarvārthāvabhāsaḥ (ĪPV on 1.6.3).

258 Vide pramātur eva svatantrasya antarlīnatadatadarthābhāsasya
atadapohanena [. . .] । — ĪPVr̥ 1.6.3.

259 “yā pratibhā eṣā” iti sarvasya sadaiva svaprakāśā vastutaś ca
antarmukhena vapuṣā । — ĪPVV II: 339; “pratibhā” [. . .] iti
antarmukhena vapuṣā āśrayaḥ siddha eva । — ibid.: 340; yat kiñcid
avabhāsate, tasya antarmukhaṁ yad avabhāsanam । — ibid.

260 evaṁ smr̥tau vikalpe vāpy apohanaparāyaṇe । jñāne vāpy antarābhāsaḥ
sthita eveti niścitam ।। [Therefore it is ascertained that whether in
memory or in vikalpa — that depends on exclusion — or in direct
perception, the manifestation of the object is definitely internal.” —
tr. Torella with slight modification.]

261 sarvasaṁvitsu sarvārthāvabhāsaḥ pramātr̥saṁlīnaś cittattvavad
ānurūpyeṇa prakāśamānaḥ sadā sthita eva । [In every kind of cognitions
(sarvasaṁvitsu), all objective manifestation is always definitely (eva)
shining in the cognizer (pramātr̥saṁlīnaḥ) like the consciousness
principle, in an appropriate way (ānurūpyeṇa). — tr. Torella, again with
the same slight alteration.]

262 Cf. n 249 above.

263 See ĪPV on 1.6.3 and Torella 1994, n 8, p. 131.

264 sūtrārtham avatārayati “yāvac ca” iti । [. . .] yat kiñcid ābhāsate,
tasya antarmukhaṁ yad avabhāsanaṁ, sa ātmā pramātā, sa eva ca svabhāvaḥ,
tad eva ca aiśvaryam iti saṁbandhaḥ । — ĪPVV II: 240.

265 It is to be noted that in the kārikā the compound
tattatpadārtha-kramarūṣitā refers to pratibhā, whereas the compound
akramānan-tacidrūpaḥ to pramātā and then by extension to maheśvaraḥ.

266 “vr̥ttau tu” iti phalanirūpaṇaṁ vr̥ttau kr̥tam iti na yacchabdo
vidhāsyamānadharmādhāratādyotako ’nuvādakatvena upāttaḥ nāpi
dharmādhāratābhisandhānapātrīkr̥tapūrvarūpaniṣṭha-
vivakṣitadharmāntarādhāratādyotako vidhāyakatvena tacchabdaḥ । na ca
sarvathā sautro vidhyanuvādau spaṣṭau ity āha “evakāreṇa” iti । — ĪPVV
II: 341.

267 “ābhāsa eva ātmā” iti vr̥ttigranthaṁ saṁgamayati āśaṅkāṁ śamayan
“yady api” ityādinā । nanu antarmukhatvāt yasya na kālayogaḥ, sa kathaṁ
‘sarvasaṁvitkālavyāpī’ iti uktaḥ । atra āha “atha ca” iti । ‘uktam’ iti
vr̥ttau sūtre ca । nanu yadi sa eva itthaṁ sphurati tacchaktivikāso
viśvam iti, tarhi alaṁ tatpratyabhijñām upadiśya । atra āha “kevalam”
iti । evaṁbhūtaṁ yad arthānāṁ krameṇa “kintu naisargikaḥ (1.6.9)”
ityādisūtradvayadr̥ṣṭyā avabhāsanaṁ, tasyeti samastaṁ padam । — ĪPVV II:
341. I take tasyeti samastaṁ padam as referring to
tattatpadārthakramācchuritaḥ in the Vr̥tti.

268 ābhāsanakriyā ca yāvad apūrvā naisargikī vyavadhānavandhyā
tātkālikatāliṅgitasphuṭabhāvā vartate, tāvadābhāso ’pi sphuṭo ’bhinava
eva । — ibid.: 333.

269 prakāśarūpatayā sarvasya sadaiva svayam eva paramārthasattve
kasyacit nirmāṇam ity avakāśābhāvāt, ābhāsakriyāmukhena tu apūrvatvam ।
— ibid.: 333-34.

270 Until now the Kārikā and Vr̥tti were taking the whole compound
beginning with akramā° as referring to pramātā.

271 Vide ĪPV I: 352-353.

272 In the Kārikā akramā° qualifies pramātā which is identical with
maheśvaraḥ.

273 In the Vr̥tti akramā°qualifies pramātā which is called ātmā
enumerated separately from maheśvaraḥ. Pratibhā is identified with
maheśvaraḥ for reasons not enumerated in the Kārikā.

274 “yā pratibhā eṣā” iti [. . .] “akramā sa” (eva bhagavān)
“anantacidrūpāḥ” [. . .] “maheśvaraḥ pramātā” । — ĪPVV II: 339-40.

275 sā ca “pratibhā” anapahnavanīyā iti antarmukhena vapuṣā āśrayaḥ
siddha eva । — ibid.: 340

276 Vide ĪPV I: 353-54.

277 Owing to our extremely limited access to the Vivr̥ti there is always
an element of tentativeness in our conclusions.

278 na ca tāvatmātrataiva vidhīyate yena seti bhavet, kintu “pramātā
maheśvaraḥ sā pratibhā” iti pramātr̥tvamāheśvaryābhyām upacitā
labdhaparipoṣā, tata eva upacayabalād eva ucitaḥ puṁstvanirdeśaḥ । —
ĪPVV II: 341

279 The current thematicization takes us back to the original notion of
reality as the synthesis of bodha (awareness) and kartr̥tā (agency).
Pramātr̥tva and māheśvarya would thus represent knowledge and agency
respectively both in their absolute agential mode.

280 prativastu samastajīvataḥ pratibhāsi pratibhāmayo yathā । — ŚSĀ
18.11ab

281 bhavadīyagabhīrabhāṣiteṣu pratibhā samyag udetu me puro ’grataḥ ।
tadanuṣṭhitaśaktir apy atas tadbhavadarcāvyasanaṁ ca nirvirāmam ।।
vyavahārapade ’pi sarvadā pratibhātv arthakalāpa eṣa mām । bhavato
’vayavo yathā na tu svata evādaraṇīyatāṁ gataḥ ।। — ŚSĀ12.23-24 [Let
insight into your profound sayings thoroughly arise in me in the first
instance. Having developed strength by practising on it, let your
worship become perpetual habit with me: “even in the realm of worldly
transactions let this mass of objects always shine to me as thy limb,
and not that it evokes regard for its own sake.] (See also n 47 above.)

282 Kṣemarāja explains pratibhā as navanavollekhinī prajñā (Vivr̥ti on
ŚSĀ 12.23, p. 185).

283 Reminds Vr̥tti-formulation: svāṅgabhūte prameye nirmātr̥tayā
maheśvaraś ca । — ĪP-Vr̥tti on 1.7.1

284 adhikāriṇi śāstrārthasya bimbapratibimbavat saṁkrāntiḥ,
loḍliṅgādīnāṁ viṣayībhavati prathamapuruṣārtha uttamapuruṣārthe
paryavasyati, na tu tāṭasthyena, adhikāryanadhikāriṇoḥ pratipattau
viśeṣābhāvaprasaṅgāt । ārogyakāmāḥ śivāṁ sevantāṁ sevadhvam — iti vā
vākyārthasya sevāmahai — ity evaṁrūpeṇa adhikāriṇi dvitīyā kakṣyā
saṁkrāntau, tr̥tīyakakṣyām eva bhāvikoṭipatitām api puruṣārthasaṁpattim
akālakalitasvarūpānupraveśena svātmīkr̥tām abhimanyamāne, tata eva
vitatasaṁvitsundaraparāmarśe pūrṇatā- bhimānapratilambhāt । — ĪPV I:
45-46.

285 Vide pp. 99-100.

286 gītaṁ nr̥ttaṁ ca vādyaṁ ca trayaṁ saṅgītam ucyate । — quoted from an
unspecified source in Raghavan 1981: 123.

287 ŚSĀ 18.18 (gītīkā), 14.10 (nr̥tta), 14.14 (gīyamāna), 20.2 (nr̥tta).

288 TĀ 3: 208-47; also Pandey 1959: 562-64.

289 With the welcome exception of Anupa Pande who translated 28th
chapter of the Nāṭyaśāstra and Abhinavagupta’s commentary thereon. See
Bibliography.

290 sādhāraṇam idānīṁ vyākhyāsyāmaḥ । tatra sādhāraṇaṁ nāma
antarasvaratā [. . .] tatra dve sādhāraṇe jātisādhāraṇaṁ svarasādhāraṇaṁ
ca । [. . .] svarasādhāraṇaṁ (emend sādhāraṇā) dvividham । — NŚ, prose
text pre-28.34 and 28.35-36

291 tasmād ittham etad ity asmatparamagurava utpalapādā manyante iha
tāvat tisro dve catasra ityādinā svasthānasvarūpam uktaṁ taccarāt [. .
.] [. . .] [. . .] tvāt pāramārthikaṁ prākr̥tarūpam ucyate । — ABh on
IV.33. [Therefore, this is the way in which my grand-teacher
Utpala-devapāda thinks. Now, here, three, two, four, this is the order
in which the nature of characterstic position has been mentioned . . .
(missing) . . . The ultimate natural form has been mentioned.” — tr.
Pande 1997: 74 with slight modification).]

292 Pande 1997: 148, n 117.

293 tās tv anauḍuvitā nityaṁ kartavyā hi svarāśrayāḥ । sarvasvarāṇāṁ
nāśas tu vihitas tv atha jātiṣu ।। na madhyamasya nāśas tu kartavyo hi
kadācana । sarvasvarāṇāṁ pravaro hy anāśī madhyamaḥ smr̥taḥ ।
gāndharvakalpe vihitaḥ sāmasv api ca madhyamaḥ ।। — NŚ 28.64-65; also
cf. Pande 1997: 86

294 Vide ABh IV.42 on NŚ 28.64; also see Pande 1997: 86, 154, n 145.

295 śrīmadutpaladevās tv āhuḥ । jātilakṣaṇe vakṣyamāṇe madhyamasya lopo
na kaścid vakṣyate । tanmadhyamasya nāśo na kartavya iti kiṁ
pratiṣedhena । prāpter abhāvāt । sarvasvarāṇāṁ nāśa ity anenāpi na
kiñcit kr̥tam । niyamasvaralopasya yathāsvaṁ jātiṣu vakṣyamāṇatvāt ।
tasmād ayam atra bhāvaḥ । yathā vaicitryārtharāgayor grāmarāgatvaṁ
nīyante tadā ṣaḍ api svarāḥ ṣāḍavauḍuvitavidhinā sarvāsu jātiṣu
svabuddhyā grāmavibhāge kramāl lopyāḥ । na tu madhyamaḥ kadācana ity
atra grāmarāgavaicitryam anena sūcitam । — ABh IV: 42-43 [Utpaladeva
says that, when the characterstics of jāti are to be mentioned, madhyama
is nowhere said to be dropped. Since madhyama is not to be dropped,
where is the point in negating it since the positive formulation (that
ma can be dropped, this) does not exist, if it is said that all notes
are dispensable, this is a general formula (applying to madhyama also by
implication). Even that has no relevance, because, in the jātis, the
dropping of notes is according to fixed rules. Hence the idea is that
when the rāgas are performed as grāma-rāgas, then for the sake of
variety all the six notes can be dropped by the technique of ṣāḍava and
auḍava in the different jātis (from which arise the grāma-rāgas),
according to grāma division and according to one’s intelligence. But
madhyama is never to be dropped. — tr. Pande 1997: 87.]

Mukund Lath (1978: 101, n 1) translates the portion from
śrīmadutpaladevās tv āhuḥ to vakṣyamāṇatvāt as under: “In laying down
the characterstics of jātis, nowhere has it been stated that madhyama
may be dropped in any of them. To what purpose, then, an especial
prohibition here ruling that madhyama should never be dropped, since the
possibility of (its being dropped) does not at all obtain (prāpter
abhāvāt)? Neither is it necessary here to enumerate all indispensable
notes, for this, too, serves no purpose because in describing the jātis
each note which is enjoined as dispensable is in any case laid down
separately for individual jātis.”

296 Lath 1978: 101.

297 Op. cit.: 185, n 2.

298 Raghavan 1981: 122. Raghavan is quoting from Mad. MS (chap. 29,
Jātyādhyāya, vol. IV: 21, corresponding to the GOS IV: 86-87). I am
however referring to the 2nd edition of the GOS where the text has been
further critically re-edited as under: anye tv āhuḥ । svarā ity
alaṁkāraikadeśāḥ prayojyā ye ’nujñātāḥ । śrīmadutpaladevās tathā
manyante । — NŚ IV: 86.

299 te dhruvāṇāṁ prayogeṣu na kāryāḥ svapramāṇataḥ । taddhruṇāṁ prayoge
tu (’pi) kāryā hy ārohiṇaḥ svarāḥ ।। — NŚ 29.28

300 śrīmadutpaladevās tathā manyante । ārohiṇaḥ svarā ity
anenātiprakarṣiṇaḥ svarūpam uktam । pratyakṣaram āroho vidyate yeṣāṁ
svarāṇāṁ te ārohiṇaḥ । tena pratisvaram akṣaraṁ pratyakṣaraṁ svaram ity
evaṁrūpam atikarṣaṇam । — ABh on IV: 86.

301 Pandey 1959: 539. He refers to ABh (MS), XXIX.41. Perhaps this is
the portion he has in mind while referring to Utpala’s name in ABh under
NŚ (MS) 26.39, 41 in Pandey 1963: 927 (Appendix B). In printed edition
it is found under NŚ 29.30 (not under 29.39 or 29.41).

302 Raghavan 1981: 122. He refers to Mad. MS IV: 22; GOS IV: 87.

303 paramaguruśrīmadutpaladevapādā manyante । varṇānāṁ padanibandhanatve
tadāśritālaṅkārā gītaprayogarahitakevala-svarālāpamātragāmina iti
(śaṅkāpadānam eva । tatrālaṅkāratā-pratibhāsas tatsaṁskārajo na mukhyaḥ)
। — ABh IV: 84. There are some minor variations in the text of Pandey
and Raghavan.

304 yathākṣaro ’tha dvikalas tathā caiva catuṣkalaḥ । (evam ekakalo
jñeyaḥ śuddhaś caccatpuṭā (emend puṭaḥ) budhai (dikaḥ) । trayo bhedā hi
tālasya dviguṇād dviguṇāḥ smr̥tāḥ ।।

305 In the 4th GOS edition it is cañcatpuṭaḥ. I have followed Lath and
Anupa Pande. Kailash Chandradeva Brihaspati adopts cañcatpuṭaḥ (1991:
237).

306 Vide Lath 1978: 323; also Pande 1997: 163, n 170. Anupa mistakenly
reads yonivādya for yonidvaya.

307 Lath 1978: 318, 322-26, 330-31, 336-38. The entire presentation on
NŚ 31.26 as above is a thoroughly abridged reproduction from Lath, so
far as I could grasp. Also see Brihaspati 1991: 236-42.

308 Pande 1997: 163-64.

309 It is only the linguistic interpretation of the printed text. I am
not at all sure if I am technically correct. I have also no idea if
asaṁbhava is a technical concept. The relevant text from ABh (on
IV.163-64) is reproduced below: ayaṁ tāvad vākyārthaḥ । yatra yā (tā)vad
anyaprakāro nāsti vilambaṁ śīghram iti hi tattadvyavahāro loke । na ca
madhyāpekṣaḥ । tatra śīghratādrutatvānugrāhakatenāpekṣyai- (tāpekṣa
e)kakalaḥ । madhyāpekṣo dvikalaḥ । vilambitāpekṣaś catuṣkalaḥ । na cāsya
layarūpasya mārgatrayātmakatvam enava (?) । na hi laye
tūttarottaradvaiguṇyam । tribhāgādhikatvam asya tatra darśitatvāt ।
mārgabhede tu dvaiguṇyam eva kevalam । [. . .] tatra kecid āhuḥ ।
dviguṇās tu guṇāḥ (smr̥tā i) ti । [. . .] । tatra hi prathamaprakāras
tāvad dviguṇaḥ । anyau kramadviguṇau evaṁ sati sarve guṇa(ṇā) dviguṇā
ity upakramaḥ । utpaladevapāda(dā)stvasmatparamaguravo vyācakṣate ।
tālasya yasmāt trayo bhedās triguṇā iti triguṇaparasparalakṣaṇadharmāṇas
tasmāt trayaḥ smr̥tāḥ । dviguṇatve hetur dviguṇā i(di)ti । yathākṣarasya
vyākhyā guṇaguṇanīyatvād dvikalatvam । tasyāpi dvābhyāṁ guṇyamānatvāc
catuṣkalatvam । catuṣkalatvād bhedābhāvāc ca nāsya punar guṇyamānatvam
astīti । vayaṁ tu manmahe । vīṇāyām api yathākṣare
dvaiguṇyasyāsambhavābhāvaḥ । asambhavasyāpekṣitatvād dvaiguṇyasyeti । —
ABh IV: 163-64.

310 Pandey 1959: 539 (from MS, xxxii, 4-6).

311 Raghavan 1981: 122-23 (from Mad. MS IV: 188 and GOS IV.291).

312 dhruvāsaṁjñāni yāni syur nāradapramukhair dvijaiḥ ।

gītāṅgāni tu(nīha) sarvāṇi viniyuktāny anekaśaḥ ।। — NŚ 32.1

313 yā r̥caḥ pāṇikā gāthāḥ saptarūpāṅga eva ca ।

saptarūpapramāṇaṁ hi taddhruvetyabhisaṁjñitam ।।

ebhyas tv aṅgānyathoddhr̥tya nānācchandaḥkr̥tāni tu ।

dhruvātvaṁ yāni gacchanti tāni vakṣyāmy ahaṁ punaḥ ।। — NŚ 32.2-3.

314 etaduktaṁ bhavati । yathā [. . .] tathā gītāṅgādīni adr̥ṣṭapradhāne
gītakādirūpasaṁghātotthitāni kutaścid rasabhāvakr̥tāny
aucityasamarpaṇātmakarañjanāyogyalakṣaṇād utkarṣād
ucitagīyamānavr̥ttaviśeṣāśrayeṇa saṁghātātmakarūpaṁ pratipannakāraṇatvaṁ
prāgdaśāyā ananubhūya kāryam auttarakālikaṁ bhajante
kāraṇaśabdavyapadeśyāni ca bhavanti iti । — ABh on NŚ 32.3: IV.290
cited, translated and explained in Lath 1978: 125.

315 dhruvāṇām aṅgasaṁjñāni pañcānām api nityaśaḥ । — NŚ 4.6; Lath 1978:
126

316 Lath 1978: 119.

317 tad evaṁ pratidhruvaṁ gītāṅgādibhya etadupajīvitam । [. . .] kim iti
ete dharmārthasādhanopāttāḥ । [. . .] dr̥ṣṭaphalatāyām api adr̥ṣṭam iti
cet tat samastānāṁ yugapad vā vikalpane veti sarvam asamañjasaprayāsam ।
tasmād uktadharmopajīvanam eva paramagurunirūpitaṁ yuktam । yathoktaṁ
śrīmadutpaladevapādaiḥ । “sthitāt sthāyitvasampannāt
prastutasthemayojanam । dhruvāsu yad yad anyebhyas tadvat prajñopa(jñaḥ
pra)kalpayet ।।” iti । [. . .] dhruvākārye kāraṇavad dharmānugamāt । —
ABh on NŚ 32.6: IV.291. Pandey has sthita for sthitāt, whereas Pandey
and Raghavan both read prastutasthamayojanam and prajñopakalpayet । (cf.
Pandey 1959: 539; Raghavan 1981: 122-23). Sthema as printed could be
understood in the sense of sthāyitva and hence seems better.

318 sannipātagrahāḥ kāścid vai tarjanīgrahāḥ । tathā ’’kāśagrahāḥ kāścid
dhruvā gāne bhavanti hi ।।

319 For whatever little understanding I could gather I am grateful to my
learned friend Prof. K.D. Tripathi.

320 ataḥ paraṁ pravakṣyāmi bhāṇḍagrahavikalpanam ।। — NŚ 32.412 cd.

321 ABh on NŚ 32.413.

322 sannipātagrahāḥ kāścid iti । dhruvā hastadvayahananajair-akṣarais
tarjanīprahatibhiḥ kr̥te lakṣaṇaśūnyavartanāmātreṇa vā bhāṇḍavādyasya
dhruvānugraha iti tridhā । anye tv āhuḥ — ekakale tāle
sannipātāntyakalāto dvikale catuṣkale ca dhruvāyāstitva tarjanyā iti ।
tadupalakṣitaturyapāde bhāgaprathamakalāntaḥ । ekakalādiniyamābhāve tu
ākāśācchūnyād gīta eva nāmabhāṇḍagraha iti । asmatparamagurubhiś ca
śrīmadutpaladevapādair ayam eva pratipanno ’rthaḥ — ABh on NŚ 32.414:
IV: 393-94.

323 Pandey 1935: 169-70; 1950: 181-82.

6

