Some Hitherto Unknown Fragments of Utpaladeva’s Vivr̥ti (I)

On the Buddhist Controversy Over the

Existence of Other Conscious Streams*

Isabelle Ratié

À Raffaele Torella,

sans qui les œuvres d’Utpaladeva

seraient demeurées à maints égards apratyabhijñāta.

Some Old Sources for New Vivr̥ti Fragments

Indology owes to Raffaele Torella one of the most exciting manuscript
discoveries made in the last decades, namely, that of the only extensive
fragment thus far known of Utpaladeva’s Vivr̥ti on his ĪPK. The edition
and translation of this fragmentary codex unicus by its discoverer1 has
had several important consequences. First of all, it has confirmed
Raffaele Torella’s initial hypothesis that the great innovator as
regards the Pratyabhijñā system is not Abhinavagupta but Utpaladeva:2 a
quick comparison between the extant fragment of the Vivr̥ti and the
parallel passages in Abhinavagupta’s ĪPV and ĪPVV shows that at least in
this part of the treatise, Abhinavagupta is extremely faithful to
Utpaladeva’s thought and closely follows his argumentation. But there is
another great advantage to this discovery: we are now able to examine
the marginal annotations contained in the manuscripts of Abhinavagupta’s
ĪPV3 and to check whether some of them contain quotations from the
Vivr̥ti. And this is a task of the utmost importance because, so far,
apart from the fragment discovered by Raffaele Torella, we could only
rely on Abhinavagupta’s commentaries so as to try and reconstruct the
gist of the arguments in the Vivr̥ti.

Admittedly, Abhinavagupta’s ĪPVV in particular constitutes a very rich
source of information regarding Utpaladeva’s detailed commentary on his
own verses: although the ĪPVV most often quotes only one or two words of
the Vivr̥ti while commenting on it, not only does Abhinavagupta expound
on Utpaladeva’s reasonings: he sometimes gives lengthier quotations as
well, although these are not always found where we would expect them to
be. Thus as I have shown elsewhere, the first concluding verse of
Utpaladeva’s Vivr̥ti can be retrieved from Abhinavagupta’s ĪPV ad ĪPK
1.4.3.4

But now that we are in possession of a lengthy fragment of the Vivr̥ti,
we can be certain that we have at our disposal another crucial source of
information on this text besides Abhinavagupta’s commentaries, since a
comparison between the text edited by Raffaele Torella and the
annotations found in the margins of ĪPV manuscripts shows that some of
these annotations are in fact quotations of Utpaladeva’s Vivr̥ti.

This is the case of some of the annotations in manuscript D2, which, as
Raffaele Torella has already noticed, was in all probability one of the
four manuscripts used by the editors of the Kashmir Series of Texts and
Studies (KSTS).5 But D2 is not an exception: Yohei Kawajiri has been
studying a Devanāgarī manuscript of the ĪPV preserved in Lucknow that
also contains such passages in its margins,6 and among the manuscripts
that I have been able to consult, it is also the case of the ĪPV
manuscript preserved in the School of Oriental and African Studies
library (SOAS), and to a greater extent, of one of the manuscripts
preserved in the Srinagar Oriental Research Library (S3). Thus D2, SOAS
and S3 share at least two quotations belonging to the part of the Vivr̥ti
edited by Raffaele Torella (and appearing as well in footnotes of the
Kashmir Text and Studies edition of the ĪPV).7 I could not find in S3 a
number of quotations that are present in the margins of both D2 and
SOAS,8 while S3 gives quotations (sometimes significantly lengthier than
those found in D2 and SOAS) that are not found in the first two
manuscripts,9 which seems to indicate that if D2 and SOAS are very
probably related, the annotations in S3 might have an independent
origin.

Now, since we are sure that these manuscripts bear quotations of the
text found in the incomplete manuscript of the Vivr̥ti discovered by
Raffaele Torella, we may quite safely surmise that they also contain
quotations of hitherto unknown parts of the Vivr̥ti. I think that it is
undoubtedly the case of S3. Of course, for now – that is, as long as no
complete manuscript of the Vivr̥ti is discovered –, we cannot always be
absolutely sure that the passages quoted do belong to Utpaladeva’s lost
text: the author of the marginal annotations in S3 sometimes specifies
that he is indeed quoting the Vivr̥ti,10 but alas he does not do so
systematically. However, here Abhinavagupta’s commentary is once more an
extremely precious source: while commenting on Utpaladeva’s lost text,
he regularly quotes some of its words, so that the probability for the
marginal annotations to be taken from the Vivr̥ti is high enough to
confine to certainty if the words quoted in the ĪPVV appear in the
marginal annotations in the same sequence as that found in
Abhinavagupta’s commentary. This means that we now have at our disposal
a mine (or rather several mines) of fragments of Utpaladeva’s lost work,
and that thanks to Raffaele Torella’s pioneering works, we may be able
to retrieve many passages of the Vivr̥ti even if no complete manuscript
of the text comes to light in the near future. The following pages,
which present the first results of an ongoing investigation of the
marginal annotations found in S3,11 offer an edition and translation of
a passage of the Vivr̥ti quoted in the margins of S3 and devoted to the
explanation of ĪPK 1.5.4-5. Both the edition and the translation are
tentative and I still have many doubts as to the meaning (or adequate
reading) of a number of passages. Nonetheless it seems to me that given
the present extent of our knowledge regarding the Vivr̥ti, an imperfect
attempt at editing and translating any fragment of Utpaladeva’s lost
work is better than no attempt at all, and I am confident that my
mistakes will soon be corrected by scholars more learned than me.

The Context of the Fragment ad ĪPK 1.5.4-5:

The Debate between a Vijñānavādin and a Sautrāntika

and the Problem of the Other Conscious Streams

In ĪPK 1.5.4-5,12 Utpaladeva lets a Sautrāntika criticize the
Vijñānavādins’ idealistic thesis that the universe is merely an internal
form taken on by consciousness and that phenomenal variety is the result
of an internal mechanism of latent traces or imprints (vāsanā). In the
course of this criticism, not only does the Sautrāntika attack the
Vijñānavādins’ position regarding the status of the external object:13
he also argues that the Vijñānavāda can only lead to solipsism, since in
the Vijñānavādin’s perspective, other subjects must be mere internal
aspects of my own stream or series (santāna) of momentary cognitive
events. I have examined elsewhere the details of this controversy,14 so
here I shall only give a basic summary of it.

The Vijñānavādin denies the accusation of solipsism by using
Dharmakīrti’s line of argument in the Santānāntarasiddhi.15 According to
Dharmakīrti, just as in a system that admits the reality of entities
external to consciousness, in the idealistic system of the Vijñānavāda,
the other streams of consciousness cannot be directly perceived (since a
consciousness cannot be directly apprehended by another consciousness
but only by itself); yet, just as in a system that accepts the reality
of external entities, in the Vijñānavāda, the other streams of
consciousness can be inferred. This inference of the existence of other
conscious entities or streams of momentary cognitions rests on the fact
that we experience in ourselves that when we act (and for instance when
we speak), our action is preceded by a will to act. So when we witness
an action that has not been preceded by our own will to act, we can
infer that this action was preceded by a desire to act that does not
belong to our own stream of cognitions – and this other willing entity
must be another conscious subject.

To this argument the Sautrāntika replies that the Vijñānavādin’s own
presuppositions prevent him from making the very inference that he
defends. He thus shows that the Vijñānavādin has no means of
establishing the invariable concomitance on which his inference of other
conscious streams rests. For indeed, I can observe an invariable
concomitance between my own speech and my previous desire to speak, so
that the logical pervasion (vyāpti) between “I want to speak” and “I am
speaking” is established; but in the case where I hear a speech that is
not uttered by me, my thought does not take the form “I am speaking” but
the form “he/she is speaking”. Now, the Vijñānavādin has no way of
establishing any invariable concomitance between the thought “I want to
speak” (in someone else’s conscious stream) and the thought “X is
speaking” (in my conscious stream when I hear someone else speaking).
The two propositions “I want to speak” and “I am speaking” are
essentially linked to the subject, or they are not “separated”
(vicchinna) from the “I”, whereas the proposition “X is speaking” is
separated from the “I” since it is expressed by using the third
grammatical person, and we have no way of determining that there is a
causal relationship (kāryakāraṇabhāva) between somebody else
subjectively thinking “I want to speak” and our own objective16 thought
“X is speaking”, so that the cause of the phenomenon “X is speaking”
remains perfectly unknown.

The Vijñānavādin replies that in fact this necessary relation between
the subjective cognition “I want to speak” and the objective cognition
“X is speaking” is constantly apprehended in the ordinary world, because
our actions are always related to our awareness that they can be
witnessed by others: when we act, we act while desiring either to be
seen acting or not to be seen acting, but whether we conceal our actions
or whether we act ostentatiously, we are aware that our desire to act
does not merely result in the cognition “I am acting” (which occurs in
my conscious stream) but also in the cognition “X is acting” (which
occurs in the other conscious streams witnessing my action). And
according to the Vijñānavādin, it is thanks to this understanding of the
invariable concomitance between my subjective desire to act and the fact
that my action becomes an object of cognition for the others that the
inference of other conscious streams is possible.

The following passage of the Vivr̥ti begins with the Vijñānavādin’s
explanation of this very argument, after which Utpaladeva (or, as
Abhinavagupta says, the Īśvarādvayavādin, the “proponent of the thesis
of the non-duality [of the universe] with the Lord”) helps the
Sautrāntika criticize the Vijñānavādin’s position. Utpaladeva points out
that this position entails a logical circle, because our awareness of
the existence of other conscious entities is supposed to stem from our
awareness that the others can witness our actions, while our awareness
that the others can witness our actions must derive from our awareness
of the existence of other conscious entities. He also points out that in
fact there is no such thing as an invariable concomitance between the
subjective thought “I want to be heard by others” and the objective
thought “X is speaking”, because we sometimes experience that we can
speak without being heard whether we want it or not: thus the causality
relationship invoked by the Vijñānavādin between a subjective will to
act and the objective awareness that X is acting cannot be established.

The Śaiva non-dualist concludes from this that the other subject can
only be established when the other’s action is perceived both by him/her
(in the form “I want to speak/I am speaking”) and by me (in the form
“he/she is speaking”), from the supposition that the same action is then
apprehended in these two different forms. For we have to make this
assumption in order to justify the unity of the sphere of human practice
(vyavahāra): if we do not accept it, then we cannot justify our belief
that the other subjects share with us the same spatio-temporal
determinations and therefore live in a common world, and the notion of
intersubjectivity collapses.

As Abhinavagupta makes clear in his commentary, the Śaiva non-dualists
have a solution to this problem of intersubjectivity:17 according to
them, the unity of the sphere of human practice is to be explained as
the result of the constant activity of division and synthesis through
which the universal consciousness appears to itself in the form of
several distinct subjects and yet is capable of unifying these subjects
in terms of spatial and temporal determinations, because although it
manifests itself as plural, it remains fundamentally one, just as a
dreaming consciousness is capable of dividing itself into a multiplicity
of characters without losing its unity. Recognizing the others is
therefore understood by Utpaladeva as a partial “recognition of the
Lord” (īśvarapratyabhijñā), i.e. as the incomplete realization of the
dynamism inherent in consciousness: when I witness an activity that is
not mine in the world, I recognize in that activity a freedom that is
nothing but the essence of my own subjectivity, so that my awareness of
the existence of other subjects is not the result of an inference based
on causality (“another conscious entity must have produced this
action”): rather, it arises from an inference based on the identity of
nature (svabhāva) between the freedom to act and consciousness.

Nonetheless, in the Vivr̥ti fragment below, this solution remains mostly
implicit,18 because the Śaiva non-dualist is almost immediately
interrupted (at least if we follow Abhinavagupta’s commentary)19 by the
Sautrāntika, who takes advantage (or at least thinks he does so) of
Utpaladeva’s criticism of the Vijñānavāda so as to put forward his own
position. He agrees with the Śaiva non-dualist that the Vijñānavādin
fails to explain the spatio-temporal determination (avadhāra) of the
other subjects (a reproach that Vasubandhu had already faced in his
Viṁśikā)20 and he points out that the only option left to the
Vijñānavādin trying to infer the existence of other subjects is to admit
that the thought formulated as “I want to act/I am acting” in one given
conscious stream projects an image of itself in another conscious stream
(an image that takes the form “he/she is acting”): the other subject
must be inferred as the reflected object (bimba) producing in my
conscious stream the reflection (pratibimba) “he/she is acting”, just as
a particular reflection in a mirror presupposes the existence of a
reflected object which exists outside of the mirror and gives it its
particular shape.

At first sight, this theory must be appealing to the Vijñānavādin
opponent as it seems to fit his idealism: if he adopts it, he can admit
the existence of several conscious streams projecting reflections of
themselves onto each other without conceding the existence of external
objects. As a matter of fact, there is evidence in several Yogācāra
texts that at least some Buddhist idealists held this thesis and used it
so as to explain the fact that several subjects seem to perceive the
same objects: according to those texts, the objects apprehended by the
senses must be reflecting an “original” object in the ālayavijñāna,21
and this “original” object is in turn a reflection of images occurring
in other conscious streams.22 This idea that the phenomenal variety
experienced in one conscious stream is the result of the influence of
another conscious stream rather than of an external object is found in
particular in Vasubandhu’s Viṁśikā23 (demonstrably known of Utpaladeva
and Abhinavagupta).24

Of course, such an explanation is not without danger for the
Vijñānavādin, since as the Sautrāntika points out in Abhinavagupta’s
ĪPV, acknowledging the existence of entities distinct from my own
cognitive stream (be they other conscious streams) seems to pave the way
for externalism.25 But whereas in the ĪPV, the Sautrāntika apparently
targets in a general way any idealistic thesis that concedes the
existence of a plurality of conscious streams while denying the reality
of anything external to them, in the fragment presented here, he seems
to have in mind, more specifically, the idealistic contention that
phenomenal variety can be explained as a result of the mutual influence
of various conscious streams; and he shows that such a thesis leads to
an absurd consequence, since each conscious stream should then perceive
an infinite number of objects, just as (according to Abhinavagupta’s
image) several mirrors reflecting each other produce an infinite number
of reflections.

The fragment ends on an objection made by the Vijñānavādin. The latter
readily accepts that all the other manifestations contained in other
conscious streams do not project reflections of themselves onto my
conscious stream (he agrees that this would lead to an absurd
consequence), but he argues that some of these manifestations in other
conscious streams awaken a particular imprint (vāsanā) already contained
in my own conscious stream and left by previous experiences. He thus
uses the theory of the vāsanā mechanism to explain why we only perceive
a limited number of objects.

Unfortunately, the end of the discussion (won by the Sautrāntika, at
least in this part of the treatise) is missing. This is all the more
regrettable since in the corresponding passage of the ĪPVV,
Abhinavagupta alludes to a very interesting discussion on ālayavijñāna26
– an important topic for the historian of Buddhist doctrines, and one
that is not found in Utpaladeva’s ĪPK and Vr̥tti, nor in Abhinavagupta’s
ĪPV, but that may well have been treated in some detail in Utpaladeva’s
Vivr̥ti.

Nonetheless, the fragment as it stands is of great interest, not only
because it confirms once again how faithful Abhinavagupta’s ĪPVV is to
the text on which it comments (all the ideas mentioned in the
corresponding passage of the ĪPVV are to be found in the Vivr̥ti), or
because it confirms interpretations of the ĪPV that were so far only
based on the ĪPVV,27 but also because it illustrates Utpaladeva’s
intimate acquaintance with Buddhist theories in general,28 and his
interest for the Buddhist debate over the epistemological (and/or
ontological)29 status of other streams of consciousness in particular.
The reason for this interest probably lies in the fact that Utpaladeva’s
system is a variety of absolute idealism: according to him, the universe
is nothing but a manifestation of a single and all-powerful
consciousness out of which nothing exists. He therefore shares with the
Vijñānavāda the burden of dealing with the accusation of solipsism, and
he is all the more attentive to this problem since he wants to offer a
solution capable of superseding both that of the Vijñānavādins and that
of their externalist opponents, the Sautrāntikas. His strategy, here as
often, consists in letting the Sautrāntika triumph over the Vijñānavādin
before showing (as he will in the following verses) that the Sautrāntika
view regarding both objects and other subjects is untenable.30 His
source regarding the Vijñānavādins’ position in this fragment is in all
probability Dharmakīrti’s Santānāntarasiddhi (a treatise that was read
by the Śaiva philosophers, whether dualist or non-dualist).31 As for his
source regarding the Sautrāntika opponent, it is difficult to judge to
what extent it is borrowed from externalist objections answered by
Dharmakīrti in the Santānāntarasiddhi, and one might also suspect that
Utpaladeva is inventing a Sautrāntika position rather than depicting a
real historical position.32 However, it seems to me that Utpaladeva’s
pūrvapakṣas are hardly ever (if at all) figments of his imagination, and
that on the contrary, they show a precise knowledge of his opponents’
theories, as can be verified in all instances where his particular
source can be determined and has come down to us. In this regard, it is
worth noting that Abhinavagupta mentions in his commentary on the
missing end of this fragment a lost work by Dharmottara, the
Bāhyārthasiddhi:33 for now at least, it seems to me that we cannot rule
out the possibility that the latter text was one of Utpaladeva’s sources
(if not his main source) for his depiction of the Sautrāntikas’ position
in this debate.

A Fragment of Utpaladeva’s Vivr̥ti ad ĪPK 1.5.4-534

nanu yatra parajñānaviṣayābhāvāpattivāraṇena nijaṣṭhīvanādiceṣṭām
icchet, tatra paṭādyapavāraṇādinaiva †. . .†35, yatra punar anyathaiva
tathā ceṣṭate, tatra parajñānaviṣayabhāvagamanābhisandhir asty eva.

tad etan mandamatibhāṣitaṁ parapramātr̥pravibhāgapratyayasya vyutpatteḥ.
tathābhūtavyāhārādy-36avabhāsenaiva hi pramātrantaraniścayaḥ syāt, tad
etad itaretarāśrayatvam, vyāhārādy-37avabhāsaviśeṣaiḥ
pramātrantaragatiḥ, tadgatyā ca
tajjñānagatavyāhārādyavabhāsajananāyābhisandher viśiṣṭād
vyāhārādyavabhāsaviśeṣāḥ. yadi hi38 paratrotpādanābhisandheḥ
paratrotpannanr̥ttaṣṭhīvanodgrāhaṇādyavabhāsānāṁ svātmano vicchinnānāṁ
pramāṇāntarāt kāryakāraṇabhāvo’vagataḥ syāt, tat svātmany api
vicchinnaṣṭhīvanādyavabhāsair anyair apy anyadā pramātrantaram
anumīyetāpi, yāvatānyataḥ parapramātary avijñāte
tadgataṣṭhīvanādyābhāseṣv anavagateṣu kathaṁ svātmagatair api tair
vicchinnair ābhāsaiḥ parasantānānumānam.

na ca paro māṁ paśyatv ity abhisandhānāt parasantāne
vicchinnavyāhārādyavabhāsotpattir yuktā, tathābhisandhāne mā drākṣīd iti
vā viparītābhisandhāne tadanutpattiprasaṅgāt.

tad eva[ṁ] tad buddhisamīhāyuktapramātravicchinnāt
tatpratyakṣatānuṣaṅgina eva yathāvadhāritotpādakra[ma]m avasthitād
vyāhārādyavabhāsāt siddhyet pramātrantaraṁ yathāsmābhir vakṣyate.

evaṁ ca viśiṣṭadeśakālatāpi tasya tadāveśāt sidhyati, [a]nyathā39
yathāvabhātadeśasthenaiva pramātrantareṇa paratrāsau janyeteti kuto
niścayaḥ.

etāvat punaḥ syāt, buddhisamīhājanita-svapratyakṣavyāhārādyavabhāsād
utpadyate parapramātr̥ṣu vicchinnas tathāvabhāsaḥ pratibimbam iva, tataś
ca tadutpādakabimbabhūtavyāhārāvabhāsānumānamukhena parapramātānumīyeta.

ity evaṁ ca ghaṭapaṭādyavabhāsā api kvacana krimisarvajñādipramātrantare
sthitās tatsadr̥śābhāsa-40 sahabhāvinaḥ pramātrantarasyāpy avabhāsāñ
janayeyuḥ, tathā ca bāhyārthavādaprakāra eva syāt, jñānabāhyānām
ābhāsabhede hetutvābhyupagamaviśeṣaḥ, yato’vabhāsānāṁ41
svasadr̥śāvabhāsāntarajanakatve pramātr̥ṣv ābhāsāparyavasānaṁ42 syāt, tair
apy anya[syā]nyasya jananād iti.

athāpi parapramātr̥gatāvabhāsās tathāvabhāsajanikāṁ vāsanām eva
prabodhayanti, na tu svato janayanti yenābhāsānantyaṁ syāt. vāsanā hy
avabhāsāntaraśate nādhipatitvocitaikaiveti43 pratipramātrekam eva
tadavabhāsaṁ janayatīti nātiprasaṅgaḥ.

A Tentative Translation

[­– Objection from the Vijñānavādin:] But in the [case] where one wants
to accomplish one’s own activity – such as spitting etc. – while hiding
it so as to prevent it from becoming an object for [someone] else’s
cognition, it is only while concealing [it] for instance behind a screen
[that one acts?],44 whereas in the [case] where one performs the same
action [of spitting] but in a different way[, i.e. without concealing
it],45 there must be an intention (abhisandhi) [of accomplishing the
action while] becoming the object of someone else’s cognition.46

[­– Answer from the Śaiva non-dualist momentarily siding with the
Sautrāntika:]47 This [statement can only be] uttered by some simpleton,
because of [the way in which it] explains the origin (vyutpatti) of the
knowledge that the other subject is distinct [from myself]; for
[according to this thesis,] it is only thanks to the manifestation of
e.g. [my action] of speaking, which is such [, i.e. which involves the
intention of being heard or not by someone else,]48 that one can
ascertain [the existence of] another subject. Therefore [your reasoning
involves] this logical circle (itaretarāśrayatva): the knowledge of [the
existence of] another subject [supposedly occurs] thanks to the
particular manifestations [of my actions] such as speaking, [i.e. this
knowledge supposedly occurs thanks to my awareness that my own speech is
particularized by an intention to be heard by the other;] and it is
thanks to this [very] knowledge [, i.e. the knowledge that the other
subject exists,] that the particular manifestations of [my actions] such
as speaking [can arise] from an intention that is particularized
[inasmuch as it] aims at producing the manifestation [of my own action]
of e.g. speaking inside that [other] consciousness [in the form “this
person is speaking”].49 For if [we] could understand through some other
means of knowledge [i.e. perception] the relation of cause and effect
between [my] intention of making [these manifestations of my actions]
arise in someone else [and] the manifestations [of my actions] such as
dancing, spitting or arguing that arise in another [conscious stream
when I am acting while being] distinct from myself [i.e. expressed in
the other conscious stream as “he/she is acting” and not as “I am
acting”,] then the other subject could also be inferred at some other
time [, i.e. when this relation is not perceived,] from the
manifestations [in my own conscious stream] of [actions of which I am
not the agent] such as spitting and so on [that] are separated [from me
in so far as they occur objectively in myself as “X is spitting”, etc.,]
although [these manifestations] which [occur] in myself are different
[from what the other subject must be thinking in the subjective form “I
want to spit” – just as a fire is inferred from smoke although smoke is
different from fire].50 But [I] cannot know the manifestations such as
spitting and so on that reside in the [other subject, e.g. in the form
“he/she is spitting” when I am spitting,] because the other subject is
not known through any other [means of knowledge besides inference, i.e.
through perception,51 and since therefore the relation of cause and
effect between the subjective will “I want to spit” and the objective
thought “he/she is spitting” remains unknown,] how could the inference
of another conscious stream [take place] through manifestations which,
although existing in myself, are separated [from myself, in the form “X
is spitting”]?

Moreover,52 it is not [true] that the arising in some other [conscious]
stream of a manifestation of [an action of] e.g. speaking separated
[from the subject, i.e. taking the form “X is speaking”,] is [only]
possible due to the [previous] intention [in my own conscious stream]
“may the other see me”; because whether [the acting subject has] such an
intention [of being seen acting] or whether [he has] the contrary
intention “may [the other] not see [me acting]”, an absence of arising
of the [manifestation of this action in the form “X is acting”] can
ensue.53

Therefore [since it is] so, as we shall explain [later], another subject
can be established from the manifestation of [his/her action of], e.g.
speaking, [a manifestation which is] not separated from [this] subject
endowed with a will [to speak consisting in] a cognition, [i.e. a
manifestation which is expressed in that subject as “I want to speak”,]
only (eva) [when this manifestation] involves (anuṣaṅgin) its
perceptibility for the [hearer as well, i.e. only if this manifestation
is perceived by me54 too and not just by the other subject, and] comes
to existence according to the [specific] order of [phonological]
production determined (avadhārita) [by the various causes that are the
points of articulation and the phonatory organs of the speaker].55

[­The Sautrāntika:]56 And [it is] thus [only – i.e. it is only if this
manifestation of the action of speaking is common to both subjects and
determined by the same conditions – that we can] establish as well the
fact that this [other subject] has the particular place and time
[associated with his/her manifestation in my conscious stream,] because
[then this fact] belongs to this [manifestation of speech shared by both
cognitive streams]. Otherwise how could [we] be certain that this
[manifestation of an activity of speech] must have been produced in some
other [stream of consciousness, i.e. mine,] by another subject who
resides precisely in [the particular] place where it is manifested [to
me]?57

But this only can be [admitted by the Vijñānavādin]58: from a
manifestation such as [my action of] speaking that is directly perceived
in myself [and] produced by a will [consisting in] a cognition, such a
manifestation arises in the other subjects [as being] separated [from
their own subjectivity, in the form “he/she is acting”,] as a reflection
(pratibimba) [arises in a mirror]; and therefore, the other subject must
be inferred through an inference [based on] this manifestation of
speech, as being the reflected object (bimba) that produces this
[reflection in my own conscious stream].

And [if the Vijñānavādin admits that this is] so, [i.e. if he accepts
that there is a plurality of conscious streams reflecting their images
onto each other, but no external object,] even the manifestations of
[objects such as] a pot, a cloth and so on which reside in any other
subject – whether a worm or an omniscient [being], etc.­ – should
produce manifestations occurring simultaneously [and] with aspects
similar to [what the worm or the omniscient being, etc., perceive] for
[any] other subject as well; and thus [this inference of the other
conscious streams as entities reflected in my own conscious stream that
the Vijñānavādin is ready to accept] is [in fact] nothing but a variety
of externalism. [That is to say, it is] the particular acknowledgement
that [entities] external to cognitions are the causes of the phenomenal
difference[s], since if the manifestations [in other conscious streams]
were what produces other manifestations similar to them [in my conscious
stream,] there would be an infinite number (aparyavasāna) of
manifestations in [each of] the subjects, because these [reflections in
my conscious stream] would in turn produce another [reflection in
another conscious stream, and] another[, and so on ad infinitum].59

[­– Objection from the Vijñānavādin:] But still, the manifestations
occurring in another subject only awaken an imprint (vāsanā) that [in
turn] produces manifestations of the same sort, but they do not produce
[these manifestations] by themselves, which would [indeed] lead to an
infinite number of manifestations. For one imprint only is not capable
of influencing (adhipatitva) the innumerable other manifestations;
therefore it [merely] produces a manifestation of the [previously
experienced object] that is only one for each subject – therefore there
is no absurd consequence [involved in our theory].60

* This article was written thanks to the generous financial help of the
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, as part of project FR 2531/3-1. I am
(as usual) greatly indebted to Alexis Sanderson, who generously shared
with me some of his copies of manuscripts of the ĪPV as well as his
enthusiasm for the historical study of the Pratyabhijñā texts, and to
Vincent Eltschinger, Eli Franco and Harunaga Isaacson, who read a
previous version of this paper, corrected a number of mistakes, engaged
in lengthy discussions on several difficult points and provided many
insightful remarks.

Bibliographical References

Manuscripts

D = Īśvarapratyabhijñā[-Vr̥tti,] Vivr̥ti [and Vimarśinī], Delhi, National
Archives of India (Manuscripts belonging to the Archaeology and Research
Department, Jammu and Kashmir Government, Srinagar), no. 30, vol. 9
[“Pratyabhijñāvivr̥tiḥ by Utpaladeva”, śāradā script].

D2 = Īśvarapratyabhijñāvimarśinī by Abhinavagupta, Delhi, National
Archives of India (Manuscripts belonging to the Archaeology and Research
Department, Jammu and Kashmir Government, Srinagar), no. 5, vol. 2,
[śāradā script].

S3 = Īśvarapratyabhijñāvimarśinī, Śrinagar, Oriental Research Library,
no. 838 (Īśvarapratyabhijñākaumudi) [śāradā script].

SOAS = Īśvarapratyabhijñāvimarśinī, London, School of Oriental and
African Studies Library, no. 207 in R.C Dogra’s 1978 catalogue / MS no.
44255 [“Pratyabhijñāsūtra with Abhinavagupta’s Sūtrārthavimarśinī”,
śāradā script].

Editions

Bhāskarī = Īśvarapratyabhijñāvimarśinī of Abhinavagupta, Doctrine of
Divine Recognition, vols. I-II: Sanskrit text with the commentary
Bhāskarī edited by K.A.S. Iyer and K.C. Pandey [Allahabad, 1938, 1950],
vol. III: English translation by K.C. Pandey [Allahabad, 1954], Delhi:
Motilal Banarsidass, 1986.

ĪPK = Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikā: See Torella [1994] 2002.

ĪPV= Īśvarapratyabhijñāvimarśinī, edited with notes by M.R. Shāstrī and
M. K. Shāstrī, KSTS 22 & 33, 2 vols., Srinagar: Nirnaya Sagar Press,
1918-21.

ĪPVV = Īśvarapratyabhijñāvivr̥tivimarśinī by Abhinavagupta, ed. M.K.
Shāstrī, KSTS 60, 62 & 65, 3 vols., Bombay: Nirnaya Sagar Press,
1938-43.

PVin = Dharmakīrti’s Pramāṇaviniścaya, Chapters 1 and 2, Critically
edited by E. Steinkellner, Beijing/Vienna: China Tibetology Publishing
House/Austrian Academy of Sciences Press, 2007.

[Santānāntaradūṣaṇa, in] Ratnakīrtinibandhāvaliḥ, ed. A. Thakur, Patna:
Kashi Prasad Jayaswal Research Institute, 2nd edn., 1975, pp. 145-49.

Santānāntarasiddhi (rec.) = Santānāntarasiddhiḥ of Ācārya Dharmakīrti
and Santānāntarasiddhiḥ Ṭīkā of Ācārya Vinītadeva, restored and edited
by J.S. Negi, Bibliotheca Indo Tibetica Series 37, Sarnath–Varanasi:
Central Institute of Higher Tibetan Studies, 1997.

Viṁśikā, Viṁśikāvr̥tti = Vijñaptimātratāsiddhi. Deux traités de
Vasubandhu. Viṁśatikā accompagnée d’une explication en prose et Triṁśikā
avec le commentaire de Sthiramati, publié par S. Lévi, Paris:
Bibliothèque de l’École des Hautes Études 245, 1925.

Vivr̥ti (fragments) = See Torella 1988; 2007a-d; Ratié (forthcoming).

Translations and studies

Chu, J., 2011, “Sanskrit Fragments of Dharmakīrti’s
Santānāntarasiddhi*”, in H. Krasser et al. (eds.) Religion and Logic in
Buddhist Philosophical Analysis: Proceedings of the Fourth International
Dharmakīrti Conference, Vienna, 23-27 August 2005, Wien: Österreichische
Akademie der Wissenschaften, pp. 33-42.

Formigatti, C.A., 2011, Sanskrit Annotated Manuscripts from Northern
India and Nepal, Unpublished Ph.D. Thesis, Universität Hamburg.

Kajiyama, Y., 1965, “Buddhist Solipsism: A Free Translation of
Ratnakīrti’s Saṁtānāntaradūṣaṇa”, Journal of Indian and Buddhist
Studies, 13(1): 9-24.

Kano, K., 2008, “Two Short Glosses on Yogācāra Texts by
Vairocanarakṣita: Viṁśikāṭīkāvivr̥ti and *Dharmadharmatāvibhāgavivr̥ti”,
in F. Sferra (ed.) Manuscripta Buddhica 1: Sanskrit Texts from Giuseppe
Tucci’s Collection, part I, Roma: Istituto Italiano per l’Africa e
l’Oriente, pp. 343-80.

Katsura, S., 2007, “Dharmakīrti’s Proof of the Existence of Other
Minds”, in B. Kellner, H. Krasser et al. (eds.) Pramāṇakīrtiḥ: Papers
Dedicated to Ernst Steinkellner on the Occasion of His 70th Birthday,
Wiener Studien zur Tibetologie und Buddhismuskunde 70.2, Wien:
Arbeitskreis für tibetische und buddhistische Studien Universität Wien,
pp. 407-22.

Kitagawa, H., 1955, “A Refutation of Solipsism (Annotated Translation of
the Santānāntarasiddhi)”, Journal of the Greater India Society, 14(1-2):
1-32.

McCrea, L.J. and P. Patil, 2010, Buddhist Philosophy of Language in
India – Jñānaśrīmitra on Exclusion, New York: Columbia University Press.

Ratié, I., 2007, “Otherness in the Pratyabhijñā Philosophy”, Journal of
Indian Philosophy, 35(4): 313-70.

———, 2010, “The Dreamer and the Yogin: On the Relationship between
Buddhist and Śaiva Idealisms”, Bulletin of the School of Oriental and
African Studies, 73(3): 437-78.

———, 2011a, Le Soi et l’Autre. Identité, différence et altérité dans la
philosophie de la Pratyabhijñā, Jerusalem Studies in Religion and
Culture 13, Leiden-Boston: Brill.

———, 2011b, “Can One Prove that Something Exists Beyond Consciousness? A
Śaiva Criticism of the Sautrāntika Inference of External Objects”,
Journal of Indian Philosophy, 39(4-5): 479-501.

———, forthcoming, “Some Hitherto Unknown Fragments of Utpaladeva’s
Vivr̥ti (II): Against the Existence of External Objects”, in D. Goodall
and P.S. Filliozat (eds.) Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire de N.
Ramacandra Bhatt.

Schmithausen, L., 1987, Ālayavijñāna. On the Origin and the Early
Development of a Central Concept of Yogācāra Philosophy, vol. I: Text,
vol. II: Notes, Bibliography and Indices, Tokyo: The International
Institute for Buddhist Studies.

———, 2005, On the Problem of the External World in the Ch’eng wei shih
lun, Studia Philologica Buddhica (Occasional Paper Series) 13, Tokyo:
The International Institute for Buddhist Studies.

Torella, R., 1988, “A Fragment of Utpaladeva’s
Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti”, East and West, 38: 137-74.

———, 1992, “The Pratyabhijñā and the Logical-Epistemological School of
Buddhism”, in T. Goudriaan (ed.) Ritual and Speculation in Early
Tantrism, Studies in Honor of André Padoux, SUNY Series in Tantric
Studies, Albany: State University of New York Press, pp. 327-45.

——— [1994] 2002: Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikā of Utpaladeva with the
Author’s Vr̥tti, critical edition and annotated translation [Roma, 1994],
Corrected Edition, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.

———, 2007a, “Studies on Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti. Part I:
anupalabdhi and apoha in a Śaiva Garb”, in K. Preisendanz (ed.)
Expanding and Merging Horizons: Contributions to South Asian and
Cross-Cultural Studies in Commemoration of Wilhelm Halbfass, Wien:
Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, pp. 473-90.

———, 2007b, “Studies on Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti. Part II:
What Is Memory?”, in K. Klaus and J.-U. Hartmann (eds.) Indica et
Tibetica. Festschrift für Michael Hahn zum 65. Geburtstag von Freunden
und Schülern überreicht, Wiener Studien zur Tibetologie und
Buddhismuskunde 66, Wien: Arbeitskreis für Tibetische und Buddhistische
Studien Universität Wien, pp. 539-63.

———, 2007c, “Studies on Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti. Part
III: Can a Cognition Become the Object of Another Cognition?”, in D.
Goodall and A. Padoux (eds.) Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d’Hélène
Brunner, Collection Indologie 106, Pondichéry: Institut Français de
Pondichéry/École Française d’Extrême-Orient, pp. 475-84.

———, 2007d, “Studies on Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti. Part IV:
Light of the Subject, Light of the Object”, in B. Kellner, H. Krasser et
al. (eds.), Pramāṇakīrtiḥ: Papers Dedicated to Ernst Steinkellner on the
Occasion of His 70th Birthday, Wiener Studien zur Tibetologie und
Buddhismuskunde 70.2, Wien: Arbeitskreis für tibetische und
buddhistische Studien Universität Wien, pp. 925-40.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 See Torella 1988 (this first part of the fragment was in fact edited
from a transcript of the original manuscript D later found by Raffaele
Torella in the National Archives of India and used for the edition of
the remaining parts of the fragment); 2007a-d.

2 See Torella 1988: 140; [1994] 2002: xliii.

3 For a study of some marginal annotations in ĪPV manuscripts (which
does not, however, bear on fragments of the Vivr̥ti), see Formigatti
2011.

4 See Ratié 2011a: 250. Abhinavagupta gives a complete quotation of the
verse in ĪPV I: 130 while explicitly ascribing it to Utpaladeva (yad āha
granthakāra eva), and from ĪPVV, vol. III, p. 404, it is obvious that
the verse was the first of a series concluding the Vivr̥ti: vivr̥tikāraḥ
saṁkṣipya sarvam āhettham ity
ādiślokaiḥ. anenāsmadukteneśvaratāprakāreṇa yā svasaṁvittiḥ* sthitā tām.
[*svasaṁvittiḥ corr.: susaṁvittiḥ ĪPVV]. According to the ĪPV the verse
runs as follows: itthaṁ svasaṁvittim apahnuvānair yat tad vadadbhiḥ
kaluṣīkr̥taṁ yat । pramātr̥tattvaṁ sphuṭayuktibhis tān mūkān vidhāya
prakaṭīkr̥taṁ tat ।। “After having thus reduced to silence through clear
arguments those who, denying their [own] self-consciousness, hold this
or that thesis, [I] have made obvious the true nature of the subject [so
far] stained by them.”

5 See Torella 2007b: 544, n 14; 2007c: 479, n 8; 2007d: 929, n 11.

6 See Yohei Kawajiri’s contribution to this volume.

7 D2, SOAS and S3 all contain the passage from pūrvāvabhāsitavastunaḥ. .
. to vicitrecchābodhitāvabhāsabhedavāsanāmātropapāditavikalparū-
pavijñānāpohanaśaktiḥ (as noted in Torella 2007a: 480, n 38, so does
110, n 71, in the Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies edition of the ĪPV
I; the three manuscripts as well as the ĪPV footnote invert the two
sentences) and the passage from smr̥tyādīnām idānīṁ. . . to sambhavam āha
in Torella 2007b: 544 (which is also quoted in ĪPV I: 116, n 17).

8 D2 and SOAS both contain the passage from arthitvāc ca . . . (the two
manuscripts bear the reading arthitāvaśāt . . .) to avabhāso bhavati in
Torella 2007b: 547 (Torella notes in n 44 that the same passage is found
in n 62, p. 124 of ĪPV I, and that the text of the footnote shows some
“significant divergence” from the text he has established. It is worth
noting in this regard that while D2 bears exactly the same reading as
that found in the ĪPV n, the text in SOAS differs from it in several
instances, among which upajātāyāṁ, also found in manuscript D used by
Raffaele Torella for his edition, but for which D2 and the ĪPV n have
upayāyamānāyāṁ); the passage from kadācit punar . . . to na kṣatiḥ in
Torella 2007b: 548 (as noted in Torella 2007b: 548, n 51, this passage
is also quoted in ĪPV I: 125, n 67; the text of the footnote has the
same variant readings as the two manuscripts); the passage from aham
anvabhūvam iti . . . to anubhāvyadharmopacāreṇa in Torella 2007c: 481
(in fact this passage is also found in ĪPV I: 129-30, n 69; SOAS bears
the obviously mistaken reading iti vā pūrvapakṣānubhavasya instead of
iti vā pūrvānubhavasya); and the passage from pratyakṣapr̥ṣṭapātināpi . .
. to parāmarśa ity āha in Torella 2007d: 930 (the sentence is also
quoted in ĪPV I: 142, n 141).

9 S3 quotes the passage from viṣayopalabdhr̥tāpy arthasya . . . to
tatpūrvakāloparaktānubhūtabhāvāvamarśanāvasānā in Torella 2007b: 544-45;
the passage from tena ca sūtre liṅartho . . . to prakāśanād bhavati in
Torella 2007b: 546-47; the passage from nanu prakāśānupraveśaṁ vinā . .
. to sahaikyaṁ syād iti in Torella 2007c: 481-82; the passage from
yoginām api parabodhaḥ . . . to na tv etannidarśane’nubhavasmr̥tyor
grāhyagrāhakabhāva iti in Torella 2007c: 482 (as noted in Torella 2007c:
482, n 42, this passage is also reproduced in ĪPV I: 137, n 121, from
grāhyabhūmi . . . onwards. Note that both S3 and the ĪPV footnote bear
the reading ’pi vā tasya parabodhasya instead of ’pi vā tasya); the
passage from kadācid dr̥kparāmarśapūrvatvena . . . to dr̥kparāmarśa iti in
Torella 2007d: 931-32; the passage from athāpi yogyadeśasthatayā . . .
to pītasyāpi syāt in Torella 2007d: 937 (in S3 a gloss is interpolated
after vā pratyāsattyā, and the manuscript shows several variant
readings, among which pītasyāpi na syāt instead of pītasyāpi syāt at the
end of the passage).

10 Some of the quotations end with iti ṭīkāyām or iti ṭīkākāraḥ; some
are preceded by tad āha ṭīkākāraḥ or iti darśayati vivr̥tikāraḥ.

11 See also Ratié (forthcoming).

12 tattadākasmikābhāso bāhyaṁ ced anumāpayet । na hy abhinnasya bodhasya
vicitrābhāsahetutā ।। na vāsanāprabodho’tra vicitro hetutām iyāt ।
tasyāpi tatprabodhasya vaicitrye kiṁ nibandhanam ।। “[A Sautrāntika
might] object (cet) [the following]: the manifestation of this or that
[particular object,] which is [apparently] devoid of cause (ākasmika),
must lead [us] to infer an external [reality], for consciousness, which
is [in itself] undifferentiated, cannot be the cause of manifestations
that are varied. [And] the varied awakening of imprints (vāsanā) cannot
be the cause of this [phenomenal variety]; for what would be in turn the
cause of the variety of the awakening of these [imprints]?”

13 On this criticism of the Vijñānavāda by a Sautrāntika as explained in
Abhinavagupta’s commentaries, see Ratié 2010: 453-60.

14 See Ratié 2007 and 2011a (chap. 8).

15 As far as I know the text is entirely preserved in its Tibetan
version only. For an English translation from the Tibetan, see Kitagawa
1955; for a tentative reconstruction of the Sanskrit text, see
Santānāntarasiddhi (rec.), and for a short bibliography of scholarly
works on this text, see Katsura 2007: 408-09. For newly-published
Sanskrit fragments, see also Chu 2011. On Abhinavagupta’s quotation and
summary of Dharmakīrti’s treatise, see Ratié 2007: 323, n 20; 2011a:
591.

16 Objective in the sense that the agent of the action is not
apprehended by him- or herself, subjectively, but as an object distinct
from the “I”.

17 See below, n 55.

18 For an analysis of Utpaladeva’s position in this debate see Ratié
2007: 336-68; 2011a: 606-42.

19 See below, n 56.

20 See below, n 57 (on the probability that Vasubandhu’s work originally
bore the title Viṁśikā rather than Viṁśatikā, see Kano 2008: 345).

21 See Schmithausen 1987, vol. II: 415-16 n 769.

22 See Schmithausen 2005: 39-47.

23 Viṁśikā 18ab: anyonyādhipatitvena vijñaptiniyamo mithaḥ । “There is a
mutual determination of representations (vijñapti) due to the fact that
[the various representations in various conscious streams] influence
(adhipatitva) each other.” Cf. Viṁśikāvr̥tti, p. 9: sarveṣāṁ hi sattvānām
anyonyavijñaptyādhipatyena mitho vijñapter niyamo bhavati yathāyogam.
mitha iti parasparataḥ. ataḥ santānāntaravijñaptiviśeṣāt santānāntare
vijñaptiviśeṣa utpadyate nārthaviśeṣāt. “Thus for all living beings
(sattva), due to the fact that representations influence each other,
there is accordingly a determination of representation[s] that is
mutual, i.e. [exerted] by each other. Therefore a particular
representation arises in one [conscious] stream due to the particular
representation of another [conscious] stream[, and] not due to a
particular [external] object.” Note that Vasubandhu, as well as
Sthiramati (see Schmithausen 2005: 44) and Dharmakīrti in the
Santānāntarasiddhi, call this influence of one conscious stream on the
others an adhipati/adhipatipratyaya an – expression used by the
Vijñānavādin portrayed by Utpaladeva in the last paragraph of the
fragment below. And whereas Vasubandhu seems to consider that thanks to
this influence the occurrence of specific representations can be
explained away without having recourse to an external object, Sthiramati
specifies that this influence does not produce the representational
object itself but only functions as some “controlling or directing
condition” (ibid.), and Dharmakīrti contrasts this influencing condition
on a conscious stream “A” of another conscious stream “B” with the
material cause (upādānakāraṇa) that the previous cognition in the
conscious stream “A” constitutes for the next cognition in that same
stream (Kitagawa 1955: 20-21).

24 See e.g. ĪPVV II: 126 (quoted below n 57) and ĪPVV: II: 144 (quoted
in Ratié 2010: 446; 2011a: 391).

25 ĪPV I: 174-75: anumīyamānam api ca bodhāntaram anumātr̥saṁmatād bodhād
yadi bhinnaṁ tad asti tāvat saṁbhavo yat prameyaṁ bodhād bhinnam astīti.
sahopalambhaniyamāder anaikāntikatvān nīlapītādināpi prameyarāśinā kim
apakr̥taṁ yenāsya svarūpaviśrāntir na sahyate. tasmāt pramātrantarāṇām
apy asiddhir eva. “Moreover, if the other consciousness being inferred
is distinct (bhinna) from the consciousness considered as the inferring
subject, then obviously, the possibility arises that the object of
consciousness [too] may be distinct from consciousness! Since [as a
consequence, Dharmakīrti’s idealistic arguments] such as ‘the necessity
[for the object] of being perceived along with [the cognition]’
(sahopalambhaniyama) are inconclusive, what crime have all objects – the
blue, the yellow, etc. – committed that would prevent them from resting
in their own nature [independently of the consciousness apprehending
them]? Therefore, [just as there can be no correct account of phenomenal
variety in the Vijñānavāda,] there can be no demonstration of [the
existence of] other subjects either.” Cf. Ratnakīrti’s remark in the
Santānāntaradūṣaṇa, p. 148: if other streams are admitted to exist
independently of the cognitive stream apprehending them, “then how does
one demonstrate that the external object too does not exist? For [then]
one can cast a doubt on this [non-existence of external objects] as
well” (tarhi bahirarthasyāpi katham abhāvaḥ sidhyati, śakyam hi tatrāpi
sandeham avatārayitum). On the Pratyabhijñā’s exploitation of
Dharmakīrti’s sahopalambhaniyama as formulated in PVin,
Pratyakṣapariccheda 54ab, see Ratié 2011b: 484-86.

26 See ĪPVV II: 128.

27 See, for example, the problem of the interpretation of ĪPV I: 173 and
my divergence with K.C. Pandey’s interpretation in particular (see
Bhāskarī III: 62; Ratié 2011a: 596-97, n 61): it seems to me that the
fragment definitely settles the matter of what the vyāpti attacked by
the Sautrāntika really is.

28 See Torella 1992.

29 As explained elsewhere (see Ratié 2011a: 644, n 133) I believe that
Dharmakīrti’s Santānāntarasiddhi mainly focuses on an epistemological
problem (how do we become aware of the existence of other conscious
streams?) and answers this problem by saying that the other conscious
streams are mere conceptual objects for us, i.e. that the assumption of
their existence is epistemologically valid in the sphere of human
practice (vyavahāra), but cannot be considered as an ultimate truth
since the existence of other streams remains impossible to perceive.
Nonetheless, later Buddhist authors claiming to belong to Dharmakīrti’s
tradition explicitly deny the ontological reality of other conscious
streams, as Ratnakīrti does in his Santānāntaradūṣaṇa (see Kajiyama
1965: 13).

30 On Utpaladeva’s refutation of the Sautrāntikas’ externalism, see
Ratié 2011b.

31 On Abhinavagupta’s and Rāmakaṇṭha’s quotations of this treatise see
Ratié 2011a: 591, nn 50-51.

32 See Ratié 2011b: 481, n 5, on the problematic identity of these
Sautrāntikas.

33 See ĪPVV II: 128. On the hypothesis that Dharmottara may have held a
theory similar to that ascribed by Abhinavagupta to the Sautrāntikas,
and on the ongoing debate among scholars regarding this issue, see e.g.
McCrea and Patil 2010: 141-42, n 71.

34 The passage is quoted on the margins of S3 ad ĪPK 1.5.4-5 (the folio
bears the number 40); it starts on the top of the page, extends on the
right margin down to the bottom of the page, and goes on in the left
margin down to the bottom of the page. The words quoted in
Abhinavagupta’s ĪPVV are underlined and in bold type. I have taken the
liberty of adding punctuation marks and of standardizing the use of the
sandhi whenever needed. Sanskrit words or syllables are in brackets
whenever the akṣaras are barely legible or illegible but obviously
required by the context. All my conjectural emendations are indicated in
footnotes.

35 A few akṣaras (four?) are illegible.

36 -vyāhārādy- conj.: -vyavahārādy- S3.

37 vyāhārādy- conj.: vyavahārādy- S3.

38 yadi hi conj.: yad iha S3.

39 From here on the text is noted on the left margin.

40 tatsadr̥śābhāsa- conj.: tattadr̥śābhāsa- S3.

41 yato’vabhāsānāṁ conj.: yathāvabhāsānāṁ S3.

42 pramātr̥ṣv ābhāsāparyavasānaṁ conj.: pramātr̥prābhā-saparyavasānaṁ S3.

43 nādhipatitvocitaikaiveti conj.: nādhipratitvocitaikaiveti S3.

44 See above, n 35.

45 Cf. ĪPVV II: 122: anyathaivety anapavāryety arthaḥ.

46 This is the reason why, according to the Vijñānavādin, we do know the
invariable concomitance between “I want to act” and “X is acting”: when
we act we are aware that our subjective will to act must produce the
awareness “he/she is acting” in other conscious streams – otherwise we
would not try to hide our actions, nor would we act while wanting the
others to see us. And since the invariable concomitance between “I want
to act” and “X is acting” is known, we can legitimately infer the
existence of a will to act in some other conscious subject when we have
the cognition “he/she is acting” – so our awareness that all our actions
are potential objects for other conscious subjects is the basis of our
inferential knowledge that other subjects exist.

47 See ĪPVV II: 122, quoted and translated in Ratié 2011a: 598-99, n 64.

48 See ĪPVV II: 123: dr̥śyatāṁ hi yadā pāmarakadāserakāv anyonyaṁ
ṣṭhīvato vādināv udgrāhayato yuvānau nr̥tyataḥ, tadāyaṁ para etaj jānātv
iti yad abhisandhānaṁ tat parapramātr̥jñānapūrvakam, parajñānaṁ ca
tathābhisandhijanitanr̥ttābhāsajñānapūrvakam ity anyonyāśrayam. tad āha
tathābhūteti. paratrotpadyatām ayam ābhāsa ity
etadabhisandhānajanito’yam vyāhārābhāsa iti. “For see: when two
low-caste men are spitting on each other, when two philosophers are
arguing, when two young persons are dancing, the intention [occurring]
[in the form]: ‘may this other [person] know this [action of mine]’ must
be preceded by the knowledge of [the existence of] the other subject;
and the knowledge of [the existence of] the other [subject] must be
preceded by the knowledge that the manifestation [in the other conscious
stream] of [my action of] dancing [etc.], results from such an intention
[of being perceived by others] – therefore there is a logical circle.
This is what [Utpaladeva] expresses [by saying] ‘[the manifestation of
the action of speaking,] which is such’ – [i.e.], the manifestation of
[the action of] speaking which is the result of this intention: ‘may
this manifestation [of my action] arise in [someone] else’.”

49 That is, if I understand correctly, the Vijñānavādin is accused here
of grounding his inference of the existence of other subjects on the
fact that my actions are particularized by a will to be perceived by the
others (which is why, according to him, the relation of cause and effect
between the subjective will “I want to speak” and the objective thought
“he/she is speaking” is already ascertained, and can be used as a
consequence to prove that the other subject exists in the form of a
subjective will causing my objective thought “he/she is speaking”),
whereas the very fact that my will is thus particularized already
presupposes the knowledge of the existence of other subjects. Cf. e.g.
ĪPV I: 173: vicchinna ābhāsaḥ paratrotpadyatām iti yā samīhā tayā saha
paratrotpannasya vicchinnābhāsasya kāryakāraṇabhāvagrahaṇam eva
parāsiddhau na yuktam. “The very fact that [I] apprehend the relation of
cause and effect between [my] will [to be heard while speaking – a will
that takes the form] ‘may a manifestation [of my action] separated [from
the subject, i.e. expressed as ‘he/she is speaking’,] arise in the other
[subject]’ – and the manifestation that occurs in the other [subject
and] is separated [from the subject, i.e. takes the form ‘he/she is
speaking’], is not possible if the other [subject] has not been
established [beforehand].”

50 See ĪPVV II: 124: tad anyena dhūmena yathāgnyantarasyāvagamas
tathānyena vicchinnanr̥ttādyavabhāsenānyasya pramātur avasānaṁ ghaṭeta.
“Then just as [we] learn [the existence] of fire, which is one thing,
through [the knowledge of the existence of] smoke, which is [something]
else, in the same way, [we] could determine [the existence of] the
[other] subject, which is one [thing], through a manifestation which is
[something else] such as dancing and so on [since this manifestation
does not take the form ‘I am dancing’ characteristic of a conscious
stream, but rather, is] separated [from the subject in the form ‘he/she
dances’, etc.].”

51 See ĪPVV II: 124: anyata iti pratyakṣāt.

52 According to Abhinavagupta’s commentary (ĪPVV II: 124), Utpaladeva is
now showing that there is no invariable concomitance between the
subjective desire to be seen acting and the objective cognition “X is
acting” (so that the Vijñānavādin cannot rightly claim that the other
subject can be inferred on the basis of the logical pervasion between
these two).

53 That is, my action might not be seen by anybody, whether I want
others to see it or not; and conversely, my action might be seen by
others whereas I do not have any particular intention of showing it to
others: cf. Abhinavagupta’s example of the crying child in ĪPVV I: 124
(see Ratié 2007: 330-31; 2011a: 599).

54 See ĪPVV II: 125: yaḥ pramātā maitraḥ, tasmād avicchinna eva yo
vyāharāmīty ābhāsaḥ svātmani pratyakṣapratibhāsī. . . “The manifestation
‘I am speaking’ that is not separated from the subject [called] Maitra
[and] involves a perceptual image (pratyakṣapratibhāsin) in myself
(svātman) . . .”

55 The passage is difficult and I am not sure whether my interpretation
is correct. At any rate here is what I understand: the Vijñānavādin’s
opponent has just explained that the intention (abhisandhi) of the
speaker willing to be heard by others is not enough to ascertain the
existence of other subjects, and he now explains that the existence of
other subjects must rather be established from the fact that the same
action of speaking is perceived both by the speaker (in the subjective
form “I am speaking”) and by the hearer (in the objective form “he/she
is speaking”) and is determined (avadhārita) in both cases according to
the same spatio-temporal conditions – a fact that the Vijñānavādin is
precisely incapable of justifying. Abhinavagupta considers that here the
Śaiva non-dualist is still speaking and anticipating on his own
explanation of intersubjectivity: according to him, the Śaiva
non-dualistic perspective justifies this unity of experiences belonging
to several subjects in so far as it considers all these subjects as
limited aspects that the all-powerful and all-encompassing consciousness
freely takes on while playfully dividing and synthesizing its
innumerable manifestations. See ĪPVV II: 125: tasminn eva yataś caitraḥ
pramātā parameśvareṇābhāsāntaraikyād upasaṁhr̥tyaikībhāvena sr̥ṣṭaḥ . . .
, tataḥ so ’pi sarvaṁ maitravad evāvabudhyate, paratas tu
śarīrādyahaṁbhāvadārḍhyāt svaparavibhāgagaṇanānapagamād* vikalpayati
maitro vyāharatīty evam īśvaravādisaṁmatam etat. [*-gaṇanānapagamād
conj.: -gaṇanāpagamād ĪPVV] “Because the Highest Lord, after withdrawing
[the individual called Caitra] from the unity of [all] other
manifestations, has created the subject [called] Caitra as being one
[with the subject Maitra] with respect to this very [manifestation of
speech subjectively apprehended in Maitra as ‘I am speaking’], [. . .]
this [Caitra] too is aware of everything exactly as Maitra is; but on
the other hand, because [Caitra] does not cease taking into account the
distinction between himself and the other(s) due to the strength of his
self-identification with his body [, intellect, vital breath and void
which are mere objects that he wrongly considers as himself], he
conceptualizes [this manifestation] in this form: ‘Maitra is speaking’ –
this is the opinion of the proponent of the [non-duality with] the
Lord.” However, Abhinavagupta also considers that up to this point, the
discourse of the protagonist fighting with the Vijñānavādin could be
interpreted as an expression of the Sautrāntika’s opinion
(bāhyavādimata, ibid.). I assume that this is the case because so far
this protagonist has not explained how this unity of experiences
pertaining to various subjects is possible (the Śaiva non-dualist
explains it as a result of the dynamism of consciousness, which is
capable of dividing itself without ceasing to be one, whereas the
Sautrāntika justifies it by having recourse to the existence of an
external world common to all subjects). But whatever the interpretation
chosen, what matters here, according to Abhinavagupta, is the assertion
that the sphere of human practice (vyavahāra) has a fundamental unity
that must be accounted for. See ibid.: ekarūpatā tāvad
vyavahārasyānenoktā. “In any case (tāvat), the [passage] expresses the
unity of the sphere of mundane practice.”

56 According to Abhinavagupta, from here on the Sautrāntika is speaking
again. See ĪPVV II: 126: sā ca bāhyatāyām apīti labdhocchvāso bāhyavādy
āha: evaṁ ceti . . . “And the externalist, who has regained faith [in
the possibility of his victory thanks to the intervention of the Śaiva
non-dualist and considers that] this [unity of the sphere of human
practice is possible] in the externalist perspective as well, says: ‘And
[it is thus] . . .’.”

57 See ĪPVV II: 126: aparathā kampate maitra iti yaś caitrasyābhāsas
taddeśābhāsasahitaḥ, sa brahmalokasthamaitrābh-
idhānapramātrantarajanito na bhavatīti kuto niścayaḥ. “Otherwise how
could [we] be certain that the manifestation ‘Maitra is moving’ that
belongs to Caitra[’s conscious stream and] is associated with the
manifestation of the place [where Caitra is perceiving Maitra] is not
[in fact] produced by another subject called ‘Maitra’ who resides in
Brahma’s world?” Abhinavagupta explains that the Sautrāntika is
insisting on the fact that the other subject must be associated with the
particular time and place where I perceive him/her to exist because he
considers that the Vijñānavādin, according to whom there is no external
world, is unable to account for this fact. See ĪPVV II: 126: evaṁ
taddeśatvādyanavadhāraṇadoṣam uktvā doṣāntaram api vijñānavādina
āpādayaty evaṁ ceti. “Having thus formulated the fault [in the
Vijñānavādin’s thesis consisting in] the fact that the [other subject’s]
existence in that [very] place, etc., cannot be determined
(anavadhāraṇa), he brings about another fault of the Vijñānavādin [in
the sentence beginning with] ‘moreover, since it is so. . .’.” This
accusation is of course reminiscent of the externalist’s objection
addressed by Vasubandhu at the beginning of the Viṁśikā, and as a matter
of fact Abhinavagupta quotes Viṁśikā 2 while commenting on this passage.
See ibid.: tat satyam uktam: na deśakālaniyamaḥ santānaniyamo na । na ca
kr̥tyakriyā yuktā vijñaptir yadi nārthataḥ ।। iti. “Therefore it has
rightly been said that ‘If representation (vijñapti) does not [arise]
from an [external] object, there [can be] no restriction (niyama) [of
this representation to a particular] place and time, nor any restriction
[of this representation to a particular conscious] stream; nor is
efficacy possible [, since dreamt or illusory objects lack efficacy].”

58 According to Abhinavagupta, the gist of the argument about to be
formulated here is as follows: the existence of the other subject must
be inferred on the grounds that a form which is manifest in something as
if it were external to the nature of that thing must have been projected
onto that thing by something else, just as the form of a pot in a mirror
must be the projection of a pot existing outside the mirror. See ibid.:
etāvad eva hi tadā syād yad yatrābhāti* svarūpabahirbhūtam iva ca, tad
anyataḥ saṁkrāntaṁ darpaṇa iva ghaṭādiḥ . . . caitrapramātari cābhāti
vyāhāraḥ svarūpabahirbhāvena maitro vyāharatīti, tad anenānyataḥ
saṁkrāntena bhavitavyam iti svabhāvahetuḥ. [*yad yatrābhāti corr.: yady
atrābhāti ĪPVV] “For then this only can be [admitted by the
Vijñānavādin]: a [thing A] that is manifest in a [thing B] and [is
manifest there] as if it were external to the nature [of B] is [a form]
that has passed [onto B] (saṁkrānta) from [something] else, just as a
pot in a mirror for instance [is the form of a pot external to the
mirror that has passed onto the mirror]. [. . .] And the speech [of
Maitra] is manifest in the subject [called] Caitra as being external to
the nature [of Caitra, in the form] ‘Maitra is speaking’; therefore this
[speech] must be [a form] passed onto [Caitra’s consciousness] from some
other [entity, i.e. another subject] – therefore the inferential reason
[on which the inference of the other subjects’ existence is based] is a
nature [and not an effect].” This thesis is of course reminiscent of the
way in which the Sautrāntika demonstrates the existence of the external
world by inferring the existence of a “reflected object” (bimba)
projecting its form onto consciousness and thus accounting for the
variety and specificity of our perceptions (see Ratié 2011a: 368-76;
2011b: 481-84). But as far as I understand, here the Sautrāntika is
pointing out that the Vijñānavādin is compelled to accept this
explanation of the way we become aware of the other subjects (because he
has no other option left, and also because the thesis that several
streams of consciousness reflect their images onto each other is still
compatible with his idealism and seems to have been held at least by
some Vijñānavādins: see above, nn 22-23). And the Sautrāntika is
insisting on this point because he wants to show (as he will in the next
paragraph) that this explanation of our awareness that other subjects
exist necessarily leads to his own thesis, namely, that of the existence
of an external world.

59 According to Abhinavagupta, the Sautrāntika is explaining here that
the Vijñānavādin has to admit defeat (by conceding the existence of
external objects) because the only idealistic option left to him in this
discussion leads to absurd consequences. This option consists in
considering that the phenomenal variety in my own conscious stream is
ultimately due to manifestations occurring in other conscious streams
and projecting their reflections onto my conscious stream, just as, when
another subject has the cognition “I am speaking”, his/her action is
reflected in my conscious stream in the form “he/she is acting”. This
thesis (on which see above, nn 22-23) has the advantage of enabling the
Vijñānavādin to acknowledge the existence of other subjects while not
having recourse to any reality external to consciousness (since the
universe is then nothing but a variety of consciousnesses reflecting
onto each other their own manifestations). But it is problematic for two
reasons. First, if it were the case then all the manifestations of
objects occurring in one conscious stream should occur in all the
others, so that every conscious stream would be simultaneously conscious
of all objects. Second, the manifestation of an object in a given
conscious stream, which supposedly projects its form onto other
conscious streams, must be considered itself as some sort of reflection
since it appears objectively, in the form “this”, i.e. as separated from
the subject perceiving it, and since it has been established that an
objective thought such as “he/she is speaking” must be a reflection in
one conscious stream of a subjective thought “I am speaking” in some
other conscious stream. If any manifestation of an object in a given
conscious stream is to be considered as a reflection of a manifestation
in some other conscious stream, then in order to avoid an infinite
regress (since my thought “the pot” must be a reflection of somebody
else’s thought “the pot”, which in turn is a reflection of somebody
else’s thought, etc.), we could consider that the objective thought “the
pot” ultimately amounts to the subjective thought “I am the pot” or “I
am manifest [as] the pot”, just as my objective thought “he/she is
speaking” is in fact a reflection of somebody else’s subjective thought
“I am speaking”. But then, as Abhinavagupta points out, we would have to
admit that all objects are ultimately one and the same thing, namely,
the “I”, and phenomenal variety could not be accounted for. The only way
to escape the infinite regress is therefore to admit that this
phenomenal variety has as its cause the existence of entities that are
external to consciousness. See ĪPVV II: 127: sarva eva
pramātrantaravartina ābhāsāḥ samarpakāḥ prāptā viśeṣābhāvāt.
darpaṇadvaye’pi hy anyonyapratibimbārpaṇe’saṁkhyapratibimbodayaḥ, kim-
aṅga pramātr̥koṭiparārdhānām anyonyapratibimbārpaṇe. tad āhāparyavasānaṁ
syād iti. kiṁ ca samarpakasaṁmato’pi pramātrantaravarty asāv ābhāso
’smadarthaviśrāntivailakṣaṇyenedam iti nirbhāsamānaḥ
pr̥thagbhāvābhimānayogyatvāt pratibimbakalpa iti tasyāpy arpakeṇa
bhāvyam, tatrāpy evam ity anavasthā. tatparihārāya tu paryante ghaṭa
evāsmadarthasaṁbhinnaḥ sakalapramātr̥vyatirikta
ābhāsanasāro’bhyupagantavyo’haṁ ghaṭo bhāsa ity evaṁrūpaḥ. tatrāpi ca
ghaṭatā yadi nādhikā tad ahaṁ ghaṭo ’haṁ paṭa iti nirbhāsamānayor
ghaṭapaṭayor aikyam eva syāt. adhikā cet tatrāpi pratibimbateti
bimbenānyena bhavitavyam ābhāsarūpatāśūnyeneti bāhya evārthaḥ siddhaḥ.
“[In that case] all the manifestations without exception that exist in
the other subjects would as a consequence be projecting [their forms
onto my conscious stream,] since there is no difference [between them
that would prevent some of them from thus projecting their form]. For
even when two mirrors project reflections onto each other, countless
reflections arise – all the more if innumerable subjects project their
reflections onto each other! This is what [the Sautrāntika portrayed by
Utpaladeva] expresses [by saying that] ‘there would be an infinite
number [of manifestations in each of the subjects’]. Moreover, although
this manifestation [of a pot] existing in another subject is considered
as what projects [its reflection onto my consciousness, since it is]
manifest [in the form] ‘this’, [i.e.] as [something] that does not rest
on the first [grammatical] person, it is similar to a reflection, since
it can be associated with the belief that it exists separately [from the
subject, in the form ‘this’ and not in the form ‘I’, and since we are
assuming for the sake of argumentation that all the objective
manifestations in my conscious stream are reflections of a subjective
manifestation in some other conscious stream]. Therefore this
[reflection] too must have [something that produces it by] projecting
[its form, and] that [thing projecting its form too] requires [a third
projecting entity in so far as it must be a reflection as well];
therefore there is an infinite regress. But in order to avoid this
[infinite regress, we] could acknowledge that in the end the pot itself,
which is [apprehended as an object, i.e. as being] distinct from the
first grammatical person [and] separated from all subjects, has as its
essence the [subjective conscious] manifestation which takes such a
form: ‘I am manifest [as] the pot’. And in that case too, if being a pot
is nothing more [than an internal, subjective manifestation,] then the
pot and the cloth, which should be manifest [in the same subjective
form] ‘I am the pot, I am the cloth’ would just be one and the same
[thing]. But if [being a pot] is something more than [an internal aspect
of consciousness,] in that case too [this manifestation] is a
reflection; therefore there must be some other [entity] that is the
reflected object (bimba) [projecting its form onto consciousness and]
that does not consist [in turn] in a [conscious] manifestation [but
rather, is external to it] – therefore the [existence] of the external
object is established.”

60 See ĪPVV II: 127: aparyavasānadoṣaparijihīrṣāṁ parakīyāṁ
śaṁkate’thāpīti. vāsanāprabodhamātre teṣāṁ vyāpāro na
svapratibimbārpaṇe, vāsanā ca ghaṭasahasrair api pūrvaghaṭānubhavajanitā
pratibodhitā tam evaikaṁ pūrvānubhūtaghaṭābhāsam unmeṣayati, tato
nāparyavasānātmābhāsānām atiprasaṅgaḥ. “[With the words] ‘But still’,
[Utpaladeva] states as an objection the opponent’s desire to avoid the
fault of an infinite number [of manifestations in each conscious stream.
Here is what the opponent means:] the activity of the [manifestations
occurring in other conscious streams] only concerns the awakening of
imprints [in my conscious stream, but] not the projection of a
reflection of their own [form into my conscious stream]; and the
imprint, which has been produced by previous experiences of pots, [i.e.]
by innumerable pots, makes this manifestation of a previously
experienced pot arise [and] this [manifestation] only; therefore there
is no absurd consequence [in our position that would] consist in an
infinite number of manifestations.”

7

