Utpaladeva’s Proof of God

On the Purpose of the Īśvarasiddhi*

Isabelle Ratié

In his short treatise entitled Īśvarasiddhi (ĪS),1 Utpaladeva claims to
prove the existence of God or the Lord (īśvara)2 understood as an
omnipotent and omniscient creator of the universe. As noted by John
Taber and Helmut Krasser,3 this very goal seems to be at odds with
Utpaladeva’s own statement at the beginning of his magnum opus, the ĪPK,
according to which the Lord can be neither proved nor refuted since it
is always experienced in any conscious individual’s self-awareness.
Several passages scattered in the works of Utpaladeva and his
commentator Abhinavagupta show that this should not be considered as a
blatant contradiction, since according to them, the ĪS was not written
from the ultimate point of view (paramārtha) of non-duality (advaya)4
adopted by Utpaladeva in his Pratyabhijñā works, but from the inferior
point of view of duality, which several scholars have recognized as that
of Nyāya. Nonetheless, these scant and allusive indications leave open a
number of questions: is Utpaladeva’s ĪS an original contribution to the
Indian debate over the existence of God, or does it merely reformulate
arguments put forward earlier? In what way(s) does Utpaladeva’s method
in the ĪS differ from that which he adopts in his ĪPK? And most of all:
why did Utpaladeva take the trouble of writing a treatise that he
himself did not consider as an expression of the ultimate truth?

The Main Argument in the ĪS and Its Naiyāyika Sources

As already noted by several scholars,5 the proof establishing the
existence of the Lord that Utpaladeva defends in the ĪS belongs to the
Nyāya tradition. The argument is an inference “from the fact that [the
universe] is an effect” (kāryatvāt) requiring a cause. More precisely,
this inference is drawn from the fact that the universe is an effect
consisting of a specific arrangement (sanniveśaviśeṣa) that must have
been created by an intelligent agent (buddhimatkartr̥)6 considered as its
efficient cause (nimittakāraṇa), as no material cause (upādānakāraṇa)
can account for this specific arrangement;7 and given the infinite
complexity and internal harmony of the universe, this intelligent agent
must be omniscient and omnipotent — i.e. it is God.8

This famous Nyāya line of argument apparently found its first
formulation in the lost work of Aviddhakarṇa,9 and Uddyotakara, whom
Abhinavagupta explicitly mentions as one of the Naiyāyika authors of the
proof,10 alludes to the inference of īśvara from the fact that some
natural entities are effects11 and defends the thesis that natural
entities endowed with specific arrangements (such as bodies) must have
an efficient cause which, even though imperceptible, can be inferred on
the grounds of their sharing similar features with human artefacts such
as pots, since the latter display a specific arrangement (racanāviśeṣa,
saṁsthānaviśeṣa)12 and have a perceptible efficient cause, i.e. the
potter.13 The same idea was elaborated by later Naiyāyika authors who in
all probability lived before Utpaladeva, such as Śaṅkarasvāmin and
Jayanta Bhaṭṭa, or who may have been younger or older contemporaries,
such as Trilocana, Vācaspatimiśra or Bhāsarvajña.14 As for Utpaladeva’s
contention that the efficient cause of the universe must be not only
omnipotent but also omniscient due to the very nature of its effect, it
can also be traced back to earlier, Vaiśeṣika and Nyāya sources such as
Praśastapāda’s lost Ṭīkā on the Vaiśeṣika-Sūtras15 or Jayanta Bhaṭṭa’s
Nyāyamañjarī,16 and it is also found in Vācaspatimiśra’s Nyāyakaṇikā17
or Udayana’s Ātmatattvaviveka.18

The Mīmāṁsaka and Buddhist Objections

The ĪS defends this inference of īśvara against Mīmāṁsaka and Buddhist
objections. Utpaladeva thus quotes a passage from the ŚV where Kumārila
shows that the example of a specific arrangement on which the proponent
of God’s existence relies (i.e. the pot, which is observed to require
the agency of a potter) is problematic: either the pot is considered as
the product of the potter (but then the example shows that a specific
arrangement is the product of a finite, perishable entity such as a
potter instead of proving God’s agency, so that the reason invoked is
contradictory), or the pot is considered as the product of īśvara (but
then the example actually lacks the property to be proven since nobody
has ever seen God create a pot, and the reason invoked is
inconclusive).19

Utpaladeva also quotes Dharmakīrti,20 who, while apparently building on
Kumārila’s criticism of the proof,21 argues that one can only infer a
particular agent from a particular specific arrangement that has
previously been observed to be causally dependent on this particular
agent — otherwise one could infer that an anthill is the product of a
potter from the mere fact that an anthill is also made of clay.22
According to the Buddhist philosopher, the theist’s inferential reason
is too broad since it appeals to the notion of “specific arrangement” in
general, a notion which rests on a mere “verbal similarity”
(śabdasāmya),23 instead of referring to particular, concrete instances
of specific arrangements.24

Utpaladeva’s Reply to the Mīmāṁsaka and

Buddhist Objections

Utpaladeva salvages the inference from Kumārila’s criticism by
explaining that in fact the inference does not establish any particular
agent (such as a potter or God), but merely shows the necessary
concomitance of any entity possessing a specific arrangement with a
cause conceived of as an intelligent being in general
(buddhimanmātra).25 This means that Kumārila cannot rightly compel his
opponent to face the alternative between the potter and God as
particular causes of a particular arrangement.26 Utpaladeva adds that
nonetheless, this inferred notion of an intelligent being in general is
particularized by its very relationship with the particular effect from
which it is inferred.27 Thus upon seeing smoke over a forest of khadira
trees, we infer the presence there of fire in general, but the general
concept of fire is then legitimately particularized as a special type of
fire (i.e. a khadira fire) because we see that the smoke is located in a
khadira forest, so that the particular substrate (āśraya) of this fire
in general can only be a khadira fire.28 In the same way, in the case of
the inference of īśvara, we infer a cause merely conceived of as an
intelligent being in general, but we are then led to specify this cause
as being God himself due to the specific property of the subject of the
inference (pakṣadharma),29 i.e. due to the specific nature of the effect
that is the universe, since only an omnipotent and omniscient entity
could be the cause of such a complex and harmonious structure.30 And in
the inference of God as well as in the inference of the khadira fire,
the cause is not particularized through any additional means of
knowledge, but through the very inferential mechanism that has first led
us to assume the existence of a cause in general,31 so that the
proponent of īśvara cannot be accused of being unable to prove more than
the fact that the universe has some unspecified cause.32

As for Dharmakīrti’s criticism, Utpaladeva responds to it by saying that
indeed, we infer the existence of a particular intelligent cause (e.g. a
potter) from that of a particular specific arrangement (e.g. a pot) when
we can observe their invariable concomitance, but that the particular
arrangement thus established to be an effect enables us in turn to
establish that other particular arrangements of the same kind (sajātīya)
are also effects of an intelligent cause, just as a particular smoke
that has been established by experience to be an effect of fire enables
us to consider other particular instances of smoke as effects of fire
even though we cannot actually witness the particular fires causing
them.33 Admittedly, the particulars that display a specific arrangement
differ from each other (a pot is neither an anthill nor a cloth, etc.)
in so far as some of the causes contributing to their production are
different, but they are also similar in some respects, i.e. in so far as
they share some causal conditions: a pot is similar to an anthill in so
far as both have the same material cause, namely clay,34 and since the
Buddhists themselves acknowledge the distinction between material and
efficient cause, they must admit these partial similarities.35 Besides,
while denying the reality of universals (jāti), the Buddhists
acknowledge that particulars (svalakṣaṇa) are similar in so far as they
have the same causal efficiency. Now, although we are aware that a pot
and a cloth do not have the same specific arrangement, we make efforts
to use them as tools because we conceptualize these objects as capable
of accomplishing a specific purpose, and we are aware of this purpose
because we are aware that both the pot and the cloth were designed to
this end by an intelligent agent.36 Since such particulars as the pot
and the cloth are capable of producing the same awareness in us in spite
of their differences, in this respect they have the same causal
efficiency, and the Buddhists should accordingly admit their (partial)
similarity.37 Natural composite entities display a specific arrangement
in which each part is arranged in such a way that it helps the other
parts perform their respective functions; and this invariable harmony
(for instance between man and woman) is similar to that found in any
artefact that we have observed to be designed by an intelligent being;
we are therefore entitled to infer that they too were produced by an
intelligent agent.38

The Naiyāyika Sources of Utpaladeva’s Reply

to the Buddhists and Mīmāṁsakas

How original are Utpaladeva’s responses to these antitheistic attacks?
John Taber has noticed that Utpaladeva seems to rely on Jayanta Bhaṭṭa’s
Nyāyamañjarī.39 Indeed, Jayanta replies to Dharmakīrti that in fact God
can be inferred as a cause in general since all inferences involve some
kind of generality: if we clung to the various particularities of the
fire and smoke directly witnessed (e.g. in a kitchen) when first
realizing the invariable concomitance between fire and smoke, we would
be incapable of inferring later the existence of a fire on a hill from
the presence there of a smoke that differs in many respects from the
smoke once seen in the kitchen.40 And according to him, there is no
point in asserting that the general notion of arrangement to which the
theist has recourse is based on a mere verbal similarity (śabdasāmya)
and not on a real one (vastusāmya), since the Buddhists themselves do
not consider such a general notion as “fire” to be real, and yet they
consider that we produce this artificial notion through a process of
exclusion (apoha) of real particulars and that such general notions can
lead to a valid inferential knowledge.41 Jayanta further points out (and
here too, his thought seems to find an echo in the ĪS) that arrangements
are not entirely similar to each other and insists that nonetheless,
they do share a partial similarity in so far as they are all specific
configurations.42 The Naiyāyika also explains that in the inference of
īśvara, one only infers an agent in general, but that this agent is then
particularized as having such specific attributes as omniscience, and
among the ways of determining these particularities he mentions the
property of the subject of the inference (pakṣadharma) to which
Utpaladeva also has recourse while answering Kumārila’s objection, and
he gives an example (the inference of a sandalwood fire) very similar to
that used by Utpaladeva (the inference of a khadira fire).43

In this respect John Taber has noticed that Utpaladeva’s formulation
seems to be an improvement on Jayanta’s. For Jayanta’s explanation seems
to imply that it is the special characteristic of the inferential reason
(hetu) itself that enables the specification of the property to be
established (sādhya): it is because one sees a sandalwood smoke that
looks different from other kinds of smoke that one can infer the
presence of a sandalwood fire; but this explanation is problematic in so
far as it “threatens the general connection between sādhya and hetu (if
sandalwood smoke looks different from other kinds of smoke, how do you
know that it is the effect of fire?)”.44 In contrast, according to
Utpaladeva, the inferential reason is “mere smoke” or “smoke in
general”, and the sādhya’s specification rather “takes place strictly
with reference to the subject (pakṣa) of the inference, as a sort of
afterthought”.45 Nonetheless, as Jayanta himself makes clear, the
argument of the specification through pakṣadharma is no novelty:46 it
was put forward by some earlier Naiyāyika47 and it recurs in other
Naiyāyika works such as those of Vācaspatimiśra48 or Vittoka.49 Besides,
the idea that this specification only comes as an “afterthought” while
not being the product of a second inference, i.e. is only the explicit
development of an implicit necessity involved in the very inferential
process which establishes a cause in general, is a topos of earlier
Nyāya literature.50

The Sāṁkhya Objection

Finally, Utpaladeva presents a lengthy defence of the Naiyāyika
inference against the Sāṁkhya objection that specific designs can in
fact be the result of the sole unconscious primordial nature (prakr̥ti)
or matter (pradhāna).51 He thus answers an objection that was put
forward by Sāṁkhya authors who may not have denied the very existence of
īśvara52 but who none the less set out to refute his agency and argued
that the universe is nothing but the activity of prakr̥ti.53 To the
argument that primordial nature can only be considered as a material
cause (upādāna) and not as the efficient cause (nimitta) that is
precisely the point in debate,54 the Sāṁkhya opponent portrayed by
Utpaladeva replies in turn that primordial nature does not transform
itself randomly, nor for its own sake (svārtha),55 but for the sake of
the pure, passive consciousness that the Sāṁkhya calls puruṣa; and
according to him, the efficient cause of the universe is nothing but
primordial nature’s property of being “for the benefit of the Person”
(puruṣārtha).56

This specific purpose of prakr̥ti explains away the seemingly
pre-established harmony of the universe: 57 primordial nature transforms
itself into the variegated structures that constitute the phenomenal
world so as to fulfil a double purpose for the sake of the puruṣa,
namely, enabling the individual to experience pain and pleasure
according to his merit and demerit, and leading him to liberation
through the discrimination between prakr̥ti and puruṣa.58 Since such a
primordial nature acting for the benefit of the Person is enough to
account for the specific arrangements that constitute the universe,
there is no need to postulate īśvara as their efficient cause.59

Utpaladeva’s Reply to the Sāṁkhya Objection

In response to this objection, Utpaladeva explains first that if the
purposefulness of prakr̥ti were the sole efficient cause of all things
possessing design, a pot would not need a potter: the very fact that its
material cause is for the benefit of individuals would be enough to
produce it.60 But if the Sāṁkhya concedes that in the case of the pot,
the specific arrangement requires a potter, why not assume it in the
case of the universe as well?61 Utpaladeva also points out that a
material cause cannot give rise to a structure specifically designed to
serve a human purpose, because it is unconscious: such a creation
requires a creative desire (cikīrṣā) or will (icchā) as well as a
synthetic awareness (anusaṁdhāna) of what should be done or avoided so
as to obtain a specific effect, and these are not found in material
entities.62 Admittedly, according to the Sāṁkhya, primordial nature,
although unconscious, is capable of knowledge in so far as it transforms
itself into the intellect (buddhi),63 which in turn is capable of desire
or will and synthetic awareness, since it produces determination
(adhyavasāya),64 so that it can know the benefit of the Person.65 But
Utpaladeva argues that determination, will or synthetic knowledge cannot
be manifest before primordial nature starts transforming itself, since
according to the Sāṁkhya, at that time primordial nature is
unmanifest.66And even assuming that matter takes the form of the
intellect in order to manifest them, since buddhi is a material entity,
it needs to be reflected upon by a conscious entity, i.e. a puruṣa,
because will and synthetic awareness are types of awareness.67 But
again, since this manifestation of the intellect and its apprehension by
a conscious entity supposedly constitute the very cause of primordial
nature’s evolution, they must take place before primordial nature has
evolved into an intellect differentiated according to each individual;68
and given that these creative will and synthetic awareness must concern
the whole universe, they can only belong to a special puruṣa
transcending individuality and endowed with omniscience, i.e. īśvara.69

The Naiyāyika Sources of Utpaladeva’s Reply

to the Sāṁkhya Objection

John Taber finds rather strange the length of this discussion with
Sāṁkhya (which spreads over about two thirds of Utpaladeva’s tract),
since according to him, Utpaladeva’s zeal in attacking the Sāṁkhya
position contrasts with the Nyāya’s relative indifference to this
opponent, and since the Sāṁkhya does not seem to have been an
influential school in Utpaladeva’s time.70 However, it is worth noting
that Uddyotakara, the only Naiyāyika author whom Abhinavagupta
explicitly mentions in connection with the demonstration of the
existence of īśvara, devotes an important part of his proof to the
refutation of the Sāṁkhya position. Thus Uddyotakara sets out to show
that primordial nature requires an intelligent controller,71 and he too
attempts to refute the Sāṁkhya thesis that the efficient cause of these
arrangements is nothing but matter’s property of being for the benefit
of the puruṣa.72 He argues (as Utpaladava does later) that there can be
no awareness of objects or of the distinction between primordial nature
and the Person (although this awareness constitutes the puruṣārtha) at
the very moment when matter starts acting, since according to the
Sāṁkhya system, such an awareness can only arise when matter has already
transformed itself into the intellect.73 Uddyotakara also criticizes the
Sāṁkhya contention that matter can act although it is unconscious by
pointing out that this is a dogmatic assertion rather than a
demonstrated fact.74

Nonetheless, John Taber rightly emphasizes that Utpaladeva’s treatment
of the Sāṁkhya objection seems to go “somewhat beyond the measure of
interest in this school among Naiyāyikas”.75 Besides, Uddyotakara’s
arguments often differ from those found in the ĪS in so far as the
former mainly target the Sāṁkhya doctrine of satkāryavāda and the
corollary principle that nothing new can be brought into existence,76
whereas Utpaladeva’s main line of argument against the Sāṁkhya (namely,
the idea that action requires a will and knowledge only found in
conscious entities, and that they cannot be a mere product of the
intellect understood as a material entity) seems to be found only in
embryonic form in the Nyāyavārttika. It does appear in Bhāsarvajña’s
criticism of the Sāṁkhya thesis,77 but Utpaladeva and Bhāsarvajña seem
to have been more or less contemporary, and I am not aware of any clue
that would entitle us to determine which author may have borrowed from
the other. Furthermore, Bhāsarvajña is known to have entertained a view
of the Self heterodox in Nyāya,78 and his refutation of the Sāṁkhya
objection, which involves this peculiar definition of the Self, may not
reflect the orthodox Naiyāyika position.

How Original Is Utpaladeva’s Proof of God?

To sum up, although Utpaladeva’s formulation of the Nyāya proof of
īśvara might have influenced some of the later authors engaging in this
controversy,79 on the whole, the ĪS does not seem to bring anything new
in the debate: it merely reformulates older Naiyāyika arguments.80 The
only exception appears to be Utpaladeva’s treatment of the Sāṁkhya
position. Does this exception constitute a real novelty (perhaps
motivated by Utpaladeva’s desire to refute at length a theory that
leaves no room whatsoever for consciousness in cosmic creation),81 or is
this apparent oddity due (at least to some extent) to the fact that
Utpaladeva is in fact relying on other texts that we have not examined
so far? Before answering this question, let us first inquire into the
meaning that Utpaladeva himself ascribes to the ĪS.

The Inferior Point of View of the Īśvarasiddhi, or

the Difference between Proof (siddhi) and

Recognition (pratyabhijñā)

In the final verse of the ĪS, Utpaladeva explains:

If the Lord shines forth internally [as] the very Self of all living
beings, [as] the agent and knower, only the recognition (pratyabhijñā)
[that] this [Lord is ourselves] is to be performed. And I have explained
elsewhere how it can be brought about; nonetheless, it is [also]
appropriate [to show] that even in duality (dvaita), there is a proof of
the Lord (īśvarasiddhi) – a fire burns brighter in the night.82

Utpaladeva himself considers that in fact no īśvarasiddhi is possible:
the Lord cannot be proved to exist but only “recognized”. The reason for
this is that according to the non-dualistic doctrine propounded by
Utpaladeva in the Pratyabhijñā treatise, nothing exists apart from the
Lord understood as an omnipotent and omniscient consciousness that
playfully manifests itself in the innumerable forms that constitute the
universe, and living beings are nothing but this all-encompassing
consciousness freely choosing to appear as this or that limited
individual. From this perspective, no demonstration of īśvara is
possible, because īśvara is the very Self (ātman) of all living beings,
and because this Self is “always already established” (ādisiddha): 83 no
means of knowledge (pramāṇa) can establish its existence because by
definition, means of knowledge function by bringing about a new
knowledge,84 but any individual is always already aware of the Lord
through the most immediate experience, i.e. self-awareness
(svasaṁvedana).85 Besides, all inferential knowledge is useless when it
comes to īśvara, because īśvara is a pure transcendental subjectivity
that cannot be grasped as an object of knowledge (prameya), whereas
rational discourse is bound to objectify whatever it talks about.86
Nevertheless, because īśvara playfully forgets his own sovereignty while
assuming the role of limited, suffering individuals, these individuals
must be led to recognize themselves as the Lord, and such a recognition
can be brought about by making them aware of their own powers of
knowledge and action, which are precisely those of the Lord. This
recognition, far from producing any new knowledge, merely uncovers or
unveils a knowledge of which the individual was never deprived87 but to
which he no longer pays attention due to some delusion (moha) through
which consciousness hides its very nature from itself.88

Admittedly, Abhinavagupta acknowledges that the Pratyabhijñā treatise
too takes the form of what the Naiyāyikas call an inference for
others.89 Nonetheless this inference, far from resting on “an
inferential reason that is an effect” (kāryahetu) in the manner of the
Naiyāyikas’ kāryatva argument, is based on “an inferential reason that
is a nature” (svabhāvahetu): 90 instead of proving īśvara as the cause
of a universe conceived as an effect distinct from it, it proves that
the individual’s Self is the Lord on the grounds that this Self is
endowed with the very powers ascribed to the Lord. And contrary to a
kāryahetu inference, a svabhāvahetu inference does not produce any new
knowledge, but merely establishes the validity of a usage (vyavahāra).91
In other words, it does not prove the hitherto unestablished fact that
the Lord is the Self: it merely shows that it is legitimate to say that
the Self is the Lord and to behave accordingly, just as showing that an
object seen in front of us is a pot because it possesses the features
that characterize a pot does not make us know the pot (which we already
perceive), but enables us to talk and act in accordance with the fact
that it is a pot.92 And if all inferential knowledge is bound to
objectify the pure subjectivity in which īśvara consists, the
Pratyabhijñā path is paradoxically conceived as a rational path capable
of bringing about recognition because it leads the subject to the very
limit of rationality: in the inference of the Pratyabhijñā treatise, the
nature (svabhāva) that is to be recognized as that of īśvara is
precisely the individual’s experience that he or she cannot be reduced
to a mere object of knowledge, and inducing recognition consists in
letting the individual realize that the aspect of him or her which
resists any attempt of conceptualization, or which “cannot bear to be
grasped as a [mere] object” (idantāvimarśāsahiṣṇu),93 is precisely the
Lord.94

In the Pratyabhijñā treatise, Utpaladeva thus accuses those who
endeavour to prove the existence of God of labouring under a fundamental
misapprehension: they consider that the existence of īśvara requires a
proof because they erroneously apprehend it as a distant, imperceptible
entity that can only be grasped through an inference as the cause of an
effect essentially distinct from it. Thus according to Abhinavagupta’s
commentary, in his lost Vivr̥ti, Utpaladeva was emphasizing that those
who engage in an īśvarasiddhi are driven by the presupposition that
īśvara is imperceptible:

[Utpaladeva] states [the sentence beginning with] “But . . .” [in his
Vivr̥ti] with the intention [of expressing the following objection to his
own thesis]: “The Lord is not the object of a mere means of knowledge
establishing [nothing but] a usage [instead of producing a new
knowledge,] because this [Lord] is not [immediately] manifest in any
way. For the Lord is never manifest anywhere to anybody.” And [with the
compound] siddhasattāka [, this opponent means] that [the Lord’s] very
existence is not established; [since] in this [case], being established
would be being manifest. [And with the words] “It is this very . . .” [,
the opponent means] that this [very] existence must be established. [In
other words, according to the opponent,] with regard to this [existence
of the Lord, we] must state a means of knowledge such that it may lead
to a knowledge consisting in the manifestation of [something] that was
not [manifest] so far; and accordingly, Uddyotakara and [others] have
produced a discourse in the form of a “proof of the Lord”
(īśvarasiddhi).95

Utpaladeva was also emphasizing in his Vivr̥ti ad II.3.17 that this
mistake (assuming that the Lord is not manifest and therefore stands in
need of a proof) is an obstacle particularly difficult to overcome as it
threatens the very possibility of recognition,96 and in his commentary
on I.1.2, Abhinavagupta goes as far as saying that the Naiyāyikas and
Vaiśeṣikas who attempt to prove the existence of īśvara are no better
than the Sāṁkhyas who attempt to refute it: both parties are
fundamentally deluded in so far as they are incapable of paying
attention to their most inner experience, and they both engage in the
equally absurd tasks of proving or refuting the Lord because they
misunderstand their own Self to the point that they no longer recognize
its sentiency.97

According to its own author then, the ĪS expresses an inferior point of
view (which the Pratyabhijñā treatise transcends) because it attempts to
prove the unprovable (or rather, the always already proven) and because
in doing so, it transforms the very core of subjectivity into a mere
object.

But the ĪS’s perspective is also inferior in so far as it presents
īśvara as an efficient cause acting together with other, material and
auxiliary causes that are unconscious and ontologically distinct from
the efficient cause. Thus in the Pratyabhijñā treatise, Utpaladeva and
his commentator Abhinavagupta explain that if the “Naiyāyikas, etc.” are
right to present the Lord as the efficient cause of the universe, they
are wrong to admit other causes distinct from it, because only
consciousness is capable of agency: the ultimate truth (paramārtha) is
rather that the Lord, understood as an all-encompassing consciousness,
is the one and only cause and acts merely by taking on this or that
appearance.98 In the Vivr̥tivimarśinī, Abhinavagupta, after alluding to
the discussion over the legitimacy of inferring īśvara as a cause in
general of the universe, adds that there is no need to explain it
further since it has been dealt with it in detail in the ĪS, but that in
the Pratyabhijñā treatise, Utpaladeva rather gives the ultimate truth
regarding the Lord’s agency — namely, the fact that only īśvara can be
considered a cause:

Although [the Naiyāyikas, etc. acknowledge that] the Lord is a cause,
they admit that other [things] as well, which are distinct from the Lord
[and] insentient, are causes; [but in fact] this [causality] is not
possible for that which does not act deliberately. For [according to the
Naiyāyikas, etc.] what [we] call an “arrangement” consists in the fact
that [various elements] are placed together while being combined [in a
particular way]; it is associated with a material cause [such as] clay
[, and it] enables [us] to distinguish, for instance with regard to a
pot, a plate and a bowl, between [their] being of the same sort [in so
far as they have the same material cause] and their being of a different
sort [in so far as they have different arrangements; and] once [we] have
observed in [only] one occasion [, upon seeing a potter at work,] that
[this arrangement] is produced by [an entity] the nature of which is
conscious, [we] must necessarily conclude that in all cases, [including
the arrangements of worlds and so on,] an arrangement must be, exactly
in the same way, [the effect of a conscious entity]. As for what [some]
say, namely, that although this [invariable co-presence] is observed [in
the particular case of a pot], the understanding that [the universe too]
is the product of a [conscious agent is not correct because this
conscious agent is only inferred as a generality,99 they] say it because
they are deluded by their partiality towards their own view [that the
Lord does not exist]; since [in fact,] in the case of smoke as well, the
[inferred cause is necessarily apprehended as] a general [entity. But]
enough with this digression; for this has been explained in detail by
the author himself in the Īśvarasiddhi, whereas here, it is the ultimate
truth (paramārtha) [that Utpaladeva states], namely: it is the Lord, by
conforming to his own power of necessity (niyatiśakti), who manifests
himself as the sprout in his own limpid self-manifesting consciousness
(svaprakāśa), by making the phenomena of the seed, earth and water
predominant.100

So why did Utpaladeva write a treatise that he himself did not consider
as an expression of the ultimate truth?

A Plausible Purpose for the Īśvarasiddhi:

Utpaladeva’s Inclusivist Strategy Towards Nyāya

John Taber has suggested that Nyāya may have been a step in the
development of Utpaladeva’s thought and that he may have got rid of it
later through the influence of Buddhism in particular.101 However, this
hypothesis would hardly explain why Utpaladeva took the trouble of
writing the ĪS after elaborating his “mature system” (as the last verse
of the treatise clearly indicates); and admittedly, Utpaladeva’s thought
was profoundly influenced by that of Dharmakīrti and his followers,102
but his rejection of Nyāya dualism, as well as his interpretation of
Buddhist concepts, was obviously determined by his belonging to a
pre-existing Śaiva non-dualistic tradition that presented Śiva as a
unique, infinite and dynamic consciousness: it is much more likely that
he chose to reject or retain this or that doctrinal element from both
Nyāya and Buddhism according to their compatibility with the
metaphysical background of his own religious tradition.

However, John Taber also remarks that the ĪS’s last verse seems to
indicate that Utpaladeva “wished to defeat the opponent on his own
turf”103 and he quotes in this respect Abhinavagupta’s assertion that
“the opinion of the author [of the ĪPK] is that in the sphere of māyā,
it is the Naiyāyikas’ method that is ultimately true”.104 The Śaiva
non-dualists acknowledge the validity of the Nyāya point of view at the
ontologically inferior level where consciousness playfully manifests
itself as differentiated, although they consider that from the
perspective of the ultimate truth, i.e. non-duality, this point of view
remains incomplete. The ĪS may thus be understood as one of the outcomes
of an inclusivistic strategy through which Śaiva non-dualism presents
itself as encompassing and transcending all doctrines instead of plainly
rejecting them.105 As Raffaele Torella has emphasized:

In a sense Utpaladeva inaugurates what was to become a salient feature
of the whole Trika in Abhinavagupta’s synthesis: namely, the tendency
not to constitute a monolithic doctrine and a world of religious
experience to oppose en bloc everything that does not coincide with it
[. . .] but to distinguish planes, that are hierarchically ordered but
in which the “higher” does not automatically cancel the “lower” [. . .].
This is the perspective of the paramādvaita, such an elevated viewpoint
that it does not fear what is different from itself, is not put in a
critical position by it, is not forced to make a choice.106

By writing the ĪS, Utpaladeva may thus have meant to show to the
Naiyāyikas (among which “Śaiva faith was known to be pre-eminent”)107
that his Śaivism was not incompatible with their system and that it
sided with Nyāya against the opponents of īśvara, while giving them a
hint that his own system was superior; and indeed, as noted by Raffaele
Torella, the ĪS’s last verse “enables us to see the right
perspective”108 by making clear that duality remains an inferior plane.

Another Aspect of the Issue:

The Śaiva Siddhānta and the Proof of īśvara

However, Utpaladeva is not the first to have integrated the Nyāya proof
of īśvara to his system. It is also the case of the Śaiva Siddhānta, the
dualistic Śaiva religious trend that was dominant in Kashmir in
Utpaladeva’s time.109 Thus the assertion that the Lord, although
imperceptible, can be inferred from the fact that the universe is an
effect, is found in the scriptures of the Śaiva Siddhānta that belong to
the last phase of its early scriptural development (i.e. around the
eighth and ninth centuries ce). The KT110 for instance contains such a
statement and argues that the cause of the universe cannot be past
actions leading to karmic retribution since these are unconscious;111
and the PT112 displays a lengthy defence of the inference of īśvara113
that seems to presuppose an awareness of Kumārila’s antitheistic
critique.114 It addresses a number of objections, most notably that of
the illegitimacy of the inference since it rests on a relation of cause
and effect that cannot be perceived,115 but also that of the possibility
of accounting for the universe’s existence through the sole mechanism of
karmic retribution,116 and it argues that the universe must have an
efficient cause distinct from material and auxiliary causes since all
effects are found to require these three kinds of cause.117 Besides, the
PT states that īśvara is inferred as a mere intelligent cause in
general,118 but that this general cause must nonetheless be
characterized as omniscient since it creates everything.119

Sadyojyotis’s Inference of īśvara and His

Reply to the Buddhist and Mīmāṁsaka Objections

This inference of īśvara from the universe considered as his effect is
also mentioned by various Saiddhāntika exegetes who wrote after
Utpaladeva,120 but of more importance is the fact that it is found as
well in another, non-scriptural Saiddhāntika source that Utpaladeva
certainly knew. Raffaele Torella has noticed that the first chapter of
the NP by Sadyojyotis (an important Saiddhāntika figure who probably
wrote c. 675–725)121 is likely to have influenced the Pratyabhijñā
treatise at least regarding Utpaladeva’s attitude towards Buddhist
epistemology.122 Now, the second chapter of the same work happens to be
entirely devoted to the proof of īśvara,123 and its main line of
argument is “virtually identical to the Nyāya argument for the existence
of God”:124 Sadyojyotis infers the existence of īśvara from the fact
that the universe, which is an effect endowed with parts, must have an
intelligent agent,125 and the whole chapter defends this inference
against various antitheistic attacks also dealt with by Utpaladeva,
among which Dharmakīrti’s objection that one can only infer a particular
agent from a particular effect when their invariable concomitance is
already established through perception.126 Sadyojyotis answers it by
claiming that since the pot on the one hand and natural composite
entities on the other hand are similar at least in so far as they are
effects, the inference is legitimate.127 In his long commentary on this
verse, Rāmakaṇṭha (who may have been influenced in turn by Utpaladeva)
explains that the Buddhists themselves have recourse to the notion of
generality without hypostasizing universals (jāti), and his arguments
sound very similar to Utpaladeva’s.128 Sadyojyotis also argues that if
inference were restricted to particulars that are seen to entertain a
causality relation, it would be useless, since it would be confined to
these singular entities, and it could not establish anything that would
not already be known through perception.129 Furthermore, Sadyojyotis
also addresses Kumārila’s objections130 and it is noteworthy that his
commentator Rāmakaṇṭha has recourse to the pakṣadharma argument131

also found in Utpaladeva’s ĪS.132

Sadyojyotis’s Reply to the Sāṁkhya Objection

But most importantly, just as Utpaladeva in his ĪS, the Saiddhāntikas
seem to ascribe a particular importance to the refutation of the Sāṁkhya
objection:133 Sadyojyotis devotes a large part of the NP chapter on
īśvara to the critical examination of the Sāṁkhya position (an
examination which, as in the ĪS, takes place once the Buddhist and
Mīmāṁsaka objections have been answered).134 Thus according to
Sadyojyotis, “some” object that what is to be established by the
inference is in fact already admitted by the opponents, since the
universe can be accounted for by having recourse to other causes besides
God, among which primordial nature.135 Sadyojyotis answers that it is
not the case, since what is to be established is that the universe is
the effect of a conscious agent,136 and he emphasizes that primordial
nature, which is unconscious, has no independence (svātantrya) and is
therefore incapable of acting by itself.137 The Sāṁkhya opponent replies
by alluding to the SK, according to which unconscious entities too can
act for the benefit of some other entity.138 Sadyojyotis answers (as
Uddyotakara before him)139 that this point remains to be
demonstrated.140 Besides, the qualities of matter do not serve each
other by nature but because they are prompted to act thus by some
conscious agent;141 and since matter starts acting after being inactive,
some conscious entity must prompt it to leave its passive state.142 The
Sāṁkhya objects that “however, knowledge exists within matter”143 since
matter is capable of transforming itself into the intellect.144 Just as
Utpaladeva in the ĪS, Sadyojyotis replies by pointing out that intellect
too is a material, unconscious entity,145 and that even if it is assumed
to exist within primordial nature in some potential state before matter
starts transforming itself, it is not capable of grasping by itself its
own knowledge (since this requires the puruṣa’s consciousness), so that
its so-called effect, determination (adhyavasāya), must in fact be
produced by some other entity that is conscious.146 And the Sāṁkhya
cannot argue that the proponent of the Lord’s existence must admit the
independent action of primordial nature just as he acknowledges that the
Lord is not prompted to act by anything else, since the crucial
difference between primordial nature and the Lord resides in the
latter’s consciousness:147 we observe that contrary to material
entities, people act without being prompted by any external cause, and
admittedly, a person can sometimes prompt another to act, but only
because this person has power over the others; and since the entity
presiding over the universe must be almighty, no other entity can prompt
it to act.148

Utpaladeva’s Īśvarasiddhi as a Message to the Saiddhāntikas

To sum up, although Utpaladeva’s criticism of the Sāṁkhya argument often
seems more refined than Sadyojyotis’, both refutations focus on the idea
that a complex effect can only be the product of a conscious entity, and
that intellect, if conceived as a material entity, cannot account for
the universe. Utpaladeva’s treatise thus seems to emphasize a principle
shared by both dualist and non-dualist Śaivas, namely the idea that only
the conscious is independent (svatantra) and therefore capable of
action, whereas unconscious entities only seem to act in so far as their
actions are always prompted by consciousness.149 Moreover, while
Utpaladeva’s goal when writing the ĪS may have been to show to the
Naiyāyikas that Śaiva non-dualists too are capable of defending īśvara
while using Nyāya concepts, it may also have been, perhaps more
crucially, to show to the Saiddhāntikas that Śaiva non-dualists too can
appropriate the Nyāya inference of the Lord. With the ĪS, Utpaladeva
ostentatiously follows the Saiddhāntikas’ tradition of integrating Nyāya
arguments and thus presents himself as siding with them. This strategy
seems to have been successful at least to a certain extent, since the
Saiddhāntika Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha for instance quotes the ĪS with approval,150
and as seen above, the commentary on Sadyojyotis’s NP by Rāmakaṇṭha (who
was Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha’s own son) sometimes seems to echo Utpaladeva’s
treatise. At the same time, by explaining at the very end of his
treatise that the perspective of duality remains inferior, Utpaladeva is
in all probability alluding to the Śaiva Siddhānta’s dualism at least as
much as he is alluding to the Nyāya’s: if Śaiva non-dualism tends to
include the scriptures of the Śaiva Siddhānta within its own tradition
as a lower form of revelation,151 it also includes as a lower form of
reasoning the philosophical justifications of its dualist counterpart.

Are Saiddhāntika Interlocutors Completely Absent

in the Pratyabhijñā Treatise? The Nature of īśvara’s

Agency and the Analogy with Yogic Creations

In this respect it is worth noting that although Utpaladeva was
obviously much influenced in this Pratyabhijñā treatise by Sadyojyotis’
works,152 one of the most striking features of the ĪPK is that in them,
“the Śaiva Saiddhāntikas virtually disappear, at least as direct
targets”.153 Raffaele Torella has pointed out that openly targetting the
Buddhists rather than the Saiddhāntikas is “a message Utpaladeva
addresses to his dualist cousins, whom [. . .] the Trika does not intend
to defeat, but to use as a basis for its emergence from the dimension of
a restricted circle [. . .]. Choosing Buddhism, and particularly its
logical school, as number one enemy means reinforcing the undeclared
alliance with the Śaivasiddhāntins.”154

However, while openly debating in the Pratyabhijñā treatise with
Buddhist and Brahmanical opponents, Utpaladeva seems to carry on with an
underlying criticism of the Śaiva Siddhānta. This implicit discussion
with fellow Śaivas in the midst of arguments explicitly targetting
non-Śaiva rivals is perceptible for instance in the way Utpaladeva
compares the Lord’s activity of cosmic creation to that of a yogin
creating “by virtue of his will” (icchāvaśāt) and without any material
cause (nirupādānam) various objects of perception that are nothing but
manifestations of his own consciousness.155

This analogy, which is already found in Somānanda’s ŚD,156 can be seen
as an attack on the Naiyāyika and Vaiśeṣika conception of īśvara as an
efficient cause that performs its action out of mere will (icchāmātreṇa,
icchāmātrāt) in so far as this action does not require a body,157 but
that merely gives a specific form to a material cause that remains
ontologically independent from it. And indeed, Abhinavagupta’s
commentaries on the verses in which Utpaladeva presents the analogy seem
to confirm that it is meant at least in part as a criticism of the
Vaiśeṣika representation of cosmic creation: there Abhinavagupta attacks
some opponents who contend that yogins’ creations are merely the result
of their capacity to instantly assemble pre-existing atoms (paramāṇu),
just as, according to the Vaiśeṣikas, God creates the universe by
arranging atoms.158

Nonetheless, the Saiddhāntikas hold a dualistic conception of cosmic
creation somewhat similar to that of the Vaiśeṣikas (although contrary
to the latter they do not identify the material cause of the universe
with atoms but with māyā),159 and the analogy with yogic creations used
by Somānanda and Utpaladeva seems to target the Saiddhāntikas too. Thus
it seems to echo a Saiddhāntika scripture: the KT (which Somānanda
undoubtedly knew)160 asserts that Śiva creates out of mere will, i.e.
without any other instrument (karaṇa), just as a yogin does.161 By
having recourse to the same image, Somānanda hints that his presentation
of īśvara’s agency is in accordance with the depiction of cosmic
activity in the Saiddhāntika scriptures;162 but by the same token, in
contrast he also emphasizes one of his main points of disagreement with
the Saiddhāntikas’ metaphysical doctrine: according to him, the
consciousness presiding over the creation of the universe indeed acts
out of mere will, but in the sense that it does not have recourse to any
kind of matter163 that would exist apart from it. That Utpaladeva in
turn borrows this analogy from the ŚD is worth noting, because in many
ways Utpaladeva’s main treatise diverges from that of his teacher,164
but in this particular respect the two works offer a striking parallel.
And while commenting on the analogy in ĪPK I.5.7, Abhinavagupta takes
the trouble of specifying that māyā is not really the material cause of
the universe, but rather, the power through which the Lord makes what is
insentient appear as if it were the material cause of the universe,165
thus making clear that the analogy is also meant as a criticism of the
Saiddhāntikas’ dualistic view of cosmic creation.

Conclusion: On the Discrete Philosophical Dialogue

Between Śaiva Dualists and Non-dualists

Utpaladeva’s ĪS has so far been interpreted mainly as an attempt to
integrate Nyāya concepts within Śaiva non-dualism as an inferior point
of view transcended by the Pratyabhijñā metaphysics. While this
interpretation is certainly valid, we should bear in mind that the
inference of the Lord defended by Utpaladeva in this short treatise was
integrated to the scriptures of the Śaiva Siddhānta before Utpaladeva
undertook to write the ĪS, and that the Saiddhāntika Sadyojyotis had
already composed in the second chapter of his NP an īśvarasiddhi that
displays many similarities with Utpaladeva’s short treatise as regards
its structure, the choice of its opponents or the strategy employed to
refute them. By writing a text so blatantly at odds with his own
metaphysical principles and so obviously relying on arguments put
forward by earlier authors, Utpaladeva probably meant to include Nyāya
concepts within the scope of his system while presenting them as a lower
perspective; but it is also very likely that he primarily saw these
Naiyāyika arguments as the philosophical justification of the
Saiddhāntikas’ dualist understanding of the relationship between īśvara
and the Self. The ĪS can therefore be read as a message sent to the
Saiddhāntikas and emphasizing Utpaladeva’s philosophical solidarity as a
Śaiva author (but also the capacity of non-dualism to integrate the
conceptual tools already appropriated by the Saiddhāntikas) while
hinting at the inferiority of the Saiddhāntikas’ metaphysics from the
ultimate viewpoint of non-dualism.

This point is of interest in the more general perspective of
Utpaladeva’s relationship with the Śaiva Siddhānta. Modern scholarship
has often emphasized that with the Pratyabhijñā treatise, Utpaladeva
engages in the Brahmanico-Buddhist philosophical debate and relegates at
its background religious issues, most notably by avoiding to have
recourse to the authority of scriptures.166 But Utpaladeva’s attempt to
present the metaphysical tenets of Śaiva non-dualism in the religiously
quasi-neutral discourse of Brahmanico-Buddhist epistemological
controversies should not be interpreted as a sign that Utpaladeva lacked
interest in his Śaiva rivals’ metaphysics, first and foremost because
this attempt had a prestigious precedent in the Śaiva Siddhānta itself:
Sadyojyotis had already departed from mere scriptural exegesis by
writing an independent treatise targetting various Buddhist and
Brahmanical opponents, and in this respect the ĪPK seem to have been
profoundly influenced by the NP’s method and strategies. Besides, while
conspicuously engaging in a dialogue with non-Śaiva authors, Utpaladeva
also sustained an implicit debate with the Saiddhāntikas that, however
discrete, is perceptible for instance in the key passages of the
Pratyabhijñā treatise where īśvara’s cosmic creation is compared to the
creations ascribed to yogins.

It is also likely that Utpaladeva’s works have in turn influenced later
Saiddhāntikas: in his commentary on Sadyojyotis’ demonstration of God,
Rāmakaṇṭha apparently relies on some of the arguments found in the ĪS,
but he also seems to answer Utpaladeva’s criticism of the Saiddhāntika
notion of īśvara. Thus, as seen above, the ĪPKs oppose the idea that
because the Lord is imperceptible, his existence needs to be
inferentially proved, and they reject the very possibility of an
īśvarasiddhi on the grounds that the Lord is “always already
established” (ādisiddha) in so far as the individual subject is always
aware of his being the Lord through mere self-awareness (svasaṁvedana).
Abhinavagupta (who may be relying here, as he so often does, on
Utpaladeva’s lost Vivr̥ti)167 explains in this connection that although
there may be a difference of degree between the individual’s powers of
knowledge and action and those of the Lord, there is no difference of
nature between them, so that the individual’s experience of these powers
is already the very experience of the Lord’s powers.168 In his
introduction to the second chapter of the NP, Rāmakaṇṭha presents a
similar objection: if the individual knows by mere self-awareness his
powers of knowledge and action, what is the point of demonstrating the
Lord’s existence, and why did Sadyojyotis take the trouble of writing a
distinct chapter on the Lord once he had composed the chapter on the
individual subject?169 Rāmakaṇṭha replies that contrary to the
individual Self, the Lord is not known through mere self-awareness
(since the Self of the Lord and that of the individual are distinct) and
remains imperceptible, so that the Lord’s agency in the cosmic creation
must still be proved.170 With this answer, Rāmakaṇṭha seems to continue
the discrete dialogue initiated by Somānanda and Utpaladeva between the
Śaiva Siddhānta and Śaiva non-dualism – a dialogue that remains largely
unexplored, and on which a comparative study of the demonstrations of
the Self by Utpaladeva and Rāmakaṇṭha for instance171 could certainly
shed some light.

* This article was written thanks to the generous financial help of the
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, as part of project FR 2531/3-1 (“Eine
Untersuchung zur Kausalität im Pratyabhijñā-System. Kritische Edition,
Übersetzung und Studie von Abhinavagupta’s ĪPV, Adhikāra II, Āhnika 4”).
I am very grateful to Vincent Eltschinger, John Taber and Albrecht
Wezler, who carefully read the first version of this paper and whose
many remarks were very helpful, and to Yasutaka Muroya, who kindly
answered my questions on the chronology of Naiyāyika authors. Mistakes
are mine.

References

Primary literature

ĀḌ = [Āgamaḍambara] Much Ado about Religion by Bhaṭṭa Jayanta, ed. and
tr. C. Dezso, New York: University Press / JJC Foundation, 2005.

ĀTV = The Ātmatattvaviveka of Śrī Udayanācārya with the Commentary of
Śrī Nārāyaṇācārya Ātreya and the Dīdhiti Commentary of Śrī Raghunātha
Śiromani, with Bauddhādhikāra Vivr̥ti of Śrī Gadādhara Bhaṭṭācārya, ed.
D. Śāstrī, Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series 84, Benares: 1940.

Bhāskarī = Īśvarapratyabhijñāvimarśinī of Abhinavagupta, Doctrine of
Divine Recognition, vols. I & II: Sanskrit Text with the Commentary
Bhāskarī, ed. K.A.S. Iyer and K.C. Pandey (Allahabad, 1938, 1950),
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1986.

GB = [Gauḍapādabhāṣya] The Sāṁkhya-kārikā. Īśvara Kr̥ṣṇa’s Memorable
Verses on Sāṁkhya Philosophy with the Commentary of Gauḍapādācārya, ed.
H.D. Sharma, Poona Oriental Series 9, Poona: Oriental Book Agency, 1933.

ĪPK = Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Kārikā of Utpaladeva with the Author’s Vr̥tti,
ed. and tr. R. Torella, [Roma, 1994], Corrected Edition, Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass, 2002.

ĪPV = Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vimarśinī, ed. M.R. Śāstrī/M. K. Śāstrī, KSTS
22 & 33, Srinagar: Nirnaya Sagar Press, 2 vols., 1918-21.

ĪPVV = Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vivr̥ti-Vimarśinī by Abhinavagupta, ed. M.K.
Śāstrī, KSTS 60, 62 & 65, Bombay: Nirnaya Sagar Press, 3 vols., 1938-43.

ĪS = [Īśvarasiddhi, in] Siddhitrayī and Pratyabhijñā-kārikā-vr̥tti of
Rājānaka Utpaladeva, ed. M.K. Śāstrī, KSTS 34, Srinagar: 1921.

ĪV = [Īśvaravāda, in] Jñānaśrīmitranibandhāvalī (Buddhist Philosophical
Works of Jñānaśrīmitra), ed. A. Thakur, Tibetan Sanskrit Work Series 5,
Patna: 1987.

JM = [Jayamaṅgalā]. See SK.

KT = [Kiraṇatantra] Bhaṭṭarāmakaṇṭhaviracitā kiraṇavr̥ttiḥ, Bhaṭṭa
Rāmakaṇṭha’s Commentary on the Kiraṇatantra, vol. I, chaps. 1-6, ed. and
tr. D. Goodall, Pondicherry: Institut Français de Pondichéry / École
Française d’Extrême-Orient, 1998.

KV = [Kiraṇavr̥tti]. See KT.

MT = The Śrī Mr̥gendra Tantram (Vidyāpāda and Yogapāda) with the
Commentary of Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha, ed. M.K. Śāstrī, KSTS 50, Bombay: 1930.

MTṬ = [Mr̥gendratantraṭīkā]. See MT.

MV = [Māṭharavr̥tti]. See SK.

NBhūṣ = Śrīmadācārya-Bhāsarvajña-praṇītasya Nyāyasārasya svopajñaṁ
vyākhyānaṁ Nyāyabhūṣaṇam, ed. Svāmī Yogīndrānanda, Varanasi: Ṣaḍdarśan
Prakāśan Pratiṣṭhānam, 1968.

NK = [Nyāyakandalī]. See PDhS.

NKaṇ = [Nyāyakaṇikā] Vidhiviveka of Śrī Maṇḍana Miśra, with the
Commentary Nyāyakaṇikā of Vācaspati Miśra, ed. L. Goswami, Prācyabhāratī
Series 8, Varanasi: 1978.

NMĪS = [Nyāyamañjarī, Īśvarasiddhi section]. See Kataoka 2005.

NP = Nareśvaraparīkṣā of Sadyojyotiḥ with commentary by Rāmakaṇṭha, ed.
M.K. Śāstrī, KSTS 45, Srinagar: Kashmir Pratap Steam Press, 1926.

NPP = [Nareśvaraparīkṣāprakāśa]. See NP.

NS = [Nyāyasūtra]. See NV.

NTṬ = Nyāyavārttikatātparyaṭīkā of Vācaspatimiśra, Nyāyacatur-granthikā,
vol. III, ed. A. Thakur, New Delhi: Indian Council of Philosophical
Research, 1996.

NV = Nyāyabhāṣyavārttika of Bhāradvāja Uddyotakara, Nyāyacaturgranthikā,
vol. II, ed. A. Thakur, New Delhi: Indian Council of Philosophical
Research, 1997.

NVC = [Nyāyavārttika (Calcutta edition) in] Gautama’s Nyāyasūtras with
Vātsyāyana’s Bhāṣya, Uddyotakara’s Vārttika, Vācaspati Miśra’s
Tātparyaṭīkā and Viśvanātha’s Vr̥tti, ed. A. and H. Tarkatirtha,
Calcutta: 1944.

PDhS = [Padārthadharmasaṅgraha] Praśastapāda Bhāṣya
(Padārthadharmasaṅgraha) with Commentary Nyāyakandalī of Śrīdhara, ed.
V.P. Dvivedin (Banaras, 1895), Delhi: Sri Satguru Publications, 1984.

PT = The Parākhyatantra: A Scripture of the Śaiva Siddhānta, ed. and tr.
D. Goodall, Collection Indologie 98, Pondicherry: Institut Français de
Pondichéry/École Française d’Extrême-Orient, 2004.

PV = Pramāṇavārttika-Kārikā (Sanskrit and Tibetan), ed. Y. Miyasaka,
Acta Indologica 2, 1971-72, pp. 1-206.

ŚD = Śivadr̥ṣṭi of Śrīsomānandanātha with the Vr̥tti by Utpaladeva, ed.
M.K. Śāstrī, KSTS 54, Srinagar: 1934.

ŚDV = [Śivadr̥ṣṭivr̥tti]. See ŚD.

SK = Sāṁkhya-Kārikā of Śrīmad Īśvarakr̥ṣṇa with the Māṭharavr̥tti of
Māṭharācārya, ed. V.P. Sarma, and the Jayamaṅgalā of Śrī Śaṅkara, ed. S.
Vangiya, Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series 296, Varanasi: 1970.

ŚV = Ślokavārttika of Śrī Kumārila Bhaṭṭa, with the Commentary
Nyāyaratnākara of Śrī Pārthasārathi Miśra, ed. D. Sastri, Varanasi: Tara
Publications, 1978.

TK = Vācaspatimiśra’s Tattvakaumudī, ein Beitrag zur Textkritik bei
kontaminierter Überlieferung von S.A. Srinivasan, Alt- und Neu-Indische
Studien 12, Hamburg: De Gruyter and Co., 1967.

TSPK = [Tattvasaṁgrahapañjikā, Krishnamacharya edition] Tattvasaṁgraha
of Śāntarakṣita with the Commentary ‘Pañjikā’ of Kamalaśīla, ed. E.
Krishnamacharya, 2 vols., Baroda: Oriental Institute, 1984.

TSPS= [Tattvasaṁgrahapañjikā, Shastri edition] Tattvasaṁgraha of Ācārya
Śānta­rakṣita with the Commentary ‘Pañjikā’ of Kamalśīla, ed. D.
Shastri, 2 vols., Bauddha Bha­ra­ti Series 1, Varanasi: Bauddha Bharati,
1981.

TSṬ = [Tattvasaṁgrahaṭīkā]. See Filliozat 1988.

TTNV = [Tattvatrayanirṇayavr̥tti]. See Filliozat 1991.

Vr̥tti = Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikāvr̥tti]. See ĪPK.

[Vyomavatī] The Praśastapādabhāṣyam by Praśasta Devācārya, with
Commentaries Sūktī, Setu and Vyomavatī, ed. G. Kaviraj, Chowkhambha
Sanskrit Series 61, Benares: 1930.

YBh = [Yogabhāṣya]
Vācaspatimiśraviracitaṭīkāsametaśrīvyāsa-bhāṣyasametāni
Pātañjalayogasūtrāṇi, āśramasya paṇḍitaiḥ saṁśodhitam,
Ānandāśramasaṁsktagranthāvaliḥ 47, Pune: [1904], 1978.

YD = Yuktidīpikā. The Most Significant Commentary on the Sāṁkhyakārikā,
ed. A. Wezler and S. Motegi, vol. I, Alt- und Neu-Indische Studien 44,
Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag, 1998.

Secondary literature

Acharya, D., 2006, Vācaspatimiśra’s Tattvasamīkṣā: The Earliest
Commentary on Maṇḍanamiśra’s Brahmasiddhi, critically edited with an
introduction and notes, Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag.

Alper, P., 1979, “Śiva and the Ubiquity of Consciousness: The
Spaciousness of an Artful Yogi”, Journal of Indian Philosophy, 7:
345-407.

Bronkhorst, J., 1983, “God in Sāṁkhya”, Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde
Südasiens und Archiv für indische Philosophie, 27: 149-64.

———, 1996a, “God’s Arrival in the Vaiśeṣika System”, Journal of Indian
Philosophy, 24: 281-94.

———, 1996b, “The Self as Agent: A Review Article”, Asiatische Studien /
Études Asiatiques, 50(3): 603-21.

Chemparathy, G., 1965, “The Testimony of the Yuktidīpikā Concerning the
īśvara Doctrine of the Pāśupatas and Vaiśeṣikas”, Wiener Zeitschrift für
die Kunde Sudasiens, 9: 119-46.

———, 1968, “The Īśvara Doctrine of Praśastapāda”, Vishveshvaranand
Indological Journal, 1968 [1969] 6: 65-87.

———, 1970, “Praśastapāda and His Other Names”, Indo-Iranian Journal,
12(4): 241-54.

———, 1972, An Indian Rational Theology. Introduction to Udayana’s
Nyāyakusumāñjali, de Nobili Research Library 1, Vienna.

Dyczkowski, M.S.G., 1987, The Doctrine of Vibration: An Analysis of the
Doctrines and Practices of Kashmir Shaivism [SUNY Press, New York,
1987], Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2006.

———, 1992, The Stanzas on Vibration: The Spandakārikā with Four
Commentaries: The Spandasaṁdoha by Kṣemarāja, the Spanda-Vr̥tti by
Kallaṭabhaṭṭa, the Spandavivr̥ti by Rājānaka Rāma, the Spandapra-dīpikā
by Bhagavadutpala, Translated with an Introduction and Exposition [SUNY
Press, New York, 1992], Varanasi: Dilip Kumar Publishers, 1994.

Eltschinger, V. and I. Ratié, 2013, Self, No-Self, and Salvation.
Dharmakīrti’s Critique of the Notions of Self and Person, Wien: Verlag
der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.

Filliozat, P.-S., 1988, “Le Tattvasaṁgraha,‘Compendium des essences’, de
Sadyojyoti”, Bulletin de l’École Française d’Extrême-Orient, 77(1):
97-163.

———, 1991, “Le Tattvanirṇaya: ‘La Détermination des trois essences’ de
Sadyojyoti avec le commentaire d’Aghoraśivācārya”, Bulletin de l’École
Française d’Extrême-Orient, 78(1): 133-58.

Frauwallner, E., 1962, Aus der Philosophie der śivaitischen Systeme,
Deutsche Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin, Vorträge und Schriften
78, Berlin: Akademie-Verlag.

Goodall, D., 1998. See KT.

———, 2001, “The Saiddhāntika Parākhyatantra, Its Account of Language,
and the Interpolation of the Eighth Chapter of the Published
Pauṣkarāgama”, in R. Torella (ed.) Le Parole e i marmi. Studi in onore
di Raniero Gnoli nel suo 50° compleanno, Serie Orientale Roma 92, Rome:
Istituto Italiano per l’Africa e l’Oriente, pp. 327-50.

———, 2004. See PT.

Hanneder, J., 1998, Abhinavagupta’s Philosophy of Revelation. An Edition
and Annotated Translation of Mālinīślokavārttika I, 1-399, Groningen
Oriental Studies 14, Groningen: Egbert Forsten.

Hannotte, L., 1987, Philosophy of God in Kashmir Śaiva Dualism:
Sadyojyoti and His Commentators, unpublished dissertation, McMaster
University, Hamilton (Ontario).

Hulin, M., 1980, Mr̥gendrāgama, Sections de la doctrine et du yoga, avec
la Vr̥tti de Bhaṭṭanārāyaṇakaṇṭha et la Dīpikā d’Aghoraśivācārya,
Publications de l’Institut Français d’Indologie 63, Pondicherry.

Jackson, R., 1986, “Dharmakīrti’s Refutation of Theism”, Philosophy East
and West, 36(4): 315-48.

Kataoka, K., 2003, “The Mīmāṁsā Definition of pramāṇa as a Source of New
Information”, Journal of Indian Philosophy, 31: 89-103.

———, 2005, “Critical Edition of the Īśvarasiddhi Section of Bhaṭṭa
Jayanta’s Nyāyamañjarī”, Memoirs of the Institute of Oriental Culture
(University of Tokyo), 148: 57-110.

Krasser, H., 1999, “Dharmakīrti’s and Kumārila’s Refutations of the
Existence of God: A Consideration of Their Chronological Order”, in S.
Katsura (ed.) Dharmakīrti’s Thought and Its Impact on Indian and Tibetan
Philosophy: Proceedings of the Third International Dharmakīrti
Conference, Hiroshima, November 4-6, 1997, Wien: Verlag der
Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, pp. 215-24.

———, 2001, “On Dharmakīrti’s Understanding of pramāṇabhūta and His
Definition of pramāṇa”, Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens, 45:
173-99.

———, 2002, Śaṅkaranandanas Īśvarāpākaraṇasaṅkṣepa, Teil 2: Annotierte
Übersetzungen und Studie zur Auseinandersetzung über die Existenz
Gottes, Wien: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.

Lawrence, D.P., 2000, Rediscovering God with Transcendental Argument: A
Contemporary Interpretation of Monistic Kashmiri Śaiva Philosophy,
Delhi: Sri Satguru Publications [State University of New York, 1999].

Muroya, Y., 2011, “Bhāsarvajña’s Interpretation of bhāva eva nāśaḥ and a
Related Chronological Problem”, in H. Krasser, H. Lasic, E. Franco and
B. Kellner (eds.) Religion and Logic in Buddhist Philosophical Analysis:
Proceedings of the Fourth International Dharmakīrti Conference, Vienna,
August 23-27, 2005, Wien: Verlag der österreichischen Akademie der
Wissenschaften, pp. 341-61.

Nemec, J., 2011, The Ubiquitous Śiva: Somānanda’s Śivadr̥ṣṭi and His
Tantric Interlocutors, Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press.

Oberhammer, G., 1965, “Zum Problem des Gottesbeweises in der indischen
Philosophie”, Numen, 12: 1-34.

Ratié, I., 2006, “La Mémoire et le Soi dans l’
Īśvarapratyabhijñāvimarśinī d’Abhinavagupta”, Indo-Iranian Journal,
49(1-2): 39-103.

———, 2007, “Otherness in the Pratyabhijñā Philosophy”, Journal of Indian
Philosophy, 35(4): 313-70.

———, 2009, “Remarks on Compassion and Altruism in the Pratyabhijñā
Philosophy”, Journal of Indian Philosophy, 37(4): 349-66.

———, 2010, “The Dreamer and the Yogin: On the Relationship between
Buddhist and Śaiva Idealisms”, Bulletin of the School of Oriental and
African Studies, 73(3): 437-78.

———, 2011a, Le Soi et l’Autre. Identité, différence et altérité dans la
philosophie de la Pratyabhijñā, Leiden-Boston: Brill.

———, 2011b, “Can One Prove that Something Exists Beyond Consciousness? A
Śaiva Criticism of the Sautrāntika Inference of External Objects”,
Journal of Indian Philosophy, 39(4-5): 479-501.

———, 2013, “On Reason and Scripture in the Pratyabhijñā”, in V.
Eltschinger and H. Krasser (eds.) Scriptural Authority, Reason and
Action: Proceedings of a Panel at the 14th World Sanskrit Conference,
Kyoto, Sept. 1-5 2009, Wien: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der
Wissenschaften, pp. 375-453.

Sanderson, A., 1985, “Purity and Power among the Brahmans of Kashmir”,
in M. Carithers, S. Collins and S. Lukes (eds.) The Category of the
Person: Anthropology, Philosophy, History, Cambridge (MA): Cambridge
University Press, pp. 190-216.

———, 1988, “Śaivism and the Tantric Tradition”, in S. Sutherland (ed.)
The World’s Religions, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, pp. 660-704.

———, 1995, “Meaning in Tantric Ritual”, in A.M. Blondeau and K. Schipper
(eds.) Essais sur le rituel III. Colloque du centenaire de la section
des Sciences religieuses de l’École Pratique des Hautes Études,
Bibliothèque de l’École des Hautes Études 102, Louvain-Paris: Peeters,
pp. 15-96.

———, 2006, “The Date of Sadyojyotis and Br̥haspati”, Cracow Indological
Studies, 8: 39-91.

———, 2007, “The Śaiva Exegesis of Kashmir”, in D. Goodall and A. Padoux
(eds.) Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d’Hélène Brunner, Collection
Indologie 106, Pondicherry: Institut Français de Pondichéry/École
Française d’Extrême-Orient, pp. 231-442.

Slaje, W., 1986, “Untersuchungen zur Chronologie einiger
Nyāya-Philosophen”, Studien zur Indologie und Iranistik, 11-12: 245-78.

Taber, J., 1986, “Utpaladeva’s Īśvarasiddhi”, The Adyar Library
Bulletin, Golden Jubilee Volume, 52: 106-37.

Torella, R., 1992, “The Pratyabhijñā and the Logical-Epistemological
School of Buddhism”, in T. Goudriaan (ed.) Ritual and Speculation in
Early Tantrism: Studies in Honor of André Padoux, SUNY Series in Tantric
Studies, Albany: State University of New York Press, pp. 327-45.

———, 1999, “Sāṁkhya as Sāmānyaśāstra”, Asiatische Studien/Études
Asiatiques, 53: 553-62.

———, 1994. See ĪPK.

———, 2007, “Studies on Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti. Part IV:
Light of the Subject, Light of the Object”, in B. Kellner et al. (eds.)
Pramāṇakīrtiḥ: Papers Dedicated to Ernst Steinkellner on the Occasion of
His 70th Birthday, Wiener Studien zur Tibetologie und Buddhismuskunde
70.2, Wien: Arbeitskreis für tibetische und buddhistische Studien
Universität Wien, pp. 925-40.

———, 2008, “From an Adversary to the Main Ally: The Place of Bhartr̥hari
in the Kashmirian Shaiva Advaita”, in M. Kaul and A. Aklujkar (eds.) The
Grammatical Traditions of Kashmir: Essays in Memory of Pandit Dinanath
Yaksh, Delhi: D.K. Printworld, pp. 508-24.

Vattanky, J., 1984, Gaṅgeśa’s Philosophy of God, Madras: The Adyar
Libary and Research Centre.

Watson, A., 2006, The Self’s Awareness of Itself. Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha’s
Arguments against the Buddhist Doctrine of No-self, Wien: De Nobili.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Although the fifty-six stanzas of the ĪS and the Vr̥tti thereon have
aroused little scholarly interest so far, two important studies must be
mentioned in this respect: Taber 1986, which summarizes the whole
treatise and offers a very insightful philosophical analysis of it; and
Krasser 2002, an excellent study of the Indian controversy over the
existence of God that contains (pp. 149-58) a translation and analysis
of some key passages in the ĪS.

2 In the context of the proof of īśvara, the term “God” might seem most
appropriate to the Western reader. Nonetheless I have kept the more
literal term “Lord” in the translations at least, because īśvara
designates first and foremost a person who has power or reigns over
something (see, for example, ĪPVV III: 181-82: yatra yad āyattaṁ sa
tatreśvaro rājeva nije rājye . . . “That on which something depends is
the Lord of this [thing], as a king [who is the Lord] of his kingdom . .
.”), and the various Indian authors quoted below often use the term in
this sense (for an example of this use by Praśastapāda, see Chemparathy
1968: 84; cf. e.g. Rāmakaṇṭha’s assertion that the potter is īśvara with
respect to the pot in KV, p. 73).

3 See Taber 1986: 106-07; Krasser 2002: 149-50.

4 Abhinavagupta repeatedly calls the supporters of Utpaladeva’s doctrine
the “proponents of the non-duality with the Lord” (īśvarādvayavādin):
see e.g. ĪPVV II: 122 or 129 (quoted in Ratié 2011a: 385, n 44 and
598-99, n 64). This non-duality is primarily to be understood as the
identity of the individual’s Self (ātman) with the Lord, but also as the
absolute ontological dependence of the phenomenal world on īśvara
conceived as an all-encompassing consciousness that creates the universe
merely by taking on its various forms.

5 See e.g. Taber 1986: 107; Torella 1994: 40; Krasser 2002: 151ff.

6 ĪS: 1: tanukaraṇādikāryaṁ buddhimatkartr̥pūrvakaṁ
sanniveśa-viśeṣavattvāt, yad yat sanniveśaviśeṣavat tat tad
buddhimatkartr̥nirmitaṁ yathā ghaṭaḥ, buddhimatkartr̥pūrvakaṁ yan na
bhavati na tat sanniveśaviśeṣavatkāryaṁ yathā paramāṇvākāśaśaśaviṣāṇādi,
tathā ca bhavati sanniveśaviśeṣavat tanvādikāryam, tasmād
buddhimatkartr̥pūrvakam iti. “An effect such as bodies, organs and so on
presupposes an intelligent agent (buddhimatkartr̥), because it possesses
a specific arrangement (sanniveśaviśeṣa). Whatever has a specific
arrangement was created by an intelligent agent – a pot for instance
[was created by a potter; whereas] that which does not presuppose an
intelligent agent is not an effect endowed with a specific arrangement –
for instance, atoms, space, [non-existing things such as] a rabbit’s
horn, etc. And thus, there is an effect [consisting of] bodies, etc.,
[namely, the universe], which possesses a specific arrangement;
therefore it presupposes an intelligent agent.” See Krasser 2002:
150-51.

7 ĪS: 4 : tathā hi śarīre tāvad upādānakāraṇaṁ śukraśoṇitādi siddham. na
cāsya tatsanniveśayogaḥ. cakṣuḥśrotrapāṇipādāder api tad evopādānam
atatsanniveśi, bhuvanānām api pārthivādyartharacanātmakānāṁ
mr̥dādyupādānam atatsanniveśy eva siddham, nātra kiṁcid durupapādam.
lokayātrātrāṇahetutāpi śarīrādeḥ sarvavādisiddhaiva pratyakṣata eva.
nātrāsthāne vistaropanyāsaḥ saphalaḥ. tataḥ siddha eva hetuḥ. “To
explain: in a body, to begin with, the material cause, such as sperm and
blood, is established. Now, this [material cause itself] is not endowed
with the arrangement [that the body displays]. [Organs] too, such as the
eye, ear, hand, foot and so on, have the same material cause which does
not possess this arrangement. [And] worlds too, which consist of
arrangements of things such as earth and so on, are established to
possess a material cause such as earth which is absolutely devoid of
this arrangement — in this regard there is nothing hard to demonstrate.
And for all those participating in the debate, it is a [fact]
established through mere perception that these bodies, etc. are causes
that ensure the pursuit of worldly affairs: a long demonstration would
be vain here at [such] an improper place. Therefore the reason [for
inferring the Lord] is indeed established.”

8 ĪS: 4-5: īśvarasiddhiparyavasānaś cāyaṁ sādhanārthaḥ. tanvādiṣu hi
viśvāparaparyāyeṣu parasparānuguṇeṣu sarveṣu yāvaj jñānaṁ nāsti tāvat
kathaṁ nirmitsā syād iti sarvajñatā tāvat sthitā, tathānirmāṇasāmarthyāc
cānekatve pramāṇābhāvāc caikasya sarvakartr̥tvam iti
dharmiviśeṣasambandhaucityād īśvara eva buddhimān paryavasyati. “And
this point of the demonstration amounts to proving [the existence of]
the Lord; for if [this inferred cause] had no knowledge of the bodies
and so on, which are another expression for the [entire] universe and
are all mutually adapted, how could [it] have any desire to create
[them]? Therefore, first of all, the omniscience [of their creator] is
established; and both because [only an omnipotent agent] is capable of
such a creation and because there is no argument [proving] that there
may be several [agents of the universe], the omnipotence of a single
[agent is established too]. Therefore [this inferred] intelligent
[agent] can only be the Lord Himself, because [the Lord only] can have a
relationship with the particular subject of the inference (dharmiviśeṣa)
[, i.e. the effect that is the entire universe].”

9 See the fragment preserved in the TSP and mentioned as “put forward by
Aviddhakarṇa” (aviddhakarṇopanyasta) in TSPS: 52: dvīndriyagrāhyāgrāhyaṁ
vimatyadhikaraṇabhāvāpannaṁ buddhimatkāraṇapūrvakam,
svārambhakāvayavasanniveśaviśiṣṭatvād ghaṭādivad vaidharmyeṇa paramāṇava
iti. “That which is either apprehended through two [different]
sense-organs or not apprehended [by any sense-organ, and] which is the
object of the debate, presupposes an intelligent cause, because it is
particularized by an arrangement (sanniveśaviśiṣṭa) of the parts that
cling together [so as to constitute this entity] itself, just as a pot;
the atoms [stand] as a dissimilar example.” Cf. e.g. Vattanky 1984: 17;
Krasser 1999: 216; 2002: 35-36, n 39 and p. 151. The reason why
Aviddhakarṇa mentions that “which is the object of the debate” is
probably that both parties (i.e. the proponents of theism a well as its
opponents) acknowledge that human artefacts are created by a conscious
agent and that uncomposed natural entities such as atoms are not,
whereas they disagree on whether composite natural entities such as
bodies are products of an intelligent agent. See NTṬ: 563: trayo hi
khalu bhāvā jagati bhavanti. prasiddhacetanakartr̥kāś ca yathā
prāsādāṭṭālagopuratoraṇādayaḥ, prasiddhatadviparyayāś ca yathā
paramāṇvākāśādayaḥ, sandigdhacetanakartr̥kāś ca yathā
tanutarumahīmahīdharādayaḥ. “For indeed, there are three [kinds of]
entities in this world: [those] that are well known as having a
conscious creator, such as palaces, watchtowers, gates, arches and so
on; [those] that are well known as not [having such a conscious
creator], such as atoms, space and so on; and [those] about which one
doubts whether they have a conscious creator, such as bodies, trees,
earth, mountains and so on.”

10 ĪPVV I: 40, quoted below, n 95.

11 Note that in his commentary on NS IV.1.21, Uddyotakara does not use
the inferential reason “because it is an effect” (kāryatvāt) to prove
that the universe has īśvara as its efficient cause: rather, he has
recourse to the inferential reason “because it is unconscious”
(acetanatvāt) that he applies to matter, atoms and actions leading to
karmic retribution (see below, n 71). Nonetheless, at the end of his
lengthy commentary on this sūtra, he mentions Aviddhakarṇa’s argument
while trying to show that in fact the kāryatvāt argument formulated by
his predecessor amounts to the one resting on the acetanatvāt
inferential reason. See NV ad NS IV.1.21: 441: evaṁ kāryatvāt tr̥ṇādīni
pakṣīkr̥tya darśanasparśanaviṣayatvād iti vaktavyam. evaṁ yatra yatra
vipratipattiḥ kāryatvaṁ ca tat tad* anenaiva nyāyenānena dr̥ṣṭāntena
vāsyādinā pakṣayitvā sādhayitavyam iti. [*ca tat tad NVC: 957: ca yat,
tad NV] “In the same way, when one takes grass and so on as the subject
of the inference since [they] are effects [and] objects of vision and
touch, one can say [that they are controlled by an intelligent agent].
[That is to say,] in the same way, when one takes as the subject of the
inference whatever is the object of the debate and involves [the
property of] being an effect, one can establish [that this object has
the property of being controlled by an intelligent agent] through the
same reasoning [, i.e. because of its being unconscious, by having
recourse] to the example of the axe and so on, [which are unconscious
entities requiring the control of an intelligent agent].” On the
probable meaning of “whatever is the object of the debate” here, see
above, n 9.

12 As noted by H. Krasser, in his refutation of this proof Dharmakīrti
uses the compound saṁsthānaviśeṣa found in the NV rather than
sanniveśa-viśeṣa, which appears in Aviddhakarṇa’s fragment (see Krasser
1999: 216, n 7; 2002: 36, n 39; cf. below, n 32).

13 See NV ad NS IV.1.22, where Uddyotakara answers the objection
according to which “just as a thorn’s sharpness for instance is devoid
of efficient cause and [yet] endowed with a material cause, in the same
way, in the case of the production of a body, etc., [there is no such
thing as an efficient cause]” (yathā kaṇṭakasya taikṣṇyādi nirnimittaṁ
copādānavac ca, tathā śarīrādisarge ’pīti, NV: 441-42). Uddyotakara
explains (NV: 442): kaḥ punar atra nyāyaḥ, animittaracanāviśeṣāḥ
śarīrādayaḥ saṁsthānaviśeṣavattvāt kaṇṭakādivad iti. na,
anupalabhyamānanimittānām anumānato nimittopalabdheḥ. yasya nimittaṁ
pratyakṣato nopalabhyate, tasyānumānato nimittaṁ pratyetavyam. kutaḥ –
nimittavaddravyasāmānyāt. yāni khalu nimittavanti dravyāṇi
saṁsthānaviśeṣavanti tāni ghaṭādīni. saṁsthānaviśeṣavac ca śarīraṁ
kaṇṭakādayaś ca. tasmāt te ’pi nimittavanta iti. “But what is the
reasoning [in the objection] here? [Answer:] the body and so on have
specific arrangements that are devoid of efficient cause, because, just
as a thorn for instance [that has no efficient cause,] they have a
specific arrangement. [We answer the objection in the following way:]
This is not [true], because the efficient cause of things whose
efficient cause is not [directly] perceived can [still] be apprehended
through inference: that whose efficient cause is not directly perceived
has an efficient cause that can be acknowledged through inference. How?
Because of its sharing a common feature (sāmānya) with [perceptible]
substances that possess an efficient cause. Indeed, the substances that
have a [perceptible] efficient cause possess a specific arrangement,
pots for instance; and a body possesses a specific arrangement, and [so
do] thorns and so on. Therefore they too have an efficient cause.”

14 On the presentation of the inference of īśvara by these authors, see
Krasser 2002: 56-126. On the vexed question of relative chronology as
regards Naiyāyika authors for the period covering the ninth to eleventh
centuries, see e.g. Slaje 1986: Acharya 2006: xviii-xxviii; Muroya 2011.

15 See TSPS: 55-56: tathā cāhuḥ praśastamatiprabhr̥tayaḥ:
sakalabhuvanahetutvād evāsya sarvajñatvaṁ siddham, kartuḥ
kāryopādānopakaraṇaprayojanasampradānaparijñānāt. iha hi yo yasya kartā
bhavati sa tasyopādānādīni jānīte. yathā kulālaḥ kumbhādīnāṁ kartā
tadupādānaṁ mr̥tpiṇḍam, upakaraṇāni ca cakrādīni, prayojanam
udakāharaṇādi, kuṭumbinaṁ ca sampradānaṁ jānīta ity etat prasiddham;
tatheśvaraḥ sakalabhuvanānāṁ kartā, sa tadupādānāni
paramāṇvādilakṣaṇāni, tadupakaraṇāni dharmādharmadikkālādīni,
vyavahāropakaraṇāni sāmānyaviśeṣasamavāyalakṣaṇāni, prayojanam upabhogaṁ
sampradānasaṁjñakāṁś ca puruṣāñ jānīta ity ataḥ siddham asya
sarvajñatvam iti. “And thus, Praśastamati [= Praśastapāda] and [others]
have said the following. ‘Because the [Lord] is the cause of all worlds,
his omniscience is established, because an agent has the full knowledge
of the effect, the material cause, the instrumental causes, the purpose
and the recipients [of the created object]. For in this [world], the
agent of [something] knows this [thing]’s material cause and so on. Just
as it is well known that a potter, who is the agent of e.g. pots, knows
their material cause, [i.e.] the lump of clay, [their] instrumental
causes, [i.e.] the wheel and so on, [their] purpose, [i.e.] containing
water and so on, and [their] recipient, [i.e.] someone in charge of the
household; in the same way, the Lord, who is the agent of all worlds,
knows their material causes, which consist of the atoms and so on, their
instrumental causes, [i.e.] merit and demerit, space, time and so on,
the instrumental causes of usage (vyavahāra) that consist of generality,
particularity and inherence, the purpose, [i.e.] the experience [of
pleasure and pain], and men, who are designated as the recipients.
Therefore the [Lord]’s omniscience is established.’” This fragment
probably comes from Praśastapāda’s lost Ṭīkā (see Chemparathy 1968:
78ff; Bronkhorst 1996a: 285). On the name Praśastamati, see Chemparathy
1970: 249ff.

16 See NMĪS: 98: yathā ca kulālaḥ sakalakalaśādikāryakalāpotpatti-
saṁvidhānaprayojanādyabhijño bhavaṁs tasya kāryacakrasya kartā,
tatheyatas trailokyasya niravadhiprāṇisukhaduḥkhasādhanasya
sr̥ṣṭisaṁhārasaṁvidhānaṁ saprayojanaṁ bahuśāstraṁ jānann eva sraṣṭā
bhavitum arhati maheśvaraḥ. tasmāt sarvajñaḥ. “And just as a potter is
the agent of all effects [such as pots, etc.] while knowing how to
produce all the effects that are dishes and so on, for what purpose
[they are], and so on; in the same way, the Great Lord can be the
[universal] creator only [if he] knows how to create and destroy these
three worlds which produce pleasure and pain in the innumerable living
beings, as well as what the purpose [of these creations and
destructions] is, [and] the numerous sciences [required for such an
activity]; therefore he is omniscient.”

17 See NKaṇ: 151, quoted below, n 48.

18 See ĀTV: 410-11; Chemparathy 1972: 166-67.

19 See ĪS: 6, quoting ŚV, Sambandhākṣepaparihāra 79-80ab:
kumbhakārādyadhiṣṭhānaṁ ghaṭādau yadi ceṣyate* । neśvarādhiṣṭhitatvaṁ
syād asti cet sādhyahīnatā ।। yathāsiddhe ca dr̥ṣṭānte bhaved dhetor
viruddhatā । [*ceṣyate corr.: veṣyate ĪS (cf. Krasser 1999: 220, n 17)].
“Moreover, if [you] consider that in [the case of] the pot for instance,
the controlling agency (adhiṣṭhāna) is that of the potter for instance,
[then the effects endowed with such a specific arrangement] cannot be
controlled by the Lord: if [you consider that they] are [governed by the
Lord, then the example] lacks the property to be proven (sādhyahīnatā);
but if [you understand] the example as it is [normally] understood
(yathāsiddha), [i.e. if you admit that the controlling agent of the pot
is the potter and not the Lord, then] the reason must be contradictory
(viruddha).” See Taber 1986: 111; Krasser 2002: 220.

20 On Dharmakīrti’s criticism of the inference of īśvara, see e.g.
Oberhammer 1965: 10-22; Vattanky 1984: 33-39; Jackson 1986; Krasser
1999, 2002: 19ff.

21 See Krasser 1999.

22 Utpaladeva thus quotes PV, Pramāṇasiddhipariccheda 11 and 13 in ĪS:
8-9: siddhaṁ yādr̥g adhiṣṭhātr̥bhāvābhāvānuvr̥ttimat । sanniveśādi tad
yuktaṁ tasmād yad* anumīyate ।। anyathā kumbhakāreṇa mr̥dvikārasya
kasyacit । ghaṭādeḥ karaṇāt sidhyed valmīkasyāpi tatkr̥tiḥ ।। [*tasmād
yad corr.: yasmād tad ĪS] “[Only a controlling agent] inferred from e.g.
a [particular] arrangement such that it is established to [exist or not]
according to whether a [particular] controlling agent exists or not is
correct[ly inferred]. Otherwise, an anthill too would be established to
be the [potter]’s creation on the grounds that a particular modification
of clay such as a pot is produced by the potter.” On these verses see
Krasser 2002: 23ff.

23 PV, Pramāṇasiddhipariccheda 12: vastubhede prasiddhasya śabdasāmyād
abhedinaḥ । na yuktānumitiḥ pāṇḍudravyād iva hutāśane ।। “The inference
of [something] well known is not right [when it occurs] on account of
[something else] that [seems to have] no difference [with a valid
reason] due to a [mere] verbal similarity (śabdasāmya), whereas [in
fact] there is a difference as regards the real entities (vastu)
[designated by the same words] — for instance, [the inference] of fire
on account of [the presence of] a white substance [is not right, since
smoke and snow, while being both called ‘white substances’, are
different].” See Krasser 1999: 217; Krasser 2002: 24ff. Utpaladeva was
apparently alluding to this verse (and to the notion of śabdasāmya in
particular) in his lost Vivr̥ti, albeit in a different context: see ĪPVV
II: 165; ĪPV I: 190-91(for an analysis of these passages see Ratié
2011b: 494-98).

24 See Taber 1986: 115.

25 See ĪS: 5: tathā hi sanniveśaviśeṣasya buddhimanmātreṇānvayaḥ
pradarśyate, na tu buddhimadviśeṣeṇa kumbhakāreṇeśvareṇa vā. “To
explain: [the inference] demonstrates the [invariable] co-presence
(anvaya) of a specific arrangement with an intelligent being in general
(buddhimanmātra), and not [its invariable co-presence] with a particular
intelligent being (buddhimadviśeṣa) that would be either the potter or
the Lord.”

26 See ĪS: 6 (immediately before quoting Kumārila): evam ihāpi neśvareṇa
buddhimatā kumbhakāreṇa vānvayapradarśanaṁ
yato'siddhānvayatādidoṣodbhāvanaṁ kriyate. “In the same way, in the case
[of the inference of the Lord] as well, [the inference involves] no
demonstration of the [invariable] co-presence [of a specific
arrangement] with either an intelligent Lord or a potter, since [if it
were the case,] this would lead to the fault [consisting of] the fact
that the [invariable] co-presence is not established, etc.”

27 See ĪS: 5: tat tu sāmānyarūpaṁ na viśeṣasambandhaṁ vinā sthitiṁ
labhata iti pakṣasambandhaucityānusāreṇa vyaktiviśeṣaṁ kulālaṁ kuvindam
īśvaram anyaṁ vāpy āśrayaviśeṣam āśrayatvenāvalambate. “Nonetheless,
this general form (sāmānyarūpa) is not established without a
relationship with a particular (viśeṣasambandha). Therefore [in such an
inference we] rely on a particular individual (vyaktiviśeṣa), [i.e.] a
potter, a weaver, the Lord or any other particular substrate [that we
use] as a substrate [for the inferred general form] according to whether
[this particular individual] is appropriate for a relationship with the
subject of the inference (pakṣa).” Cf. Krasser 2002: 151-52.

28 See ĪS: 5: yathā dhūmamātreṇa dūrāt khadiravane 'gnimātre 'py
anumīyamāne khādiratvaviśeṣo dhūmaviśeṣānapekṣayāpy āśrayavaśāt
prasiddhyati. “Just as, when inferring merely fire in general from smoke
in general [because we see smoke] in the distance in a forest of
khadiras, [we] are well aware of the [fire’s] particularity that is [the
property of] being of a khadira type, regardless of the particular
smoke, due to the substrate (āśraya) [that is appropriate for a
relationship with the forest of khadiras which is the subject of the
inference] . . .” Cf. Taber 1986: 109-10. Utpaladeva also takes as an
example of inference the Sāṁkhya teleological argument that aims at
proving the existence of the Self from the fact that things are “for the
benefit of another” (parārtha). On this inference, see Watson 2006:
192-202; Eltschinger and Ratié 2013: 152-72. On Utpaladeva’s use of this
Sāṁkhya argument here, see Taber 1986: 110.

29 See ĪS 8-9: na kulālena neśenāpy anvayo 'tra pradarśyate । yato
viruddhatāsya syād asiddhānvayatāpi vā ।। kevalaṁ
buddhimanmātravyāptisaṁdarśanād api । pakṣadharmabalād dhīmān kvacit
kaścit pratīyate ।। “In this [inference of the Lord, what we]
demonstrate is not the [invariable] co-presence [of a specific
arrangement] with the potter, nor is it [the invariable co-presence of
this specific arrangement] with the Lord, since [if it were so,] either
the [reason] would be contradictory, or the [invariable] co-presence
would not be established [in the example]. Nonetheless, [we] acknowledge
[the existence of] a particular intelligent [entity] in a particular
[case], although [we gain this knowledge] by demonstrating [only] the
invariable concomitance [of a specific arrangement] with an intelligent
being in general, by virtue of a [particular] property [belonging to]
the subject of the inference (pakṣadharmabalāt).” Cf. Krasser 2002: 153.

30 See ĪS: 6: anyonyopayogitanukaraṇādisarvakriyaiveśvaratvaṁ yathā
mr̥tsanniveśaviśeṣakartr̥taiva kulālatvam. “Being the Lord (īśvaratva) is
nothing but creating everything, [i.e.] bodies, organs and so on, which
help each other [in the performance of their respective functions], just
as being a potter is nothing but creating a specific arrangement from
clay.”

31 See ĪS: 6: tena yathā dhūmenāgniḥ sāmānyena kvacit pradeśe
sādhyamānas tatpradeśādhāraviśiṣṭaḥ sāmarthyāt sidhyati na tu tatra
pramāṇāntaram upayujyate, tatheśvarasādhane 'pi. “Therefore a fire, when
demonstrated [to exist] as [a fire] in general in a particular place
thanks to [the presence of] smoke, is proved by implication (sāmarthyāt)
[to exist as a fire] particularized by the substrate that is this
[particular] place, while no other means of knowledge is used [to prove]
this [particularity], in the same way, in the demonstration of the Lord
as well [, no additional means of knowledge is needed to prove that the
intelligent cause in general is the Lord].”

32 This accusation had been put forward by Kumārila, who had argued that
if the theist merely intends to prove that the universe has a cause in
general, he only proves what his opponents too already admit, since the
Mīmāṁsakas consider that the specific arrangement of the universe is
determined by the individuals’ past actions and their karmic
retribution. See ŚV, Sambandhākṣepaparihāra 75: kasyacid dhetumātratvaṁ
yady adhiṣṭhātr̥teṣyate । karmabhiḥ sarvajīvānāṁ tatsiddheḥ
siddhasādhanam ।। “If [what] you mean [when talking about] the fact that
something is a controlling agent [of the universe] is [merely] the fact
that it is a cause in general (hetumātra) [of the universe], [then you
only] prove what is [already] established [for us too] (siddhasādhana),
since [we consider that] this [causality in general] is established
through the [past] actions (karman) of all living beings.” As shown in
Krasser 1999, this criticism (or at least a very similar one) was
appropriated by Dharmakīrti and is mentioned in PV,
Pramāṇasiddhipariccheda 10: sthitvāpravr̥ttisaṁsthānaviśeṣārthakriyādiṣu
। iṣṭasiddhir asiddhir vā dr̥ṣṭānte saṁśayo’thavā ।। “[The opponents’
inferential reasons] such as ‘activity after a rest’, ‘a specific
arrangement’ and ‘fulfilling a purpose’ contain [logical faults in so
far as they] prove what is already admitted [by us too] (iṣṭasiddhi), or
[what they must prove] is not established in the example, or there
[remains] a doubt [regarding the inferential reasons].” See also Krasser
2002: 22ff.

33 ĪS: 8: na cāpi ghaṭādisvalakṣaṇaviśiṣṭa* eva sanniveśaḥ pramāṇena
siddha iti sa evānyatra dharmiṇy adr̥ṣṭakartr̥ke dr̥ṣṭasajātīyakam eva
kartāraṁ sādhayati na tu sanniveśanāmātram, tasya sāmānyarūpasya
kāryatvāsiddher iti vācyam; yataḥ svalakṣaṇam eva yady api
svalakṣaṇāpekṣayā darśanādarśanābhyāṁ kāryaṁ pratīyate, tathāpi tat**
svalakṣaṇaṁ kāryatvena tathā siddhaṁ sajātīyasvalakṣaṇāntarāṇy api
tatkāraṇasajātīyasvalakṣaṇāntarakāryatvena vyavasthāpayati, yathā sakr̥d
apy eko dhūmo 'gnikāryatayā siddho dhūmāntarāṇy apy agnikāryatvena***
siddhāny eva karoti. [*ghaṭādisvalakṣaṇaviśiṣṭa em. Krasser 2002: 154:
ghaṭādisvalakṣaṇo viśiṣṭa ĪS. **tat em. Krasser ibid.: tat tathā ĪS. ***
agnikāryatvena em. Krasser ibid.: agnikāryatve ĪS]. “Moreover, one
cannot say[, as Dharmakīrti does:] ‘since an arrangement is established
[to be an effect] by a [valid] means of knowledge only [if it is]
particularized (viśiṣṭa) as a particular (svalakṣaṇa) such as a pot,
with respect to another subject of inference whose agent is not
perceived, this same [arrangement consisting of a particular merely]
proves [the existence of] an agent that [can] only [be] of the same sort
(sajātīya) as the perceived [one], and not an arrangement in general
(sanniveśanāmātra), because that which consists of a generality
(sāmānya) cannot be established to be an effect [, so that it is
illegitimate to infer the agency of īśvara by analogy with that of the
potter.’ One cannot say that,] because even though one only grasps an
effect that is a particular through the perception and non-perception
[that establish invariable concomitance] with respect to a[nother]
particular, nonetheless, this particular that is thus established to be
an effect establishes in turn other particulars of the same sort
(sajātīya) as being effects [consisting of] other particulars having a
cause of the same sort as the [first particular], just as a single
[particular instance of] smoke, even though [it occurs] only once, is
established to be an effect of fire [and thus] enables [us] to establish
that other [particular instances of] smoke as well are effects of fire.”
See Taber 1986: 115-16; Krasser 2002: 153-55.

34 ĪS: 8: tac ca kāryasvalakṣaṇam
anekasahakārijanya-tayānekavidhasvalakṣaṇāntaraiḥ sajātīyam. tathā ca
ghaṭasvalakṣaṇaṁ mr̥nmayatvena valmīkādibhiḥ, sanniveśena paṭādibhiḥ,
parivartulatvena piṣṭādimayaśarāvādibhir vicchinnatvena
cchinnavr̥kṣādibhir ity evamādinā krameṇaikaikajātiyuktāni svalakṣaṇāny
ekaikakāraṇakāryāṇi vyavasthāpyante. “And this particular [established
to be] an effect is of the same sort as the other particulars,
[although] they are not of the same sort in so far as they are produced
by cooperating [causes] (sahakārin) that differ. And thus, the
particular that is a pot [is of the same sort] as [particulars] such as
an anthill in so far as it is made of clay; [it is of the same sort] as
[particulars] such as a cloth in so far as it has a [specific]
arrangement; [it is of the same sort] as [particulars] such as a bowl
full of flour for instance in so far as it is round; [and it is of the
same sort] as a cut tree for instance in so far as it is separated [from
other things]. It is in such ways that particulars belonging to this or
that kind (ekaikajāti) are established to be effects of this or that
cause.” See Taber 1986: 116; Krasser 2002: 155.

35 ĪS: 8: tajjātīyārthitāyās tajjātīyakāraṇopādānāya saugatair apīyaṁ
vyavasthā kr̥tā, na mr̥daḥ saṁsthānaṁ na kulālān mr̥drūpatety evaṁ
vadadbhiḥ. “The Buddhists themselves, when saying ‘[the pot’s]
arrangement does not [come] from clay, the [pot’s property of]
consisting of clay does not [come] from the potter’, make such a
distinction out of their desire to find [effects] of the same kind so as
to grasp causes of the same kind.”

36 ĪS: 8: vastusthitiś cedr̥śy eva, na hi yathā ghaṭaḥ saṁsthānavān
buddhimatā puruṣeṇa niyatena tathā paṭo 'pi. tathaiva tu* pratītir
ubhayatrāpi prājñakr̥tatvapratīter upayogāya ca pravr̥ttir ity evaṁ
vyavasāya eva**. [*tu conj.: ca ĪS. **vyavasāya eva em. Krasser 2002:
154: vyavasāyaiva ĪS]. “And the establishment of things [in practical
existence occurs] in the same way. For a cloth does not have an
arrangement [produced] by a specific intelligent person in the same way
as a pot does [, since they differ as regards material or instrumental
causes]; yet in both cases, [we] grasp [them] in the same way [as being
arrangements produced by a specific intelligent person,] and [we] make
effort so as to use [both the pot and the cloth precisely] because we
grasp [both of them] as products of an intelligent [cause]: this is
exactly [how] determination (vyavasāya) occurs.” See Krasser 2002:
155-56.

37 ĪS: 8: kevalaṁ teṣāṁ pareṣāṁ saugatānāṁ yathā sajātīyatvaṁ jātyā
vinaivāvaśyābhyupagantavyam ekapratyayakāritvaṁ svalakṣaṇaniṣṭham eva
tathaivaitad apīti. “Nonetheless, these Buddhist opponents must
necessarily acknowledge that [pots and clothes] are of the same kind [in
this respect], even though [they] refuse [to acknowledge the existence
per se of] the universal (jāti), [when they acknowledge that the pot and
the cloth] produce the same apprehension [in so far as they are both
grasped as products of an intelligent agent, and when they acknowledge
that the production of this same apprehension] rests exclusively on a
particular [and not on a universal. Therefore] in the same way, [they
must necessarily acknowledge] the [fact that the causes] too [must be of
the same kind, i.e. intelligent agents].”

38 ĪS: 9: ity avyabhicāry eva sanniveśaḥ strīpuṁsāder ivānyonya-
sādhyārthakriyānuguṇyādiviśeṣitas tanvāder īśvarakartr̥tāsādhana iti.
“Therefore the invariable arrangement particularized by the harmony
(ānuguṇya) in the functions (arthakriyā) [that the parts] perform thanks
to each other, as [the functions] of man and woman for instance,
establishes that the Lord is the agent of bodies, etc.”

39 Taber 1986: 112-14.

40 NMĪS: 83: dhūmo hi mahānase kumbhadāsīphūtkāramārutasaṁdhukṣya-
mānamandajvalanajanmā kr̥śaprāyaprakr̥tir upalabdhaḥ. sa yadi parvate
prabalasamīraṇollasitahutavahapluṣyamāṇ-
amahāmahīruhaskandhendhanaprabhavo bahulabahulaḥ khamaṇḍalam akhilam
ākrāmann upalabhyate, tat kim idānīm analapramitiṁ mā kārṣīt. atha
viśeṣarahitaṁ dhūmamātram agnimātreṇa vyāptam avagatam iti tatas
tadanumānam. ihāpi sanniveśamātraṁ kartr̥mātreṇa vyāptam iti tato ’pi tad
anumīyatām. “For [we] observe that in a kitchen, smoke arises from a
weak flame kindled by the air blown by a servant [, and that] its form
is usually meager. If [we] see that the [smoke] on a hill arises from
the fuel [consisting of] the trunks of big trees burnt by a fire fanned
by a strong wind, [and that this smoke] is huge [and] stretches up to
the sky, then should [this second smoke perceived] now not produce [in
us] the knowledge of fire? If [the opponent answers that we] understand
smoke in general, devoid of any particularity, to be invariably
concomitant with fire in general, hence the inference of [fire], [we
answer that] in the [case of the Lord] as well, an arrangement in
general is invariably concomitant with an agent in general, therefore
let it be inferred too!” Cf. ĀḌ: 164: anya eva hi dhūmo’sau kr̥śajanmā
mahānase । anya evāyam adrau ca vyāptavyomadigantaraḥ ।। “For this smoke
which arises meagerly in the kitchen is one thing, and that [smoke] on
the hill pervading all the quarters of the sky is quite another!”

41 See NMĪS: 83: nanu sanniveśaśabdasādhāraṇamātram atra, na
vastusāmānyaṁ kiṁcid asti. bhikṣo, dhūme’pi bhavaddarśane kiṁ
vastumātram asti. “[­ The Buddhist:] But in this [inference of the Lord]
there is only a verbal generality (śabdasādhāraṇa) ‘arrangement’, [but]
no real generality (vastusāmānya) at all. [­The Naiyāyika:] O monk, in
the smoke as well, according to your system, is there any [such thing as
a] real general entity (vastumātra)?” Jayanta later concludes (ibid.:
84): ihāpi sanniveśavikalpānuvr̥ttes tvatprakalpitam apoharūpam eva
sāmānyam iṣyatām. “In this [case of the inference of the Lord from a
specific arrangement] as well [as in the case of the inference of fire
from smoke, you] must admit a generality ­[even though] it is nothing
but an exclusion that you construct in accordance with the concept of
arrangement.” (For a translation of the full passage, see Krasser 2002:
106-08). Cf. ĀḌ: 166, where the Buddhist’s objection “But whereas in
other [cases] there is a real generality, in this [case] there is only a
verbal generality, and no real generality; and with respect to a [mere]
verbal generality there is an overextension [of the reasoning]” (nanv
anyatra vāstavaṁ sāmānyam, iha tu śabdasāmānyamātraṁ na tu
vastusāmānyam, śabdasāmānye cātiprasaṅgaḥ), is answered: “But how could
there be a real generality in the house of a Buddhist?” (kuto
bauddhagr̥he vāstavaṁ sāmānyam).

42 See NMĪS: 84: api ca sakartr̥katvābhimateṣv api saṁsthāneṣu na
sarvātmanā tulyatvaṁ pratīyate. na hi ghaṭasaṁsthānaṁ paṭasaṁsthānaṁ
catuḥśālasaṁsthānaṁ ca susadr̥śam iti. saṁsthānasāmānyaṁ tu parvatādāv
api vidyata eveti. “Moreover, although [specific] arrangements are
considered as having an agent, [they] are not apprehended as being
entirely similar. For the arrangement of a pot is not entirely similar
to the arrangement of a cloth or to the arrangement of a building.
Nonetheless, the generality ‘arrangement’ is indeed found in a mountain,
etc., as well.” Cf. ĀḌ: 166: dharmaṁ niyatam ālambya bhavati hy
anumākramaḥ । kva vā sarvātmanā sāmyaṁ sādhyadr̥ṣṭāntadharmiṇoḥ ।। “For
the inferential process rests on a specific property; in what case could
there be a complete similarity between the example [possessing the
property] to be established and the subject of the inference?”

43 NMĪS: 97-98: apare pakṣadharmabalād eva viśeṣalābham
abhyupagacchanti. na hīdr̥śaṁ paridr̥śyamānam anekarūpam aparimitam
anantaprāṇigatavicitrasukhaduḥkhasādhanaṁ bhuvanādi kāryam anatiśayena
puṁsā kartuṁ śakyam iti. yathā candanadhūmam itaradhūmavisadr̥śam
avalokya cāndana eva vahnir anumīyate, tathā vilakṣaṇāt kāryād vilakṣaṇa
eva kartānumāsyate. “Others consider that the particularity [of the
inferred agent in general] is obtained by virtue of the sole property of
the subject of the inference (pakṣadharmabalāt). For such an effect as
the worlds, etc., which [we] observe [to be] manifold, unlimited, [and]
to produce various pleasures and pains in the innumerable living beings,
cannot be produced by an ordinary (anatiśaya) person. Just as upon
seeing sandalwood smoke, which is different from other smokes, one
infers a fire that is necessarily a sandalwood [fire], in the same way,
due to the effect having a peculiar characteristic, one infers an agent
that necessarily has a peculiar characteristic.” Cf. ĀḌ: 166, where the
Buddhist objection “But this effect that is the earth, etc., indeed has
a peculiar characteristic!” (nanu vilakṣaṇam evedaṁ kṣityādi kāryam) is
answered in the following way: “But [then] you should admit that [its]
agent [too] must have a peculiar characteristic!” (nanu vilakṣaṇam eva
kartāraṁ kalpayantu bhavantaḥ).

44 Taber 1986: 114.

45 Ibid.

46 See above, n 43: Jayanta presents the argument as belonging to
“others”.

47 According to Oberhammer 1965: 32, this earlier Naiyāyika may have
been Trilocana. Note, however, that Krasser 2002: 101 emphasizes the
distance between the known fragments of Trilocana’s work and the
argument of specification through pakṣadharmatā found e.g. in
Vācaspatimiśra’s NKaṇ (see below, n 48).

48 See NKaṇ: 151 (as edited in Krasser 2002: 93): tad ayuktam,
sāmānyamātravyāptāv apy antarbhāvitaviśeṣasyaiva sāmānyasya
pakṣadharmatāvaśena sādhyadharmiṇy anumānāt, itarathā
sarvānumānocchedaprasaṅgāt. “This is not correct, because even though
there is an invariable concomitance between [two] mere generalities
(sāmānyamātra), with respect to that which must be established to bear
the property, one infers a generality that necessarily includes a
particularity, thanks to the fact that the subject of the inference has
a [particular] property (pakṣadharmatāvaśena); since otherwise, as a
consequence all inferences would be annihilated.” See also NKaṇ: 151 (as
edited in Krasser 2002: 98): saty apy utpattimattvasyācetanopādānatvasya
copādānopakaraṇasampradānaprayojanajñakartr̥mātravyāptatve
vivādādhyāsiteṣu pakṣadharmatābalād viśiṣṭasya tasya siddhiḥ. anyathā
sāmānyasyāpi vyāpakābhimatasyāsiddhiḥ syāt, nirviśeṣasyāsambhavāt,
viśeṣasya cānyasyānupapatteḥ. asarvajñasya
cātrādr̥ṣṭādibhedavijñānarahitasyādhiṣṭhātr̥bhāvāsambhavāt sarvajñātmaka
eva viśeṣo balād āpatati. tena yady apy upalabdhimatkartr̥katvaṁ
vyāptiviṣayaḥ, tathāpi tadviśeṣasya pakṣadharmatābalāt pratilambha iti
viśeṣaviṣayam anumānam. “Even though there is an invariable concomitance
of [the properties] ‘being produced’ and ‘having an unconscious material
cause’ with [the existence of] an agent in general (kartr̥mātra) who
knows the material cause, the instrumental causes, the recipient and the
purpose [of the effect], with respect to the [things] that are in
dispute [i.e. natural composite entities that are not unanimously
considered as effects,] this [agent] is established as [being]
particularized [by omniscience] by virtue of the fact that the subject
of the inference possesses a [particular] property (pakṣadharmatābalāt);
otherwise, the generality considered as invariably concomitant would not
be established, because [such an invariable concomitance] is not
possible for [something] that is not particularized, and because no
other particularity is possible [as regards this agent]. Since in this
[case] someone who is not omniscient [and therefore who] does not know
the various [unconscious instrumental causes] such as the invisible
[force] (adr̥ṣṭa) could not be a controller (adhiṣṭhātr̥), the
particularity consisting in [being] omniscient necessarily follows [for
this agent]. Therefore even though the invariable concomitance regards
[only the property of] having a conscious agent, nonetheless, one
understands this particularity due to the fact that the subject of the
inference has a [particular] property (pakṣadharmatābalāt) — therefore
the inference regards a particularity [and not a mere generality].”
While commenting on Jayanta’s mention of the pakṣadharmatā argument, H.
Krasser remarks that we cannot determine with certainty who formulated
it in the first place and that among Naiyāyikas, only Vācaspatimiśra and
Vittoka seem to have propounded such a theory, but that the latter seems
to be later than Jayanta. If the dates proposed for Vācaspatimiśra (i.e.
c. 950–1000) in Acharya (2006: xviii-xxviii) are right, Vācaspatimiśra
cannot have been Jayanta’s source either. In any case Utpaladeva (fl. c.
925-75) certainly knew Jayanta’s NM, but (as far as I know) it is not
impossible that he also knew at least some of Vācaspatimiśra’s writings
(on the proximity of Utpaladeva’s argument with Vācaspati’s, see Krasser
2002: 152, n 211).

49 See Krasser 2002: 136.

50 See e.g. the Naiyāyika pūrvapakṣa presented by Kamalaśīla in TSPS: 65
(see Krasser 2002: 81, n 117): yāvatā sāmānyena
buddhimatpūrvakatvamātraṁ sādhyate, tasmiṁś ca siddhe tanvādīnāṁ
sāmarthyād īśvaraḥ kartā siddhyati. na hi ghaṭādivat teṣāṁ kulālādiḥ
kartā sambhavati. tena sāmānyasya viśeṣaviśiṣṭatvāt, tanvādiṣu* cānyasya
kartur asambhāvyamānatvāt, sāmarthyād viśeṣaparigraham antareṇāpīśvara
eva kartāmīṣāṁ sidhyatīti. [*tanvādiṣu TSPS: tarvādiṣu TSPK] “It is only
[the property of] presupposing an intelligent [agent] that [we] prove as
this mere generality; and once this [mere generality] is established, as
an implication (sāmarthyāt) [of it, we] establish that the agent of
bodies and so on is the Lord. For their agent cannot be a potter for
instance, contrary to [the case] of e.g. a pot. Therefore, because the
generality is particularized by this particularity, and because with
respect to bodies and so on, another agent is impossible, as an
implication, even if [we] do not have the full grasp of the
particularity, it is the Lord that is established to be their agent”.
Jñānaśrīmitra’s ĪV: 239 attributes this line of argument to Trilocana
(see Krasser 2002: 79-80). On the fact that this strategy is common in
the Nyāya (and also recurs in the works of later Naiyāyikas such as
Udayana), see Chemparathy 1972: 88-89.

51 See Taber 1986: 120ff.

52 See Bronkhorst 1983, which argues that originally the distinction
between seśvara and anīśvara Sāṁkhya referred to the difference between
the Sāṁkhyas who accepted the agency of God in the creation of the
universe and those who did not, and that up to a rather late period
(i.e. at least the end of the first millenium) the so-called anīśvara
Sāṁkhya did not deny the existence of God but only its causal role in
the cosmic manifestation. Note that in ĪS 26, Utpaladeva designates his
opponent as sāṁkhyam anīśvaram.

53 Such Sāṁkhya refutations of īśvara as the cause of the universe can
be found in GB: 54 and MV: 55-56 ad SK 61, in YD ad SK 15: 157ff (see
Chemparathy 1965 for a translation and analysis), or in TK ad SK 57:
164.

54 ĪS: 12: na hi pradhānasiddhimātreṇaiveśvaranirākr̥tiḥ syād
upādānakāraṇatayā paramāṇusthāna eva pradhānasya mūlakāraṇatvena
samarthanāt. tac ca pradhānena paramāṇuvāda eva yadi paraṁ nirākriyate*
tataḥ pradhānavyavasthā viśva-syopādānakāraṇavicāraprastāve
prameyībhavati, na tu nimittakāraṇo-papādanaprakrame. [*nirākriyate
conj. : nirākriyeta ĪS] “For the Lord cannot be refuted merely by
establishing matter, since matter is proved to be the primordial cause
[of the universe only] in so far as it is [proved to be] the material
cause instead of atoms. And as a consequence, if it is only atomism that
is refuted by [establishing] matter, then establishing matter is an
object fit for the topic of the examination of the universe’s material
cause, but not for the topic of the explanation of [its] efficient
cause.”

55 See Taber 1986: 122-23.

56 ĪS: 12: tad evaṁ mūlaprakr̥tiḥ
sattvarajastamaḥsaṁjñaguṇa-trayasāmyātmikā prakr̥titayaiva
prasavadharmiṇī guṇānām evāṅgāṅgibhāvagamanena yāvan mahadādivikārātmanā
pariṇamate, tāvat puruṣārthatvam eva tatra tasyāḥ svabhāvabhūtaṁ
nimittam. “Therefore primordial nature, which consists of a state of
balance between the three qualities (guṇa) called sattva, rajas and
tamas, [and] which, precisely because it is a prakr̥ti [i.e. literally,
‘that which generates’,] has the property of generating, transforms
itself by bringing these very qualities to a state [in which they] serve
each other (aṅgāṅgibhāva), [and it brings them to this state through an
activity] consisting in transforming [them] into the Great [, i.e. the
intellect (buddhi)], etc. In so far as [primordial nature acts thus,]
the efficient cause (nimitta) of this [transformation] is nothing but
[primordial nature’s property of] being for the benefit of the Person
(puruṣārtha); [i.e. the efficient cause] is the very nature of this
[prakr̥ti].” Here the Sāṁkhya opponent seems to rely on SK 56-57 while
playing on the meanings of the term nimitta (apparently rather used in
the SK in the sense of “goal”): ity eṣa prakr̥tikr̥to
mahadādiviṣayabhūtaparyantaḥ । pratipuruṣavimokṣārthaṁ svārtha iva
parārtha ārambhaḥ ।। vatsavivr̥ddhinimittaṁ kṣīrasya yathā pravr̥ttir
ajñasya । puruṣavimokṣanimittaṁ tathā pravr̥ttiḥ pradhānasya ।। “This
[world,] from the Great [i.e. the intellect] to the elements that are
[sensory] objects, is produced by primordial nature for the benefit that
is the liberation of each Person; this activity is for the benefit of
another (parārtha) [, i.e. the Person, although it] seems to be for
[nature’s] own benefit. Just as milk, which is unconscious, acts so as
to (nimitta) make the calf grow, in the same way, matter acts so as to
free the Person.” Several commentaries interpret SK 56 as a refutation
of īśvara’s role as an efficient cause. See JM: 111: prakr̥tikr̥ta iti
pradhānakr̥taḥ, neśvarādikr̥ta ity arthaḥ. “Produced by primordial nature
[means] ‘produced by matter’; i.e. it is not produced by the Lord for
instance.” Cf. TK: 164: neśvarādhiṣṭhitaprakr̥tikr̥to
nirvyāpārasyādhiṣṭhātr̥tvāsambhavāt. na hi nirvyāpāras takṣā vāsyādy
adhitiṣṭhati. “It is not produced by a primordial nature that would be
controlled (adhiṣṭhita) by the Lord, because [the Lord,] who does not
act, cannot be a controller; for a carpenter who does not act does not
control the axe and so on.” Vācaspatimiśra further interprets SK 57 as a
justification of the fact that primordial nature, although unconscious,
can act as an efficient cause in so far as it exists for the benefit of
the puruṣa. See TK, ibid., where the objection answered by SK 57 is
stated in the following way: syād etat. svārthaṁ parārthaṁ vā cetanaḥ
pravartate. na ca prakr̥tir acetanaivaṁ bhavitum arhati. tasmād asti
prakr̥ter adhiṣṭhātā cetanaḥ. na ca kṣetrajñāś cetanā api prakr̥tim
adhiṣṭhātum arhanti, teṣāṁ prakr̥tirūpānabhijñatvāt. tasmād asti
sarvārthadarśī prakr̥ter adhiṣṭhātā, sa ceśvara iti. ata āha . . .
“Suppose that [the following] be [urged]: a conscious [entity] acts
either for its own benefit or for the benefit of something else; now,
primordial nature, which is unconscious, is incapable of [acting] thus;
therefore there is a conscious controller of primordial nature. And the
individuals, although they are conscious, are not capable of controlling
primordial nature, since they are ignorant of the [various] forms of
primordial nature. Therefore there is a controller of primordial nature
who knows all things; and this controller is the Lord. In response to
this [the author] states . . . .”

57 ĪS: 12: na hi yadr̥cchayā vartamānāyāḥ kāryavargasya
devamānuṣatiryagyonirūpasya tadavāntarajātivaicitryavato niyamena
strīpuṁsasaṁsthānadvayasya vānyonyānuguṇyam upapadyate. tad etat
sanniveśaviśeṣarūpatayābhyupetam īśvaravādināpi. “For the mutual harmony
(ānuguṇya) [found to occur] invariably in all the effects that are
[divided into] gods, men and animals [and that] comprise [a whole]
variety of [different] species within [these divisions], or [the mutual
harmony found to occur invariably] in the two [bodily] structures of a
woman and man, cannot arise from [matter] if [matter] transforms itself
randomly (yadr̥cchayā) [rather than for the benefit of the Person]. Even
the proponent of the Lord [as the cause of the universe] admits this in
so far as [he acknowledges that the universe] is a specific
arrangement.”

58 See ĪS: 12: arthavattvaṁ ca sukhaduḥkhopalambha-saṁpādanārthatayaiva
sarvasyaivārtharūpasya paramparayā paryavasyati. “And [stating that
nature does not act randomly] amounts [to saying that] it has a purpose,
since precisely, the purpose [of nature] is to successively bring about
the perception of pleasure and pain as regards everything that consists
of an object.” See also ĪS: 13: tato yathā
sukhaduḥkhamohamayasarvārthasaṁvedanaṁ* puruṣārthas tathā
śāstropadiṣṭānumānopamānādinā guṇapuruṣāntaropalabdhir api. tad ubhayam
api prayojanaṁ bhogāpavargarūpaṁ** guṇapravr̥tteḥ.
tatprayojanasaṁpādanayogyasvabhāvatā ca nimittakāraṇam ucyate.
[*°sarvārthasaṁvedanam conj.: °parārthasaṁvedanam ĪS. **°rūpaṁ conj.:
°rūpa° ĪS]. “Therefore the benefit of the Person is the awareness of all
objects consisting of pleasure, pain and delusion [which constitute the
three qualities], but also the perception that the qualities and the
Person are distinct, [a perception which occurs] for instance thanks to
the inferences and comparisons taught in treatises. As a consequence,
both of these, i.e. experience (bhoga) and liberation (apavarga), are
the goal of the activity of qualities. And what is called ‘efficient
cause’ is [nothing but] the fact that [primordial nature] has a nature
capable of accomplishing this goal.” Cf. MV: 54: sa cārtho dvividhaḥ.
śabdādyupalabdhir ādir guṇapuruṣāntaropalabdhir antaś ca. triṣu lokeṣu
śabdādiviṣayaiḥ puruṣaṁ yojayati. ante ca guṇapuruṣāntaropalabdhyā
mokṣaṁ kurute. “And this benefit [of the Person] is twofold: first, it
is the perception of [objects] such as sound, and finally, it is the
perception that qualities and the Person are distinct. In the three
worlds, [primordial nature acting for this benefit] connects the Person
with objects such as sound, and finally it induces liberation through
the perception that qualities and the Person are distinct.”

59 See ĪS 21: ata eva pradhānasya mahattvapariṇāminaḥ । nimittakāraṇaṁ
nānyat puruṣārthodyamād r̥te ।। “For this very reason, there is no
efficient cause besides the effort that matter makes for the benefit of
the Person while transforming itself into the Great [, i.e. the
intellect, etc.]”

60 ĪS: 18: tatraitān sāṁkhyān praty ucyate, yathā nāvagato bhavadbhiḥ
sādhanārtha iti. yadi hi sarvavicitrasaṁsthānakāryotpādaneṣu
pradhānasyaiva yā puruṣabhogārthatā saiva nimittakāraṇaṁ kim īśvareṇety
ucyate tat kumbhakāreṇāpi kiṁ ghaṭakaraṇe. tatrāpi prādhānikasya
mr̥tpiṇḍādeḥ puruṣārthasvabhāvatāvaśād eva
tathābhūtasanniveśavadghaṭakaraṇasāmarthyaṁ syāt. “In this regard, [we]
reply to these Sāṁkhyas in [the following] way: you have not understood
the point of the demonstration. For [you ask:] ‘if it is matter’s
[property of] having as its purpose the experience [of pain and
pleasure] by the Person that is the efficient cause with regard to the
production of all the various effects that are [specific] arrangements,
what is the point of the Lord?’ [But to this we] reply: then what is the
point of the potter as well in the production of a pot? [If we followed
your reasoning,] in the [case of the pot] as well, the capacity to
produce a pot endowed with such a [specific] arrangement would be due to
the mere fact that a material [entity] such as the lump of clay has as
its nature to be for the benefit of the Person.”

61 ĪS: 18: atha pradhānasyāyam api svabhāvaviśeṣa eva, yad
ghaṭasanniveśādau daṇḍacakravadbuddhimadapekṣā, tāvatā prādhānikena
kāraṇakalāpena puruṣārthopayogitatsanniveśa-vadghaṭavastusiddheḥ. tad
evam eva tanukaraṇādikāraṇasyāpi prādhānikāt tathāsvabhāvayogāt kathaṁ
tathākaraṇayogya-buddhimadapekṣā neṣyate. “If [, on the other hand, you
consider that] matter has this particular feature that with respect to
the [specific] arrangement of a pot for instance, it requires an
intelligent [agent] equipped with a stick and a wheel, because it is
through all these causes which belong to matter [as transformations of
it]­ that the realization of the thing that is a pot having this
[specific] arrangement contributes to the benefit of the Person, then,
since [you acknowledge that] matter possesses such a nature, [you must
admit that] it is exactly the same with respect to the cause of [such
things] as bodies and organs as well: why [then] do [you] refuse to
admit the requirement of an intelligent [agent] fit for such a creation
[as the universe]?”

62 ĪS 31cd-33ab: lokayātrānusaṁdhānavatīṁ prajñāṁ vinā na hi ।। tathā
cikīrṣāṁ ca vinā vicitraracanodbhavaḥ । sthūlatāmātram eva syān na tu
lokopayoginī ।। racanā niyamena syād vicitrā jātirūpiṇī । “For without a
knowledge (prajñā) involving the synthetic awareness (anusaṁdhāna) of
the course of the world, and similarly, without a desire to act
(cikīrṣā), various [specific] arrangements cannot arise. [Without it,
material elements] may [gather into] gross [, perceptible wholes,] but
there can be no arrangement useful to people, [occurring] invariably,
varied [and] containing [different] species.” On the required synthetic
awareness, see e.g. ĪS: 19-20: tathā hi yāvad idam ito bhavati
kiṁcidadhikaviśeṣāt punar ata evānena viśeṣeṇa saviśeṣam idam eva
bhavati, aparaviśeṣayuktāt punar asmād evānyad evānyajātīyam eva kāryaṁ
jāyate, tataḥ saṁpraty evaṁvidham upayujyate tathaiva karomīty evaṁ
vicāracaturā matir na syāt, tāvat kathaṁ tathābhūtaviśeṣakaraṇāya
hānopādāne syātām. “To explain: [if only material, insentient causes
were to produce specific arrangements designed to contribute to the
benefit of the Person,] how could [they] reject [some auxiliary causes]
and use [others] so as to produce such a specific [arrangement], in so
far as [these causes] could have no such fourfold understanding as this:
‘this [thing A] exists due to that [thing B]; but this same [thing A]
exists while having a particularity due to this same [thing B] when this
[thing B] has some added particularity, [precisely] because of this
particularity [of B]; [and] in turn, when this [thing B] has another
particularity, it produces another effect, which is of another sort than
[A]; therefore now, such a [cause] can contribute [to producing this
particular effect], [and] I am going to act exactly in this way’?”

63 See SK 22: prakr̥ter mahāṁs tato ’haṁkāras tasmād gaṇaś ca ṣoḍaśakaḥ ।
tasmād api ṣoḍaśakāt pañcabhyaḥ pañca bhūtāni ।। “From primordial nature
arises the Great [, i.e. the intellect]; from the [Great] arises egoity
(ahaṁkāra); and from [egoity], the group of the sixteen [i.e. the group
of the five subtle elements, the five organs of perception, the five
organs of action and the mind (manas)]; and in turn, from the five
[subtle elements] within these sixteen [arise] the five gross
[elements].”

64 See SK 23a: adhyavasāyo buddhiḥ . . . “The intellect is
determination. . .”. Cf. GBh: 25: adhyavasāyo buddhilakṣaṇam.
adhyavasānam adhyavasāyaḥ. yathā bīje bhaviṣyadvr̥ttiko’ṅkuras tadvad
adhyavasāyaḥ. ayaṁ ghaṭo’yaṁ paṭa ity evaṁ sati yā sā buddhir iti
lakṣyate. “Determination is the characteristic of the intellect; it is
the act of determining. Just as the sprout that will occur later is
[contained] in the seed, in the same way, determination [is contained in
the intellect]. It is defined as the intellect when such a [thought]
occurs: ‘this is a pot’, ‘this is a cloth’.”

65 See SK 36: ete pradīpakalpāḥ parasparavilakṣaṇā guṇaviśeṣāḥ । kr̥tsnaṁ
puruṣasyārthaṁ prakāśya buddhau prayacchanti. “The [external organs,
egoity and mind,] which differ from each other [and] are particular
[modifications of] the qualities, [functioning] like a lamp, manifest
the entire benefit of the Person and place [it] in the intellect.”

66 ĪS: 23: na ca pradhānasyaiva mūlakāraṇasya vyavasāyādibhir vyaktir
asti tat kathaṁ tasyecchādiyogaḥ puruṣārthoddeśānītaḥ syād yataḥ
pravr̥ttir bhavet. “And matter alone, [considered as] the primordial
cause, [can]not be manifest in the form of determination, [will and
synthetic knowledge]; therefore [at that time,] how could it possess
will [, synthetic knowledge and determination], which would enable it to
be aimed at the benefit of the Person, so that the activity [of matter]
could take place?”

67 ĪS: 23: yady api ca buddher astīcchānusaṁdhānaṁ ca vyāpāras tathāpi
puruṣasannidhānād yāvan na cetyamānaḥ prakāśamāno 'sau saṁpannas tāvan
necchādirūpatāṁ dhatte tathālakṣaṇatvād icchānusaṁdhānādīnām. “And even
if an activity of the intellect does occur [at the beginning of the
universe’s manifestation, namely,] will and a synthetic awareness,
nonetheless, if [this activity of the intellect, which is of a material
nature,] is not reflected upon due to the presence of a Person, [i.e. if
it] does not obtain [to be] manifest [for a consciousness], it cannot
reach the status of will and [synthetic awareness], because will,
synthetic awareness and so on consist in such a [conscious state].” On
the Sāṁkhyas’ endeavour to solve the problem of the relationship between
the material buddhi and the puruṣa’s consciousness, and on Utpaladeva’s
criticism of this solution in the Pratyabhijñā treatise, see Torella
1994: 93, n 12; Ratié 2011a: 94-106, 276-89.

68 See ĪS: 23: atha sarvapuruṣasādhāraṇasyaikasyāpi buddhitattvasya
mahatsaṁjñakasya pratipuruṣam adhyavasāyalakṣaṇavr̥ttiḥ satyaṁ bhidyate,
mahatkāraṇāsmitājanmano vā manaḥsaṁjñakaraṇasya, eṣādhyavasāyādivr̥ttiḥ
pratyekapuruṣaniyatāstu, na tayottarakālabhāvinyā pradhānasya mahato vā
puruṣārthānusaṁdhānecchāvattā yujyate. “But if [you reply that] although
one, [i.e.] common to all Persons, the principle of the intellect
(buddhitattva) called the Great, or the organ called mind (manas) which
arises from egoity (asmitā) that [in turn] has as its cause the Great­,
transforms itself into [a manifestation] characterized as determination
(adhyavasāya) [and] is in fact differentiated according to each Person,
[then] this transformation into determination and so on must be
restricted to each Person, [but] neither matter nor the [principle of
the intellect called] the Great can be endowed with synthetic knowledge
and will regarding the benefit of the Person through this
[transformation,] since [this transformation only] arises at a later
time.”

69 See ĪS: 23-24: kiṁ tu pradhānasyaiva prathamavikārakaraṇa eva
sarvapuruṣoddeśena sāmānyānusaṁdhānecchāvyavasāyādivr̥ttiḥ prathamā
buddhisaṁjñāsty eva, yena tasyāpi buddhipūrvakāritā syāt. tadaiva tad
api na yuktam, pradhānasya
sarvathaivāvyaktarūpatvenānupalakṣaṇīyavr̥ttitvāt. na ca vr̥ttau
puruṣeṇāsaṁviditāyām icchānusaṁdhānādirūpatvaṁ saṁbhavati, puruṣeṇāpi
pradhānavr̥tteḥ kena saṁvedyamānatā sarvapuruṣoddeśena sāmānyapravr̥tteḥ,
ekaikena cet tat tasya sarvajñatvaṁ syāt . . . “Rather, when matter
first transforms itself, there must be a first transformation into
synthetic knowledge, will, determination and so on which is called
‘intellect’ [and] is universal (sāmānya), [i.e.] concerns all Persons,
[and it is] thanks to [this transformation] that even [matter] can be an
intelligent agent. [But again,] at that very moment [when matter starts
transforming itself], this too is impossible, because the transformation
of matter cannot be perceived, since its nature is absolutely
unmanifest. And if no Person is aware of this activity, it cannot
consist of will, synthetic knowledge and so on; and which Person is
aware of this transformation of matter, since this activity is universal
(sāmānya), [i.e. since it] concerns all Persons? If [you reply]: each of
them, then [each of] them should be omniscient . . .” See also ĪS: 24:
atha sāmānyarūpeṇaiva sarvajñena ca puruṣaviśeṣeṇa sāmānyapradhānavr̥tteḥ
saṁvedyamānatā tat sa eveśvaro 'stu, tasyaiva viśvanirmitsā saṁvedyā
satī sambandhinī bhavatīti. “But [if you reply that] it is a special
Person (puruṣaviśeṣa), who has a universal form [and not an individual
one] and who is omniscient, who is aware of the universal transformation
of matter, then let [us] admit that this [Person] is the Lord himself,
since only he can have the desire to create the universe while being
aware of it.” Cf. ĪS 41cd-42ab: athāpi sarvapuruṣābhinnenaikena kenacit
।। vedyā sā vaiṣa tarhy ekaḥ kartā jñātā sa ceśvaraḥ । “But if [the
Sāṁkhya opponent had] rather [reply that] a certain unique [entity]
which is not distinct from all Persons (sarvapuruṣābhinna) is aware of
this [desire to create,] then [he must concede the existence of] a
single agent [and] knower, and this is [what we call] the Lord.”

70 Taber 1986: 119, 128.

71 See NV ad NS IV.1.21: 433: kaḥ punar īśvarasya kāraṇatve nyāyaḥ –
ayaṁ nyāyo ’bhidhīyate. pradhānaparamāṇukarmāṇi prāk pravr̥tter
buddhimatkāraṇādhiṣṭhitāni pravartante’cetanatvād vāsyādivad iti. yathā
vāsyādi buddhimatā takṣṇādhiṣṭhitam acetanatvāt pravartate, tathā
pradhānaparamāṇukarmāṇy acetanāni pravartante. tasmāt tāny api
buddhimatkāraṇādhiṣṭhitānīti. “But what is the reasoning [proving] that
the Lord is the cause [of the universe]? Here is [how we] formulate this
argument: before [they] start acting, matter, atoms and actions [that
lead to karmic retribution] are prompted [to act in so far as they are]
controlled (adhiṣṭhita) by an intelligent cause, because they are
unconscious, just as an axe. [For] just as an axe for instance is
prompted [to cut a tree in so far as it is] controlled by an intelligent
woodcutter, because it is unconscious, in the same way, matter, atoms
and actions, which are unconscious, are prompted [to act so as to
produce the universe]; therefore they too are controlled by an
intelligent cause.”

72 See ibid.: tatra pradhānakāraṇikās tāvat puruṣārtham adhiṣṭhāyakaṁ
pradhānasya varṇayanti. puruṣārthena prayuktaṁ pradhānaṁ pravartata iti.
puruṣārthaś ca dvedhā bhavati, śabdādyupalabdhir guṇapuruṣāntaradarśanaṁ
ceti. tadubhayaṁ pradhānapravr̥ttiṁ vinā na bhavatīti. “In this regard,
first of all, those who consider matter as the cause [of the universe]
explain that [what] controls matter is the benefit of the Person
(puruṣārtha), [i.e.] that matter is prompted [to act] while being
directed by the benefit of the Person. And the benefit of the Person is
twofold: [on the one hand, it is] the perception of [objects] such as
sound, and [on the other hand,] the realization that qualities and the
Person are distinct. And these two [sorts of benefit of the Person]
cannot occur without the activity of matter.”

73 See NV ad IV.1.21: 433: na, prāk pravr̥ttes tadabhāvāt. yāvat
pradhānaṁ mahadādibhāvena na pariṇamate, tāvan na śabdādyupalabdhir
asti, na guṇapuruṣāntaropalabdhir iti hetvabhāvāt pradhānapravr̥ttir na
yuktā. “[This is] not [correct], because prior to [matter’s] activity,
this [twofold benefit of the Person] does not exist: as long as matter
does not transform itself into the Great [i.e. the intellect], etc.,
there cannot be any perception of sound and so on, nor [can there be]
any perception that qualities and the Person are distinct. Therefore,
since this [so-called] cause [of the activity of matter] does not exist
[at that time], the activity of matter is impossible.” Note that this
argument is part of a dilemma; thus Uddyotakara adds (NV: 433-34):
athāsti nāsad ātmānaṁ labhate na san nirudhyata ity evaṁ ca sati
vidyamānaḥ puruṣārthaḥ pradhānaṁ pravartayatīti na puruṣārthā
pradhānasya pravr̥ttiḥ. na hi loke yad yasya bhavati sa tadarthaṁ punar
yatata iti. “But [if the Sāṁkhya opponent answers that in fact this
cause] is present [at that time, on the grounds] that what is
non-existent cannot obtain existence [and that] what exists cannot cease
[to exist], [we answer that] if it is the case, since the benefit of the
Person prompts matter to act [whereas it already] exists, the activity
of matter [can] not be for the benefit of the Person; for in the
[ordinary] world, one does not make again an effort to [achieve] a
benefit that is [already achieved].”

74 Thus in NV: 434, while arguing with other opponents who contend that
atoms controlled by individuals’ actions (rather than primordial nature)
are the cause of the universe, Uddyotakara comes back to the Sāṁkhya
assertion that unconscious matter can act and alludes to SK 57 (see
above, n 56): kṣīrādivad acetanasyāpi pravr̥ttir iti cet,
yathāpatyabharaṇārthaṁ kṣīrāder acetanasya pravr̥ttir evaṁ
paramāṇavo’cetanāḥ santaḥ puruṣārthaṁ pravartiṣyanta iti, tan na yuktaṁ
sādhyasamatvāt. “If [the opponent argues] that just as in the case of
milk, [something can] have an activity although it is unconscious, [i.e.
if he argues that] just as milk for instance, although unconscious, acts
so as to nourish an offspring, in the same way, atoms, which are
unconscious, must act for the benefit of the Person, [we answer that]
this is not correct, because of the [fault that this] is identical with
what is to be established (sādhyasama).”

75 Taber 1986: 128.

76 See the discussion in NV: 434, too long to be quoted here.

77 Thus, while defending the proof of īśvara’s existence as the
efficient cause of the universe, Bhāsarvajña argues that only conscious
entities can act (NBhūṣ: 447): cetanasyaiva hi kartr̥tvam. svatantro hi
kartety ucyate. śarīrādeś ca svātantryaṁ nāsti
puruṣābhiprāyānuvidhāyitvān mr̥taśarīrādeḥ kartr̥tvānupalambhāc ca. “For
agency belongs exclusively to [what is] conscious. For [we only] call
[something that is] independent an ‘agent’. And the body and so on have
no independence, because they conform to the intention of the person,
and because [we] do not observe that corpses for example have any
agency.” He then answers a Sāṁkhya objector who, relying on SK 57 (see
above, n 56), argues that agency can belong to conscious entities
“because an unconscious entity such as milk is seen to act
independently, for the purpose of making the calf grow”
(vatsādivivr̥ddhyartham acetanasya kṣīrādeḥ svātantryeṇa
pravr̥ttyupalambhāt, NBhūṣ: 447). According to Bhāsarvajña, this position
is refuted by inference as well as scripture: tathā hi loke 'pi
śāstraśilpādikāryaviśeṣaṁ dr̥ṣṭvā jñānaviśeṣaṁ tatkartur anumi­noti,
tajjñānarahitānāṁ cākartr̥tvam eveti. āgameṣv api vedasmr̥tipurāṇādiṣu
jñānina eva kartr̥tvaṁ śrūyate. vidvān yajeta ityādivacanād
dharmādikartr̥tvam api cetanasyaiveti. “To explain: in the world too,
upon seeing a particular effect such as a treatise or a work of art,
[we] infer that its agent must have a particular knowledge, whereas
those who are devoid of this knowledge cannot be the agents [of this
particular effect]. And in scriptures too, such as the Vedas, Smr̥ti,
Purāṇas and so on, it is stated that agency exclusively belongs to
[someone] who knows: through such words as ‘he who knows should
sacrifice’, the agency of dharma and so on also is ascribed solely to
the conscious.” The Sāṁkhya, however, objects (ibid.) that in fact this
agency belongs to that which is capable of knowledge, will and effort,
i.e. the intellect, which is a mere evolute of the insentient primordial
nature: nanu ca śāstraśilpādikartr̥tvaṁ jñānecchāprayatnavato
'cetanasyaiva buddhitattvasya, na tu cetanasyeti. “But it is [something]
unconscious, [namely] the principle of the intellect that possesses
knowledge, will and effort, which is the agent of such [effects] as a
treatise or a work of art and not [something] conscious [as you claim].”
Bhāsarvajña answers (ibid.) that only a conscious entity, i.e. the Self,
can be the substrate of knowledge, will and effort: tad idaṁ
mahāmohavijr̥mbhitaṁ yajjñānavān acetana iti. yo 'sau jñānecchādīnām
āśrayaḥ, sa eva hy ātmā, na tato 'nyaś cetano 'stīti vakṣyāmaḥ. “The
[notion] that the unconscious knows spreads from a great delusion; for
the substrate of knowledge, will and so on is nothing but the Self,
[and] we will explain that nothing is conscious apart from this [Self].”

78 While most Naiyāyikas consider that consciousness is only an
adventitious quality of the Self, Bhāsarvajña argues that the Self is by
nature conscious, and Abhinavagupta himself mentions with approval
Bhāsarvajña’s heterodox position in ĪPVV I: 134-35. See Ratié 2011a:
88-91.

79 See Krasser 2002: 157, which mentions a number of formal similarities
between the ĪS and the theistic argument attacked by the Kashmiri
Buddhist Śaṅkaranandana in the Īśvarāpākaraṇasaṁkṣepa, and suggests that
Śaṅkaranandana’s pūrvapakṣa might be at least in part based on
Utpaladeva’s work.

80 While conceding that Utpaladeva’s treatise “remains quite within the
Nyāya framework” (Taber 1986: 127), J. Taber considers that the ĪS’s
argument is “highly original in that it is unmistakably an argument from
design. The reason why God must have created the world is, for Utpala –
unlike for many Naiyāyikas – not simply because it is an artifact
(kāryatvāt), but because it is a very unusual kind of artifact which
only a conscious, intelligent being, to say the least, could have
produced.” Indeed, as emphasized by J. Taber, Utpaladeva keeps pointing
out the complexity and harmony of natural arrangements; nonetheless, as
seen above, the argument resting on the notion of a specific arrangement
(sanniveśaviśeṣa, etc.) is commonplace in Nyāya literature.

81 This hypothesis is mentioned in Taber 1986: 128: “Sāṁkhya could well
have represented to Utpala [. . .], as a system of materialism, a
challenge to his own mature theology. That theology consists in a system
of idealism in which Śiva as consciousness is the ultimate reality [. .
.]. The refutation of Sāṁkhya, then, does away [. . .] with a view of
the world in which consciousness has virtually no role.” In this
connection it should be noted that in ĪPK II.4.17-19, Utpaladeva refutes
at length the Sāṁkhya view of causality by showing that pradhāna can
transform itself into the universe only if it is a manifestation of the
ultimate consciousness.

82 ĪS 56: svātmaivāyaṁ sphurati sakalaprāṇinām īśvaro’ntaḥ kartā jñātāpi
ca yadi paraṁ pratyabhijñāsya sādhyā । sā cāsmābhir vihitaghaṭanānyatra
kiṁ tv īśasiddhir dvaite’py astīty ucitam adhikaṁ bhāti vahnir niśīthe
।।

83 ĪPK I.1.2: kartari jñātari svātmany ādisiddhe maheśvare । ajaḍātmā
niṣedhaṁ vā siddhiṁ vā vidadhīta kaḥ ।। “What sentient Self could
produce either the refutation or the demonstration [of the existence of]
the agent, the knowing subject, the Self that is always already
established, the Great Lord?” See also Torella 1994: 86 n 8.

84 Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta thus exploit Dharmakīrti’s famous
definition of the means of knowledge in PV, Pramāṇasiddhipariccheda 1ab
and 5c: pramāṇam avisaṁvādi jñānam . . . ajñātārthaprakāśo vā. “The
means of knowledge is a cognition that does not deceive [. . .] or the
manifestation of an object that was not known [so far].” (See Torella
1994: 161 n 2). The second part of the definition (in fact borrowed from
the Mīmāṁsakas: see Krasser 2001 and Kataoka 2003) is explicitly
included in Utpaladeva’s own definition of the means of knowledge (see
ĪPK II.3.1: the means of knowledge is a manifestation that “arises
[while being] new”, abhinavodayaḥ).

85 See Vr̥tti ad ĪPK I.1.2: 2 (svasaṁvedanasiddham aiśvaryam. “The fact
that one is the Lord (aiśvarya) is established through self-awareness”)
and Torella 1994: 86.

86 Thus, while commenting on ĪPK I.1.2ab (see above, n 83),
Abhinavagupta explains (ĪPV I: 32-33): saṁvid iti tūcyamānā
vikalpyatvena prameyatāṁ spr̥śantī sr̥ṣṭatvān na paramārthasaṁvid iti
vakṣyāmaḥ. kartā jñātā ca maheśvara ity abhidhāne’pi sa eva prakāra
āpated iti yathā yathā prameyabhūmikāpādananyakkārakalaṅkaparihāraḥ
śakyas tathā tathā yāvadgati yatitavyam iti bhūtavibhaktyā nirdeśaḥ
kr̥taḥ. upadeśāvasare hi sarvātmanā tāvat sā prameyatāsya parihartum
aśakyā. “But we will state [later] that the ‘consciousness’ of which
[people] talk as [if it were] a conceptual object (vikalpya) is not
consciousness in the ultimate sense (paramārtha), because [this
consciousness that] has the status of an object of knowledge (prameya)
is [merely] a created [object and not the creative subject]; and when
one mentions ‘the agent’ and ‘the knower’, [or] ‘the Great Lord’, the
same consequence must follow. Therefore, since [we] must strive as much
as possible to avoid the stain of debasing [this consciousness] by
letting it fall to the level of an object of knowledge, [Utpaladeva] has
expressed it with a case [i.e. the locative] that expresses an
accomplished state; for surely, when teaching, it is impossible to avoid
this objectification altogether.”

87 See ĪPV I: 20, where Abhinavagupta explains that the goal of the
treatise is not a cognition but a recognition (praty-abhijñā, where
praty- stands for pratīpam, “again”) for the following reason: pratīpam
iti svātmāvabhāso hi nābhūtapūrvo* ’vicchinnaprakāśatvāt tasya.
[*nābhūtapūrvo corr. (see Ratié 2011a: 27): nānanubhūtapūrvo —Bhāskarī,
KSTS]. “[It is a] re-[cognition], for the Self’s manifestation is not
[something] that did not exist before, since this [Self] is an
uninterrupted manifesting consciousness.”

88 See ĪPK I.1.3: kintu mohavaśād asmin dr̥ṣṭe ’py anupalakṣite ।
śaktyāviṣkaraṇeneyaṁ pratyabhijñopadarśyate ।। “However, since the
[Self], although perceived (dr̥ṣṭa), is not apprehended [as it really is]
(anupalakṣita) because of a delusion (moha), this recognition is shown
through making [the Self’s] powers obvious.”

89 See ĪPV I: 25; for analyses and translations, see Lawrence 2000:
50ff; Ratié 2009: 352 n 9.

90 As noted in Torella 1994: 173 n 33.

91 According to the Buddhist logicians to whom Utpaladeva borrows this
terminology, the svabhāvahetu inference does not establish the existence
of the thing itself (vastu) but only a particular usage (vyavahāra),
since the inference “this is a tree because this is a śiṁśapā” only
justifies the use of the word “tree” with respect to the object called
“śiṁśapā” (which designates a particular variety of tree) by relying on
some properties that the tree and the śiṁśapā share (such as having
branches). On Dharmottara’s statement that the svabhāvahetu inference
only establishes a vyavahāra, see Ratié 2007: 357 n 90. Cf. ĪPVV I: 87:
nanu ca siddhe vastuni yat pramāṇam, tat kila vyavahārasādhanam iti
prasiddham. “But it is well known that surely, the means of knowledge
with respect to an entity [the existence of which is already]
established [only] establishes a usage.”

92 See ĪPK II.3.17 (apravartitapūrvo ’tra kevalaṁ mūḍhatāvaśāt ।
śaktiprakāśeneśādivyavahāraḥ pravartyate ।। “It is only that manifesting
the powers [of the Self through the treatise] makes possible the usage
[of the terms] ‘Lord’, etc. which were not used before with respect to
this [Self] because of delusion” and Abhinavagupta’s commentaries
thereon (see Ratié 2011a: 729-39; 2013: 427-38).

93 ĪPVV I: 106 (see Ratié 2007: 363, n 101). In fact, in this passage
Abhinavagupta is describing the process through which we come to
recognize the existence of other conscious beings, but as shown in Ratié
(2007: 360ff.), this description is very close to his definition of the
Recognition of the Lord: according to Abhinavagupta, the recognition of
other individual conscious entities already involves the (partial)
realization of īśvara’s nature.

94 See ĪPVV III: 181: śabdavikalpa īśvaraḥ pramātā sarvaśaktir ātmaivety
upadeśāvasare vyavahārasādhanabalopanate śabdaiḥ prameyatāṁ nītasyāpi
paramārthaparāmarśe ’hantātmani viśrama iti. “In the verbal concept that
arises through establishing a usage (vyavahāra) when teaching that the
Lord, who is a knowing subject endowed with all powers, is the Self
itself, [that which is taught,] although transformed by words into an
object of knowledge, rests on the ultimate realization
(paramārthaparāmarśa), that is, [pure] subjectivity (ahantā).” For an
analysis of the role of subjectivity in the inferential process of
recognition, see Ratié 2011a: 734-39.

95 ĪPVV I: 40: īśvaro na vyavahārasādhanapramāṇamātraviṣayaḥ kathañcid
apy anavabhāsamānatvāt, na hīśvaro viśvatra kasyacit kadācid bhāsata ity
āśayenāha nanv iti. siddhasattākasyeti sattaiva na siddheti ca.
siddhatvam atra prakāśamānatvam. saiveti sattā sādhyā.
apūrvaprakāśanarūpaṁ tatra jñānaṁ yato bhavati, tādr̥k pramāṇaṁ
vaktavyam. tathā coddyotakarādaya* īśvarasiddhir ity evaṁ vyavahāram
akārṣuḥ. [*coddyotakarādaya corr.: coddyotakārādaya ĪPVV].

96 See ĪPVV III: 166: dūrabhuvanaviśeṣavr̥ttitvād
asmadādyadr̥śyatvādināpūrveṇāsmān praty
aprakāśamā-nenārthenāsahabhavanaśīlo ’sāv aiśvaryavyavahāraḥ svātmani
tathābhūtāpūrvarūpavirahiṇi viruddha iti yo vyāmohas tenautaprotahr̥dayaḥ
kathaṁ tathā vyavahāret. “How could [someone] adopt such a usage
(vyavahāret) [as ‘the Lord’ with respect to oneself] while having one’s
heart interwoven (otaprota) with this delusion: ‘This usage, “being the
Lord”, is contradictory with respect to the Self, [because] this
[expression “being the Lord”] is by nature incapable of denoting
something that never manifests itself as new to us, [i.e. something that
is always manifest]; since, for instance, [the Lord] is imperceptible
for [limited subjects] such as us due to its existing in some distant
particular world; [whereas the Self] is devoid of such a nature [, since
it is always already manifest to us].’”

97 See ĪPV I: 34 (commenting on ĪPK I.1.2cd, according to which no
“sentient Self” can prove or refute the Lord): ajaḍātmeti, yasya tu
vaiśeṣikāder jaḍa ātmā sa siddhiṁ karotv īśvaraviṣayām; anyas tu
sāṁkhyādir niṣedham; sāṁkhyo ’pi viṣayāvabhāsanarūpaṁ jñānaṁ
buddhidharmam icchann ātmānaṁ vastuto jaḍam evopaiti. na ca jaḍātmā
svātmany api durlabhaprakāśasvātantryaleśaḥ kiñcit sādhayituṁ niṣeddhuṁ
vā prabhaviṣṇuḥ pāṣāṇa iva. “[With the expression] ‘sentient Self’ [,
Utpaladeva means the following:] On the one hand, let the Vaiśeṣika[s]
and so on, for whom the Self is insentient, produce a proof of the Lord;
on the other hand, let other[s], such as the Sāṁkhya[s], [produce] a
refutation [of the Lord] – for even a Sāṁkhya, who considers knowledge,
which consists in manifesting an object, as a property of the intellect,
actually ends up making the Self insentient –; now, an insentient Self,
in which the faintest trace of manifesting consciousness (prakāśa) and
freedom cannot be found, does not have the power to prove or refute
anything, just like a stone!”

98 See ĪPK II.4.8: ata evāṅkure ’pīṣṭo nimittaṁ parameśvaraḥ ।
tadanyasyāpi bījāder hetutā nopapadyate ।। “For this very reason, [some]
consider the Highest Lord as the efficient cause (nimitta) of the sprout
as well; [but] nothing distinct from [him], such as the seed and so on,
can also be a cause.” Cf. ĪPV II: 145-46: yata evaṁ cetana eva nirmātā,
ata eva naiyāyikādibhir aṅkurādau buddhimān eva parameśvaro
hetutveneṣṭaḥ. nanu tair nimittakāraṇatāsyāṅgīkr̥tā
kriyāvibhāgādikramāyātaparamāṇvādidvārakatayā,
samavāyikāraṇanijāvayavārambhaparamparayā tu tata īśvarād anyasyāpi
bījabhūmijalāder hetutā kathitā. satyaṁ kathitā, sā tu nopapadyate,
uktayuktyā jaḍasya hetutāyogāt; tataś ceśvara eva
bījabhūmijalābhāsasāhityenāṅkurātmanā bhāsata itīyān atra paramārthaḥ.
“Since thus, only a conscious [entity] is a creator, for this very
reason the Naiyāyikas, etc. consider that the Highest Lord, who must be
intelligent (buddhimān), is the cause of the sprout and so on.
[­–Objection:] Granted, they admit that he is the efficient cause
(nimittakāraṇa) inasmuch as he is what enables the atoms, [atom dyads]
and so on to go through the succession (krama) of activities (kriyā),
disjunctions (vibhāga) and [conjunctions that lead to the formation of
the perceptible universe]. Nonetheless, [these Naiyāyikas, etc. also]
claim that [entities] such as the seed, earth, water and so on, although
distinct from the Lord, are [also] causes [of the sprout], because of
the series of combinations (ārambha) [of atom dyads and so on] that has
their own parts as an inherence cause (samavāyikāraṇa). [­– Answer:]
True; [they] claim [that other things are also causes]. But this [claim]
is not sound, because according to the reasoning that [we] have already
stated, the insentient cannot be a cause; and therefore it is the Lord
that manifests himself as the sprout accompanied by the manifestations
of the seed, earth and water; such only is the ultimate truth in this
regard.” Abhinavagupta is probably alluding here to the Vaiśeṣika theory
of cosmic creation. See PDhS: 48-49, which describes in the following
way the beginning of the universe: tataḥ punaḥ prāṇināṁ bhogabhūtaye
maheśvarasiskṣānantaraṁ sarvātmagatavttilabdhādṣṭāpekṣebhyas
tatsamyogebhyaḥ pavanaparamāṇuṣu karmotpattau teṣāṁ parasparasaṁyogebhyo
dvyaṇukādiprakrameṇa mahān vāyuḥ samutpanno nabhasi dodhūyamānas
tiṣṭhati. “Then, again, the Great Lord has a desire to create [the
universe] so as to [provide] living beings with a wealth of experiences;
immediately afterwards, after the arisal of an activity (karman) in the
atoms of air due to the conjunctions (saṁyoga) of these [atoms] that
depend on the unseen [force] (adṣṭa) which has started to operate
inside all the [individual’s] Selves, due to the mutual conjunctions of
these [atoms], through the succession of the atom dyads, etc. a great
wind comes to being, trembling in the sky.” However, oddly enough, in
the ĪPV, action is first, disjunction second, and conjunction only
appears implicitly with -ādi (“and so on”), whereas according to
Praśastapāda, conjunction is first and action is second. Bhāskarakaṇṭha
solves the problem by explaining that the sequence alluded to by
Abhinavagupta is the following (Bhāskarī II: 164): pūrvaṁ kriyā tato
vibhāgas tataḥ pūrvasaṁyoganivttis tata uttarasaṁyogotpādādiḥ. “First
activity, then disjunction, then the disappearance (nivtti) of the
previous conjunction, then the arising of the new conjunction.” In other
words, according to Bhāskarakaṇṭha, in fact, the succession alluded to
in the ĪPV starts earlier in the Vaiśeṣikas’ description of cosmic
activity, i.e. during the destruction of the universe, which begins with
an activity that leads to disjunctions down to the destruction of all
atomic combinations before the universe can begin again with new
conjunctions. See PDhS: 48: maheśvarecchātmāṇusaṁyogajakarmabhyaḥ
śarīrendriyakāraṇāṇuvibhāgebhyas tatsaṁyoganivttau teṣām āparamāṇvanto
vināśaḥ. “Due to the activities (karman) produced by the will of the
great Lord and the conjunctions of the atoms with the selves,
disjunctions (vibhāga) between the atoms that are the causes
[constituting] the bodies and sense-organs [occur, and] due to [these
disjunctions there is] a disappearance (nivtti) of the conjunctions
between [these atoms]; when [they have thus ceased], there is a
disappearance of these down to the atoms.”

99 My conjecture (below, n 100) as well as the additions in brackets in
the translation are only tentative and I might be misunderstanding this
passage. According to the edited text (tadadarśane’pi
tatkr̥tatvapratipattir ityādi), the objection examined here is: “even
though there is no perception of it, one understands that it is an
effect of that”, but given the way Abhinavagupta replies to it, it seems
to me that it should rather be an allusion to Dharmakīrti’s objection
that only a particular conscious agent can be inferred from a particular
arrangement when their invariable concomitance has first been
ascertained. I am assuming that this objection is the quotation of the
beginning of a sentence in Utpaladeva’s lost Vivr̥ti, but this might
rather be a quotation from some other text that I have failed to
identify.

100 ĪPVV III: 192: saty apīśvare kāraṇe tato ’nyasyāpīśvarād atiriktasya
jaḍasya yā hetutā tair upagatā, sā na saṁbhavaty aprekṣāpūrvakāriṇa iti.
sanniveśo hi nāma sajātīyavijātīyatāvibhāgotthāpako ghaṭaśarāvakuṇḍādau
mr̥dupādānasaṁbhāvī saṁbhūyaniviṣṭatārūpaś cidrūpakārya ity ekavāram
avalokite sarvatra sanniveśena tathaiva bhāvyam ity ekānta evāyam. yat
tūcyate taddarśane ’pi* tatkr̥tatvapratipattir ity ādi tat
svadr̥ṣṭipakṣapātavyāmohavyāhr̥taṁ dhūme ’pi samānatvād asyety alam
avāntareṇa. etad dhi granthakāreṇaiva vitānitam īśvarasiddhau, iha tv
eṣa paramārtha īśvara eva niyatiśaktiṁ nijām anurundhāno
bījabhūmijalābhāsapuraḥsarīkāreṇāṅkurātmānaṁ svacche svaprakāśe
nirbhāsayatīti. [*taddarśane ’pi conj. (see above, n 99): tadadarśane
’pi ĪPVV].

101 See Taber 1986: 129-30: “It is well known that Naiyāyikas were, as a
rule, Śaivas; Jayanta and Bhāsarvajña, the two major Naiyāyikas closest
to Utpala in time and place, were outspokenly so. And it is evident that
Utpala received formal training in Nyāya at the hands of Naiyāyikas, so
skilfully does he handle Nyāya principles. Thus, one might reasonably
hypothesize that Utpala developed his theology in connection with
reflection on the Nyāya system. While he retained the theism of the
Nyāya — indeed Śiva in Utpala’s system is not the featureless, inactive
Absolute of Advaita Vedānta but a vital, personal, absolute Deity — he
came, ultimately, to reject its realism, due to the impression made upon
him by the Mahāyāna Buddhists, among others. Thus, the treatment of
problems regarding the existence of God from strictly within the
framework of Nyāya would not have been just an intellectual exercise for
Utpala. Rather, it would have been partly an expression of convictions
which were, at least at one stage, central to his thought and which
played an important role in the development of his mature system.”

102 See Torella 1992.

103 Taber 1986: 129.

104 ĪPV I: 25: naiyāyikakramasyaiva māyāpade pāramārthikatvam iti
granthakārābhiprāyaḥ.

105 On the “inclusivistic hierarchy” of Śaiva non-dualism, see Hanneder
1998: 6ff.

106 Torella 1994: xxi.

107 Torella 1994: xxii (cf. the remark in Taber 1986: 129, quoted above,
n 101). Torella adds: “It is probably for this reason that we see Utpala
assuming a Naiyāyika guise in the ĪS.”

108 Torella 1994: xxi n 25.

109 See Sanderson 1985: 203.

110 On its date, see Goodall 1998: xlvii-lxxvi.

111 KT III.11cd-12: vyāpāro na ca dr̥śyate kāryam icchā pratīyate ।।
sthūlaṁ vicitrakaṁ kāryaṁ nānyathā ghaṭavad bhavet । asti hetur ataḥ
kaścit karma cen na hy acetanam ।। “And [although] the [Lord’s cosmic]
activity is not perceived, [its] effects [are, so that his creative]
will is known. [The universe,] which is coarse [and] diverse, is an
effect, just as a pot — it could not be otherwise. Therefore [it] must
have some cause; if [one says that this cause] is [past] action[s], [the
answer to this is:] no, for [past actions are] unconscious.” See Goodall
1998: 273-78.

112 On its date, see Goodall 2004: xxxv-lviii.

113 The inference itself is formulated as follows (PT II.2-3): mūrtāḥ
sāvayavā ye ’rthā nānārūpaparicchadāḥ । sthūlāvayavaśiṣṭatvād
buddhimaddhetupūrvakāḥ ।। ato ’sti buddhimān kaścid īśvaraḥ
samavasthitaḥ । pratipannaḥ svakāryeṇa dr̥ṣṭenātrānumānataḥ ।। “The
material things that have parts [and] are endowed with various forms
presuppose an intelligent cause, because they are particularized by
gross [i.e. perceptible] parts. Therefore there is some intelligent
[cause] that is established [to be] the Lord. In this [system he is]
known through an inference from his perceived effect.” See Goodall 2004:
165-66.

114 See Goodall 2001: 332-33; 2004: xlix-l.

115 See the objection in PT 2.4: kāryakāraṇasambandho na gr̥hīto yatas
tayoḥ । tena tatkāraṇābhāvān na khyāpyaṁ kāryadarśanam ।। “Since [we] do
not perceive the relation of cause and effect between the [Lord] and the
[universe, and] since therefore there is no [known] cause of this
[universe,] one cannot say that the effect is perceived [, since we do
not know whether the universe is an effect].” (See Goodall 2004: 166.)
The objection is answered mainly by arguing that the Lord is inferred
through a necessary assumption (arthāpatti) defined as a sāmānyato
dr̥ṣṭam reasoning, i.e. as an inference that shows the necessity of the
Lord’s existence (conceived as an intelligent cause in general) from the
impossibility of accounting for its effect otherwise. See PT 2.9ab and
11: arthāpattir iyaṁ proktā mānaṁ sāmānyadarśikā ।. . . tena sāmānyato
dr̥ṣṭād anumānena buddhimān । kāraṇaṁ sthūlakāryasya kṣitikāryādikasya
saḥ ।। “This necessary assumption [through which one also infers the
imperceptible causality of past actions] is proclaimed [to be] a [valid]
means of knowledge that demonstrates a generality (sāmānya) [. . .].
Therefore this [Lord, who is an] intelligent [entity, is known] through
an inference from [what is] apprehended as a generality (sāmānyato
dr̥ṣṭāt) [as] the cause of the coarse effect [that is the universe, i.e.]
first, the effect that is the earth [, etc.]” See Goodall 2004: 169.

116 See PT 2.12: kṣiter evaṁvidhaṁ rūpaṁ na kadācid anīdr̥śam । tanvādeḥ
kāraṇaṁ karma kalpitena matena kim ।। “The form of the earth is as [we
now see it and] was never otherwise; [as for] the cause of bodies and so
on, it is [past] action[s]; [so] what is the point of [this] artificial
theory [about the Lord]?” (See Goodall 2004: 169-70.) As in the KT, the
answer is mainly that because the universe is coarse (sthūla), it is an
effect built by an intelligent agent, so that karman, which is
unconscious, can only be an instrument of that intelligent agent. See PT
2.13ab (yad yat sthūlaṁ bhaved vastu kr̥takaṁ tad viniścitam । “Whatever
entity is coarse is established to be constructed”) and PT 2.16:
buddhimāṁs tena kartāsau tanvādīnām iha sthitaḥ । tan no hetur bhavet
karma kiṁ tadyojitaṁ bhavet ।। “Therefore this intelligent agent of
bodies and so on is established [to exist] here; so [past] action[s]
cannot be the cause [of bodies and so on;] rather, [they] must be
[instruments] used by this [cause].” See Goodall 2004: 170-71.

117 PT 2.29-30: nimitttam īśvarākhyaṁ yat tad dr̥ṣṭaṁ sahakāraṇam ।
upādānaṁ ca yat sūkṣmaṁ sarvakāryeṣu saṁhitam । kāraṇānāṁ trayaṁ tena
sarvakārye’numīyate । yato na janakaṁ caikaṁ sāmagrī janikā bhavet ।
nimittakāraṇaṁ tena kartā sa parameśvaraḥ ।। “The efficient cause is
[what is] called ‘Lord’; the auxiliary cause is what is seen [, such as
the potter’s stick, wheel and so on]; and the material cause is subtle
[matter]. [These] three causes are connected with all effects; therefore
[they] are [legitimately] inferred with respect to the effect that is
the universe. And since one [of them] cannot produce [it on its own],
[it is] this set [of causes] that must produce [it]; therefore the
efficient cause is the agent [who is] the Highest Lord.” (See Goodall
2004: 174-78.)

118 See above, n 115.

119 See PT 2.62cd-65ab: sarvajñaḥ sarvakartr̥tvād yatas taj jñānapūrvakam
।। sādhanāṅgaphalaiḥ sārdhaṁ vetti sarvam idaṁ tataḥ । yathā
tantvādivitkartā viṣayīkr̥tya tāni saḥ ।। tasmin pravartate kārye tadvat
tasmin paraḥ śivaḥ । sarvakr̥tyeṣu tajjñānaṁ vyāpitaṁ yena sānvayam ।।
nikhilajñānayogitvāt sarvajñaḥ parameśvaraḥ । “[This Lord] is
omniscient, because [he] is omnipotent, since the [power to act]
presupposes knowledge. Therefore he knows all the [universe] along with
the means [of accomplishing it, its] parts and [its] fruits. Just as an
agent who knows the threads and [whatever is required to make a cloth]
engages in the activity (kārya) [of weaving] after taking these [things]
as the object [of his thought], in the same way, the Highest Śiva
[engages in cosmic activity after taking the universe as the object of
his thought]. Since the knowledge of the [things required so as to
create] is invariably found to be present in all activities (kr̥tya), the
Highest Lord is omniscient, because he [must] know everything.” (See
Goodall 2004: 185-86.)

120 See Rāmakaṇṭha’s lengthy commentary in KV ad KT III.11cd-12 and
Goodall 1998: 273-78. Later commentators also tend to forcibly read the
inference in scriptures that do not mention them. See Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha’s
MTṬ on MT, Vidyāpāda 2.3-4 (which does not mention the Nyāya inference
but merely states that the fivefold cosmic activity and its effects must
belong to the Lord who is “established by his own nature”,
svabhāvasiddha), p. 54: etac ca na māyādibhiḥ karmabhir vā nirvartayituṁ
śakyam ācaitanyāt, nāpi puruṣeṇāsya malaniruddhaśaktitvāt. na
cānīśvaro’tra kartā yuktaḥ. yaś caitat sr̥ṣṭyādi kartuṁ śaknoti,
so’vaśyaṁ tadviṣayajñaś cikīrṣitakāryaviṣayāṇāṁ jñānaviśeṣāṇām aṁśenāpi
vaikalye tattatkāryāniṣpatteḥ. ataś ca sarvakartrā sarvajñena tena ca
svabhāvasiddhena jagataḥ kartrā bhavitavyam. “And this [fivefold cosmic
activity of creation, maintenance, destruction, obscuration and grace]
cannot be performed by matter (māyā), for instance, nor by [past]
actions (karman), because [these] are unconscious, nor by the individual
(puruṣa), because his powers are restrained by the stain (mala) [that
binds him in saṁsāra]. Nor can this [fivefold activity] have an agent
that would not be a Lord, and he who can perform this [fivefold activity
of] creation and so on necessarily knows the object of this [activity],
because if the particular knowledges regarding the effects that one
wants to create are lacking, even in part, it is impossible to bring
about this or that [particular] effect. And as a consequence, there must
be an agent of the world who is omnipotent and omniscient, and therefore
[, as the scripture states here,] ‘established by its own nature’.” (See
Hulin 1980: 58ff.) See also Aghoraśiva’s TSṬ: 103: ataś ca jagataḥ
sanniveśādimattvena kāryatvāt tatkartr̥tayeśvarasiddhir iti bhāvaḥ. etena
prakr̥tikarmapuruṣeśvaravādino ’pi nirastāḥ, prakr̥tikarmaṇor acetanatvāt
puruṣasya ca samalatvenāsvavaśatvāt. “And therefore, because the world
is an effect in so far as it possesses a [specific] arrangement, etc.,
the Lord is established to be its agent — this is the implicit idea.
This also refutes those who say that the Lord [presiding over the
universe is in fact] primordial nature, [past] actions or individuals,
because primordial nature and [past] actions are unconscious, and the
individual does not act independently due to the stain (mala) [that
binds him].”

121 See Sanderson 2006.

122 Torella 1994: xxii.

123 For a summary and analysis of this chapter, see Hannotte 1987:
238-338.

124 Hannotte 1987: 245.

125 Note, however, that Sadyojyotis does not use the term sanniveśa
(arrangement) whereas his commentator Rāmakaṇṭha (who is posterior to
Utpaladeva) does. On the proof that Sadyojyotis defends, see NP II.1ab
(kṣmādeḥ sāvayavatvena kumbhavat kāryatā matā । “The earth and so on are
known to be effects, because they have parts, just as a pot”), NP II.3
(upādānādi tasyeṣṭaṁ vimatiḥ kartr̥kārake । ataḥ sa sādhyate ’smābhis
tatkartā śaṅkaraḥ sphuṭam ।। “The material cause (upādāna) and
[auxiliary causes] of this [effect] are admitted [by all, but] there is
a disagreement as regards the factor of action that is the agent
(kartr̥); therefore we demonstrate that the agent of this [effect] is
clearly Śaṅkara” and NP II.4ac (adr̥ṣṭakartr̥kāyādikāryaṁ prajñāvatā kr̥tam
। kumbhavat . . . “The effect [constituted by] bodies and so on, the
agent of which is not perceived, [must be] produced by an intelligent
[agent], as in the case of a pot.”). Cf. NPP: 117-18: yad yat kāryaṁ tat
tad viśiṣṭajñānakriyāyuktakartr̥pūrvaṁ dr̥ṣṭaṁ yathā ghaṭādi, kāryaṁ ca
tanukaraṇabhuvanādy adr̥ṣṭakartr̥kaṁ sarvam eva jagat pratipāditam, tasmād
idam api* viśiṣṭajñānakriyātmakakartr̥pūrvakaṁ siddham iti yas tasya
kartā sa parameśvaraḥ siddhaḥ. [*idam api conj.: api NPP]. “[We] observe
that whatever is an effect, such as a pot for instance, presupposes an
agent endowed with a particular knowledge and action, and the whole
universe, [i.e.] bodies, organs, worlds and so on, is an effect the
agent of which is not perceived. Therefore this [universe] too is
established to presuppose an agent characterized by a particular
knowledge and action, so its agent is established to be the Highest
Lord.”

126 See NP II.5ab: dhīmatkr̥taṁ tu yat kāryaṁ dr̥ṣṭaṁ tasyaiva darśanāt ।
dhīmato’numitir yuktā dehāder na viparyayāt ।। “[­–Objection:] But only
the inference of an intelligent [agent] from the perception of an effect
that is seen to be produced by an intelligent [agent] is legitimate,
[whereas the inference of an intelligent agent] from the body and so on
is not, because [the body and so on are] not thus [seen to be effects of
an intelligent agent]. Cf. NPP: 122: yad eva hi yasya kāryatvena siddhaṁ
tad eva tasyānumāpakaṁ na kāryamātram . . . “For only that which is
established to be an effect enables [us] to infer this [intelligent
agent, and] not an effect in general (kāryamātra) . . . .” Rāmakaṇṭha
explicitly ascribes this objection to “the Buddhists” (saugata, ibid.)
and quotes PV, Pramāṇasiddhipariccheda 11-13 (on which see above, nn
22-23) and 15.

127 NP II.6: kāryatvād eva kumbhāder dehādi* na vilakṣaṇam । kāryaṁ ca
na kvacid dr̥ṣṭaṁ prajñāvatkāraṇaṁ vinā ।। [*dehādi conj.: dehādir NP].
“The body, etc., are not different from the pot, etc. in so far as (eva)
they are effects; and no effect is ever seen [to exist] without an
intelligent cause.”

128 See the summary in Hannotte 1987: 273-88. Rāmakaṇṭha argues in
particular that the Buddhists too acknowledge that some things share
common features in so far as they are of the same sort (sajātīya) even
though in other respects they may be said to be of a different sort
(vijātīya): compare for instance the discussion in NPP: 126 (too long to
be quoted here) with ĪS: 8 (quoted above, n 33).

129 See NP 7: na ca yadvyaktisaṁbaddhā vyaktir yaiveha saṁmatā । tasyā
evānumānaṁ syāt punas tadupalabdhitaḥ ।। “And [if] inference [were aimed
at establishing] only the [particular] individual entity (vyakti) to
which the individual entity that is considered in this [particular case
as an effect] is linked, [it] could not take place again [with respect
to any other subject of inference, nor could it take place in the case
of this particular individual entity itself,] because this [individual
entity] would [already] be perceived.” Cf. NPP: 128: yady evam,
sakalasajātīyavijātīyavyāvr̥ttena svalakṣaṇenaivāgnyādinā mahānasādau
dhūmādeḥ svalakṣaṇasyaiva pratibandhaḥ siddhaḥ, tasya cānanuyāyitvān na
dharmyantare ’numānaṁ sambhavati nāpi tatraiva pratyakṣasiddher
anumānāyogād iti nivr̥ttedānīm anumānavārttā. “If it were the case,
[inference could] establish only the relation of a particular
(svalakṣaṇa) such as a smoke in e.g. the kitchen with a[nother]
particular such as a fire [in that kitchen], to the exclusion of any
[other entity] of the same kind or of another kind; and because no
[other entity] could conform to this [singular fire, this] inference
would not be possible with respect to any other subject of inference
[such as a distant hill above which one can see smoke], nor [would it be
possible] in that very case [of the kitchen], because inference would
not apply, since [its object] would [already] be established through
perception, so that this [whole] business of inference would immediately
be reduced to naught.” In his commentary, Rāmakaṇṭha repeatedly puts
forward the argument already mentioned by Jayanta that generality is
necessary in the inferential process, otherwise one could never infer
the presence of fire on a mountain thanks to the knowledge of the
concomitance between a particular fire and a particular smoke observed
in a kitchen. See NPP: 134: vahnyādir api parvatasambandhī mahānasādāv
adr̥ṣṭatvān na dhūmādinā sādhya iti sarvānumānābhāvaprasaṅgaḥ. “[In that
case] the fire belonging to a mountain too, for instance, could not be
established thanks to, e.g. [the presence of] smoke, since it is not
seen, e.g. in a kitchen, so that as a consequence no inference at all
could occur.”

130 In NP II.8-12; see Hannotte 1987: 289ff; Goodall 2004: 185 n 158. In
his introduction ad NP II.8, Rāmakaṇṭha quotes ŚV,
Sambandhākṣepaparihāra 80, and in his commentary ad NP II.9, he quotes
ŚV, Sambandhākṣepaparihāra 79 (both verses are also quoted in the ĪS:
see above, n 19).

131 See NPP: 135: nanu pakṣadharmatābalān niyatasya dhūmasya grahaṇān
niyato vahniḥ pratīyate. “But due to the fact that the subject of the
inference has a [specific] property (pakṣadharmatābalāt), because one
grasps a specific smoke, one grasps a specific fire [as its cause].”
After showing that the Buddhists themselves should admit this thesis
since it is not contradictory with their own principles, Rāmakaṇṭha
concludes (ibid.): yady evam ihāpy apratiṣṭhitabhedaḥ kāryaviśeṣa eva
kartr̥viśeṣavyāptaḥ siddha iti tanukaraṇabhuvanādeḥ kāryātmano* ’rthasya
śaktyā tatkartur api viśiṣṭasya svakāryaviṣayam
amalatvasarvajñatvecchāmātrakartr̥tvādy apīśvaratvaṁ siddhyati
[*kāryātmano corr.: karyātmano NPP]. “Since it is so, in this [case of
the inference of the Lord] as well, it is a particular effect that is
established to be invariably concomitant with a particular agent,
[although this particular effect] is not established to be different
[from the pot in so far as it too is an effect]. Therefore its agent
too, who is particularized [as the agent producing] through [his] power
an object that is an effect such as bodies, organs, worlds and so on, is
established to be stainless [and] omniscient [and] to create through
mere will (icchāmātra) and so on [; i.e. it is established] to be the
Lord, [since these properties] correspond to his own [particular]
effect.”

132 See above, nn 29, 43 and 48.

133 This stress on the Sāṁkhya objection may be due at least in part to
the fact that the cosmology of Śaiva scriptures has borrowed from
Sāṁkhya a number of doctrinal elements (such as the cosmic evolution
through a scale of tattvas): on the importance of the Sāṁkhya tradition
in Śaiva literature, see Torella 1999.

134 See NP 14ff.

135 NP 14ab: bījakarmāṇubhiḥ kecid atrāhuḥ siddhasādhyatām । “With
respect to this [inference of the Lord,] some claim that what is to be
established [, i.e. that the universe has an agent,] is [in fact
already] established thanks to primordial nature (bīja), [past] actions
and individuals.” Cf. NPP:139: jagataḥ kartr̥pūrvakatvaṁ hi bhavadbhiḥ
sādhyate, sa copādānakāraṇatayā bījaśabdavācyaḥ pradhānākhyaḥ siddha
eva, tat kiṁ sādhyata iti sāṁkhyāḥ. “For the Sāṁkhyas [object the
following:] ‘You are endeavouring to demonstrate the fact that the
universe presupposes an agent; now, [what] is called matter [and]
expressed [here] by the word bīja is already established as the material
cause; therefore what [remains] to be demonstrated?’” Rāmakaṇṭha
ascribes the two other positions to the Mīmāṁsakas and Lokāyatas
(ibid.).

136 NP 14cd: na pūrvābhyāṁ viśiṣṭatvād dhiyā sādhyasya sā bhavet ।।
“[What is to be established] cannot be [already established] thanks to
the first two [afore-mentioned causes, i.e. primordial nature or past
actions,] because what is to be established is particularized by
consciousness.”

137 NP 15cd: nācaitanyāt pravr̥ttiḥ syāt svātantryād bījakarmaṇām ।।
“Primordial nature and [past] actions could not have any activity
[arising] independently (svātantryāt), because [they] are unconscious.”

138 NP 16a: payovac cet . . . “If [the opponent replies that primordial
nature can have an activity although it is insentient,] as in the case
of milk . . .” Rāmakaṇṭha stipulates (NPP:142) that this is an allusion
to SK 57 (on which see above, n 56).

139 See above, n 74.

140 NP 16b: na sādhyatvān mr̥ddaṇḍāder adarśanāt । “[We answer:] no,
because [the ability of unconscious entities to act] remains to be
established, since one does not observe that clay, the stick and [other
unconscious items used by a potter for instance are capable of acting
independently].”

141 NP16cd: aṅgāṅgitvaṁ ca sattvādeḥ svābhāvyān noktahetutaḥ ।। “And the
fact that [the three qualities, i.e.] sattva, [rajas and tamas,] serve
each other (aṅgāṅgitva) is not due to their nature, for the reason
[already] stated.” Cf. NPP: 143: acetanatvād eva teṣāṁ na svabhāvataḥ
parasparopakāraḥ, kintu pradīpādivad eva cetanakartr̥prayuktānām iti
nācetanasya kartr̥tvasiddhiḥ. “And precisely because they are
unconscious, they do not serve each other by nature; rather, just as in
the case of lamps for instance, [the qualities serve each other only] if
they are used by a conscious agent; therefore the agency of what is
unconscious is not established.”

142 NP 17ab: sthitvā kriyā ca bījasya nācitaś cetanaṁ vinā । “Besides,
primordial nature, which is unconscious, cannot act after being inactive
(sthitvā) without a conscious [entity that prompts it to do so].”

143 NP 17c: nanu jñānaṁ pradhāne’sti . . .

144 See NPP: 143: pradhānakāryasya buddher jñānābhyupagamāt pradhānam
api jñānātmakaṁ siddhyatīti kim anyad anumīyate. “Since [we Sāṁkhyas]
admit that the intellect, which is an effect of matter, possesses
knowledge, matter too is established to consist of knowledge; therefore
why infer some other [knowing entity]?” Rāmakaṇṭha refers (ibid.) to SK
23 (on which see above, n 64).

145 NP 17cd: nācaitanān mr̥dādivat ।। “No, because [the intellect too] is
unconscious, just as clay and so on.”

146 NP 18ab: astu vā śaktirūpatvād agrāhi tad asatsamam । “Or [if the
Sāṁkhya opponent explains that] the [intellect endowed with knowledge]
must exist [in primordial nature], because it consists of a potentiality
(śakti) [within matter], [we reply that since] it does not grasp [its
own knowledge by itself], this [principle of the intellect] is as good
as non-existent. Cf. NPP: 144: tathābhūtam api tat pradhāne kāraṇātmani
na vyaktam, api tu śaktyātmanāvasthitam ity adhyavasāyātmanaḥ
svakāryasyākaraṇād asatsamam. tataś cādhyavasāyātmano ’pi jñānasyābhāvān
nāsya kartr̥tvam iti kartrantarasiddhiḥ. “[If the Sāṁkhya explains that]
although [the principle of the intellect] is thus [i.e. endowed with
knowledge], it is not manifest in matter, which is [its material] cause;
rather, it exists [only] as a potentiality, [we reply that then this
principle of the intellect] is as good as non-existent, since it does
not produce its own effect, i.e. determination (adhyavasāya). And as a
consequence, since [matter] possesses no knowledge, even in the form of
determination, it is not an agent, so that it is etablished that [there
is] another agent.”

147 NP 18cd-19ab: sthitvā vyāpriyamāṇatvāc chambhor api pareraṇaṁ ।।
naivaṁ* bījasya no sāmyaṁ prajñāvān īśvaro yataḥ ।। [*naivaṁ conj.: navā
NP] “[­Objection:] “[According to you, it is] not [true] that the Lord
himself is prompted to act by something else because it acts after
remaining inactive; [so] in the same way, [it is not true that]
primordial nature is prompted to act by something else. [­Answer:] there
is no similarity [between the Lord and primordial nature,] since
[contrary to primordial nature], the Lord is conscious.”

148 NP 19cd-21ab: anekaṁ devadattādi dr̥ṣṭaṁ loke dhiyānvitam ।। sthitvā
pravartamānaṁ hi pākādāv apareritam । pareritam apīty asmāt saṁśayo na
maheśvare ।। upariṣṭād yato devaṁ vakṣyāmo’tiśayāṅkitam । “For in the
world, [we] observe that many [entities] endowed with consciousness,
such as Devadatta, when performing [the act of] cooking for instance
after being inactive, are not prompted [to do so] by anything else; [if
you object] that [sometimes they] are also prompted [to do so] by
something else, [we answer that] for this reason there is no doubt as
regards the Great Lord, since later we will explain that the Lord is
characterized by an absolute [power] (atiśaya).”

149 This doctrinal feature has often been pointed out with respect to
Śaiva non-dualism (see Bronkhorst 1996b), but as noted in Watson 2006:
90-91, Utpaladeva shares it with the Saiddhāntikas.

150 As noted in Sanderson 2006: 45, MTṬ: 30-31 on MT, Vidyāpāda 1.1,
quotes ĪS 55 (samujjvalannyāyasahasrasādhito ’py upaiti siddhiṁ na
vimūḍhacetasām । maheśvaraḥ pāṇitalasthito ’pi san palāyate daivahatasya
sanmaṇiḥ ।। “Even though he may be demonstrated by innumerable,
blazing[ly clear] reasonings, the Great Lord is not proved for those
whose mind is confused; although this authentic gem stands in the palm
of one’s hand, it escapes the ill-fated.”

151 See Sanderson 1985: 204-05; 1988: 692; 1995: 20-21; 2007: 376;
Torella 1994: xxi; Hanneder 1998: 6ff.

152 See the brief remarks in Dyczkowski 1987: 19-20; 1992: 33.

153 Torella 1994: xxi.

154 Ibid.: xxi-xxii. See also Torella 2008: 516.

155 See ĪPK I.5.7: cidātmaiva hi devo ’ntaḥsthitam icchāvaśād bahiḥ ।
yogīva nirupādānam arthajātaṁ prakāśayet ।। “For the Lord, who consists
of nothing but consciousness, must manifest externally all objects that
[actually remain] internal [to him] by virtue of his will, without any
material cause, just as a yogin.” The yogin’s creation recurs in ĪPK
II.4.10, where Utpaladeva specifies again that it is devoid of material
cause: yoginām api mr̥dbīje vinaivecchāvaśena tat । ghaṭādi jāyate tat
tat sthirasvārthakriyākaram ।। “This [production] also occurs by virtue
of the will of yogins, without any [material cause] such as clay [for a
pot] or a seed [for a sprout]; various [objects,] such as a pot and so
on, arise [thus while] having an efficiency of their own and while
lasting [just as ordinary objects].” On the special powers which, in the
Yoga tradition, enable yogins to create objects out of mere will, see
YBh: 165, which describes the last three members of a list of eight
yogic “perfections” (siddhi) in the following way: vaśitvaṁ
bhūtabhautikeṣu vaśī bhavaty avaśyaś cānyeṣām. īśittvaṁ teṣāṁ
prabhavāpyayayvyūhānām īṣṭe. yatrakāmāvasāyitvaṁ* satyasaṅkalpatā yathā
saṁkalpas tathā bhūtapraktīnām avasthānam. [*yatrakāmāvasāyitvaṁ corr.:
yatra kāmāvasāyitvaṁ YBh.] “Mastery [is the perfection of a yogin who]
is the master of elements and their products and is not [himself]
mastered by others; sovereignty [is the perfection of a yogin who] is
sovereign upon the production, disappearance and arrangement of the
[elements and their products; and] the determination [of things]
according to one’s desire [is the perfection of a yogin when] what [he]
fancies becomes real (satyasaṅkalpa); [i.e.,] it is the determination of
the material causes of elements according to one’s fancy.” On God’s
cosmic activity compared to this yogic creation in the Pratyabhijñā
treatise, see Alper 1979; Ratié 2010; 2011a: 403-41.

156 ŚD 1.44-45ab: yoginām icchayā yadvan nānārūpopapattitā । na cāsti
sādhanaṁ kiñcin mr̥dādīcchāṁ vinā prabhoḥ ।। tathā bhagavadicchaiva
tathātvena prajāyate । “Just as various forms can arise by the will of
yogins, and [in such cases] there is no means [of producing them] such
as clay, etc. apart from the Lord’s will, in the same way, it is the
Lord’s will that arises as being such [i.e. in the form of the
universe].” See Nemec 2011: 143. See also ŚD 3.35-37 (and Nemec 2011:
236-37) as well as ŚDV ad loc: 112: na hy asau yogī svātmano
mtpiṇḍasyeva śivikastūpakādirūpavikārapariṇāmakrameṇa* kumbhakāra iva
ghaṭam iva bhāvamaṇḍalaṁ janayaty api tu yasya yādśīcchā
tatsamanantaram eveṣṭakāryātmābhilāṣātmatayā sthitiḥ, tathā cidātmano
’pi. [* śivikastūpakādirūpavikārapariṇāmakrameṇa corr.:
śibikastūpakādirūpavikārapariṇāmakrameṇa ŚDV:
śibistūpakādirūpavikārapariṇāmakrameṇa em. Nemec 2011]. “For the yogin
does not produce all [objective] entities as a potter [produces] a pot,
through a process of transformation [of the clay involving various]
changes of form such as [the ones called] śivika, stūpaka, etc.; rather,
whatever is [the object] of such a will [as the yogin’s] immediately
exists while having as its nature [the yogin’s] desire, [i.e.] while
consisting in the desired effect; and the same goes for [the Lord] whose
nature is consciousness.” According to Nemec 2011: 368, śibikastūpaka
should be amended into śibistūpaka, and the latter designates (ibid.:
237 and n 177) a “small stūpa of the King of Śibi”, i.e. the character
of a famous jātaka; but the reason why such a character should appear in
this particular context (that of a potter making various forms with
clay) remains unclear. Nemec tries to explain it by stating that in
memory of King Śibi’s sacrifice a “beautifully adorned stūpa” was
erected and that “the present example thus serves to suggest that what
is made from the clay is a thoroughly intricate and ornate object, one
requiring much detailed work on the part of the sculptor”. However, the
technical terms śivika and stūpaka often occur in Abhinavagupta’s works,
where they obviously designate not one but two distinct things that have
nothing to do with the Buddhist jātaka — namely, two different states of
the clay being modelled by the potter who is in the process of making a
pot. See Bhāskarī I: 116: stūpakaḥ — ghaṭanirmāṇārtham upāttasya
mtpiṇḍasya kulālena prathamaṁ kriyamāṇo racanāviśeṣaḥ. śivikaḥ —
unnatavasturūpo racanāviśeṣaḥ. “The stūpaka is a specific arrangement
that the potter first makes with a lump of clay [thus] shaped in order
to create a pot. The śivika is [also] a specific arrangement consisting
in [the same] thing [but] tall[er].” In other words, Utpaladeva is
emphasizing here that contrary to a potter’s creation, which must
undergo various stages before reaching its final state, the yogin’s
creation is immediately complete because it is nothing but the yogin’s
will taking this or that particular form.

157 Thus according to Praśastapāda (PDhS: 46), God creates the universe
by putting atoms together so as to form a cosmic egg, and this
conjunction of atoms results “from the Great Lord’s mere will”
(maheśvarasyābhidhyānamātrāt) (cf. Vyomavatī, p. 301, which glosses
abhidhyāna with the word icchā). See Chemparathy 1968: 72, 81-83;
Bronkhorst 1996a: 286-87. Kumārila attacks this conception in ŚV,
Sambandhākṣepaparihāra 81-82ab: kulālavac ca naitasya vyāpāro yadi
kalpyate । acetanaḥ katham bhāvas tadicchām anurudhyate ।। tasmān na
paramāṇvāder ārambhaḥ syāt tadicchayā । “And if [you] do not conceive
the activity of this [Lord] as [that of] the potter, how can an
unconscious entity conform to his will? Therefore the atoms and so on do
not cling together by virtue of his will.” (See Krasser 1999: 220-21.)
The idea is also found in the Nyāya. See NMĪS: 103, where Jayanta
answers Kumārila’s objection by explaining: jñānacikīrṣāprayatnayogitvaṁ
kartr̥tvam ācakṣate. tac ceśvare vidyata evety uktam etat.
svaśarīrapreraṇe ca dr̥ṣṭam aśarīrasyāpy ātmanaḥ kartr̥tvam. “[We] observe
that being an agent is being endowed with knowledge, a desire to act,
and effort; and [we] have [already] explained that this [agency] is
found in the Lord. And [we] observe that the Self is the agent prompting
one’s own body to act although it does not have a body.” See also ibid.:
“Because the [Lord] acts my mere will . . .” (icchāmātreṇa ca tasya
kartr̥tvāt . . .). Cf. NBhūṣ: 453-54, which defends the idea of a cosmic
creation icchāmātrāt. On this same idea in Udayana’s works, see
Chemparathy 1972: 145 n 306, p. 146. Cf. Utpaladeva’s gloss of
Somānanda’s icchayā (ŚD 1.44ab, see above, n 156) as icchāmātreṇa (ŚDV:
32), or Abhinavagupta’s gloss of Utpaladeva’s icchāvaśāt in ĪPK I.5.7
again as icchāmātreṇa (ĪPV I: 183).

158 See ĪPV I: 183-84; ĪPVV II: 145 or ĪPV II: 152-53, translated and
analysed in Ratié 2011a: 406-07.

159 On the distinction in the Śaiva Siddhānta between the material cause
(i.e. māyā) and the efficient cause (i.e. īśvara) of the universe, see
PT 2.30cd (quoted above, n 117), TTNV: 134 (māyā hi jagata
upādānakāraṇātvāt . . . “For māyā, since it is the material cause of the
universe . . .”) and Goodall 2004: 174-77 n 128. On the idea that God
creates through his sole will, see NPP: 135 (quoted above, n 131). It
should be noted that the Vaiśeṣikas and Naiyāyikas may have originally
borrowed the notion of a creation by mere will from an ancient Śaiva
source: see Chemparathy 1965 and Bronkhorst 1996a: 289 on the
attribution by the YD of the doctrine of īśvara to pāśupatavaiśeṣika,
“Pāśupatas and Vaiśeṣikas” or “Vaiśeṣikas who are Pāśupatas”. See also
Bronkhorst 1996a: 290, on the hypothesis that Praśastapāda drew his
depiction of cosmic creation from some “Śaiva work”.

160 As noted in Goodall 1998: lxxvi, Somānanda explicitly refers to the
KT in ŚD 3.16ab (on which see Nemec 2011: 223 and n 77).

161 KT 3.10-11ab: yathā kālo hy amūrto 'pi dr̥śyate phalasādhakaḥ । evaṁ
śivo hy amūrto 'pi kurute kāryam icchayā ।। icchaiva karaṇaṁ tasya yathā
sadyogino matā । “For just as [we] observe that time, although devoid of
any corporeal form, produces a result, in the same way, Śiva, although
devoid of any corporeal form, produces an effect by virtue of [his]
will; [and] his instrument is nothing but this will, just as the [will]
of a true yogin is known [to be his sole instrument].” See Goodall 1998:
272.

162 John Nemec has emphasized that Somānanda “favourably quotes
Saiddhāntika sources in a number of places” rather than simply
dismissing them as a lower form of revelation (Nemec 2011: 58-59).

163 ŚD 1.44cd thus specifies that a yogin creates without any means
“such as clay, etc.” (see above, n 156).

164 See Torella 1994: xii-xxxvi, 2008; Nemec 2011: 31-34.

165 See ĪPVV II: 147: māyā ca bhagavacchaktivijr̥mbhāpi
viśvopādānarūpatāvabhāsitajaḍatvasvabhāvātattvarūpā. “And māyā, although
it is [in fact nothing but] the unfolding of the Lord’s power, consists
in something unreal in so far as its nature is an insentiency that is
manifested (avabhāsita) as consisting of the universe’s material cause.”

166 See Frauwallner 1962: 22; Sanderson 1985: 203; 1988: 694; Torella
1994: xiii; Ratié 2011a: 4-14.

167 Alternatively, Abhinavagupta may have been aware of the NPP passage
quoted below (Abhinavagupta already knew at least one of Rāmakaṇṭha’s
works when he composed his Tantrāloka: see Sanderson 2006: 44) and the
ĪPV passage may be an answer to Rāmakaṇṭha (who in turn was replying to
Utpaladeva).

168 See ĪPV I: 30: kartr̥jñātr̥svabhāvam iti cen nanu sa pramātaiva
tathābhūta iti ko ’nyaḥ saḥ. nanu sarvakartr̥tvasarvajñatve pramātur na
staḥ, na khalu sarvaśabdārtho jñātr̥kartr̥tvayoḥ svarūpaṁ bhinatti,
bhedadarśane ’pīśvarajñānacikīrṣāyatnāder nityasya
viṣayeṇākāraṇabhūtenānādheyātiśayatvāt. “If [the opponent replies] that
[one must prove the existence of the Lord] whose nature is that of an
agent and knower, [we answer]: ‘But since the knowing subject himself is
[of] such [a nature], who could be this other [agent and knower]?’ [If
the opponent replies:] ‘But [contrary to the Lord,] the knowing subject
does not have omnipotence and omniscience!’, [we answer in turn that]
the meaning of the prefix ‘omni-’ (sarva) [in ‘omniscient’ and
‘omnipotent’] does not involve any difference in the [very] nature of
[the powers consisting in] being a knower and an agent, because even in
a dualistic system (bhedadarśana), the Lord’s knowledge, desire to act
or effort [to act, since they are] permanent, are not made superior
(atiśaya) [than they were] by the [particular] object [on which they
focus, since this object] cannot be the cause [of any change in their
permanent nature].” Cf. Bhāskarī I: 51: na hi kaṇabhāvacayabhāvayor
agneḥ svarūpabheda ity uttaravākyābhiprāyaḥ. “The [author’s] intention
in the sentence [given in] reply is [to convey] that there is no
difference in the nature of fire, whether it exists as a [mere] spark or
as a heap [of flames].”

169 NPP: 113: atha puruṣaparīkṣānantaram īśvaraparīkṣā. nanu yuktam etad
anāntarīyakānāṁ* vaktum, iha tu jñatvakartr̥tvasvabhāve puṁsy
āvaraṇabhāvābhāvābhyāṁ savitarīvālpamahāviṣayatve
svasaṁvedanayogyatānumānābhyāṁ pūrvoktarītyā pratipādite svalpamahator
īśvarayoḥ siddhiḥ sthitaiva jñatvakartr̥tvarūpatvād īśvarasyeti kim
anyayā tatparīkṣayā । [*etad anāntarīyakānāṁ conj.: etat tannāntarīyāṇāṁ
— NPP]. “Now, immediately after the examination of the individual,
[Sadyojyotis undertakes] an examination of the Lord. [–­Objection:]
Surely this is an appropriate [thing] to say with respect to [entities]
that are not connected; but here, since the individual has as its nature
to be a knower and an agent, [and] since [this individual] is [already]
established in the manner that has already been stated, through its
perceptibility in self-awareness (svasaṁvedana) and through inference,
given that the Lord’s nature is [also] to be a knower and an agent, the
demonstration of both Lords [endowed with the powers of knowledge and
action, i.e. the individual, who is] a small [Lord since he has limited
powers] and the Great [one, whose powers are unlimited,] is ipso facto
completed, just as the sun [, although one,] can be [known as] a small
or a great object [of knowledge] according to whether a veil covering
[it] (āvaraṇa) is present or not.” As a matter of fact, the Śaiva
non-dualists describe as a veil (āvaraṇa) the delusion (moha) through
which the individual does not recognize himself as the Lord and
therefore sees himself as limited. See ĪPV I: 12, which mentions this
“veil covering the Self’s light with an appearance of stain”
(kālikākārasvaprakāśāvaraṇa), or ĪPV II: 203, which explains that
māyāśakti deludes (vimohinī) in so far as it veils (āvr̥ṇute) the Self’s
nature. See also ĪPVV II: 24 (dehātmakaniviḍatarāvaraṇābhimānaviṣamā ca
tanukaraṇaprāṇabuddhiśūnyāvaraṇāntarvartinī saṁvid amalā
śaradabhropahitaraviprakāśavat . . . “Consciousness, which [remains in
fact] devoid of stain, which is different from the [wrong]
identification with that thickest of veils that is the body, [and] which
remains internally present despite the veils that are the bodily organs,
vital breath, intellect and the void [to which individuals wrongly
identify], just as the light of the sun on which autumnal clouds have
gathered . . .” cf. Torella 2007: 928-29) or Bhāskarī I: 38, which
explains that recognition does not bring about any new knowledge but
merely removes the veil covering the Self’s true nature by stating: na
hi vātenāpasāritameghāvaraṇaḥ sūryas tadutpādita iti kathyate. “For when
the veil (āvaraṇa) of clouds [preventing us from seeing the sun] is
taken away by the wind, [we] do not say that the sun is established by
the [wind]!”

170 NPP: 113: satyam etat, jagaddhetubhūtānādīśvaraparīkṣā tv iyam
anyaivety avirodhaḥ. tathā hi na tāvad asāv asmadādīnām ātmavat
svasaṁvedanapratyakṣasiddho bhinnātmarūpatvena tasya tato ’nyatvāt, na
hy ātmanāṁ svasaṁvedanamātrāḥ saṁkīryanta ity uktam.
nāpīndriyapratyakṣeṇa parasparaṁ svabhāvād evendriyātītatvena teṣāṁ
siddheḥ, taccharīrāṇām indriyānatītatvasiddhāv api
viśiṣṭajñānakriyātmanor īśvaretarayor asiddheḥ. “This is true;
nonetheless, this examination of the beginningless Lord who is the cause
of the world is different [from the examination of the individual], so
that there is no contradiction [in writing a distinct chapter on the
Lord]. To explain: to begin with, for [limited subjects] such as us, the
[Lord] is not established through the direct perception that is
self-awareness, contrary to the Self, because he is different from this
[Self], given that he has as his nature a distinct Self. For [we have
already] explained that the pure self-awarenesses of [distinct] Selves
do not mix. Nor [is the Lord known] through a direct sensory perception,
because it is [now] established that by their very nature these
[different Selves] are beyond the reach of senses for each other, and
because, although their bodies have been established not to be beyond
the reach of senses, there is no demonstration that [both] the Lord and
[the individual] who is different from the Lord are Selves [endowed
with] particular [powers of] knowledge and action.”

171 For a particularly thorough analysis of some important passages in
the first chapter of the NPP, see Watson 2006. Ratié 2006 mentions a
number of striking similarities between Rāmakaṇṭha’s demonstration of
the Self in the first chapter of the NPP and Utpaladeva’s in the
Jñānādhikāra of the ĪPK, while emphasizing their main divergence (see in
particular n 160, p. 96).

8

