Alaṁkāras in the Stotras of Utpaladeva

Radhavallabh Tripathi

The concept of alaṁkāra in Sanskrit poetics is marked with a
comprehensive approach to arts. Bharatamuni says that there are two
aspects of creativity in art — svabhāva and alaṁkāra.1 The former
indicates natural acquisitions and the latter extraordinariness attained
through practice and devotion. In a dramatic performance they culminate
into the renderings of lokadharmī and nāṭyadharmī, and in literature
into svabhāvokti and vakrokti. The effects created by the process of
alaṁkāra lead to transgressing whatever may be commonplace or trivial.
By etymology the term alaṁkāra (making perfect) stands in agreement with
this approach. Amarakośa has given four meanings of the term alam-, i.e.
bhūṣaṇa (decoration or embellishment), vāraṇa (negation or elimination),
paryāpti (sufficiency) and śakti (power).2 They are related to surface
structure, deep structure and deeper structures in an art form. They are
not isolated. The process of beautification (bhūṣaṇa) starts from the
outer structure and basically relates to the form, but it is always
linked to the content. This linkage necessitates the activity of
elimination or exclusion (vāraṇa) and both these processes of bhūṣaṇa
and vāraṇa work together to bring in paryāpti (sufficiency). Thus a
piece of art attains the state of fulfilment through bhūṣaṇa, vāraṇa and
paryāpti and in this attainment lies its śakti. The alaṁkāra involves
this fourfold view of alam, resulting in a holistic view of art. The
triple process of bhūṣaṇa, vāraṇa and paryāpti, with the fourth element
of śakti embedded as an inherent force, tends to make an artistic
creation extraordinary and this extraordinary nature of art is alaṁkāra.
The ācāryas (masters of literary theory) have termed it as alambhāva or
alaṁkāra-bhāva. Abhinavagupta says:

lokottīrṇena rūpeṇa avasthānam iti ayam eva asau alaṁkārabhāvaḥ.

Remaining in the state of extraordinariness is essence of alaṁkāra.3

In this completeness, each and every category in an art piece would
compete with the other ones in an ascending order for creating
excellence. It is this ascendance of various components of poetry that
Kuntaka terms as parasparaspardhādhiroha4 — a process in which various
components of poetry vie with each other to enhance the charm of poetry
and to make it reach the peaks of excellence.

This manifestation of alambhāva or alaṁkāra-bhāva in literature or a
piece of art encompasses all the three levels of human existence, i.e.
ādhibhautika (empirical), ādhidaivika (psychic) and ādhyātmika
(spiritual). The creative process under bhūṣaṇa, vāraṇa and paryāpti
functions on these three levels respectively. Therefore, alaṁkāra in
literature and art must unfold a holistic view of life that functions on
all these three levels, and it would reveal the extraordinary nature as
discussed above only after completing its functions on all these three
levels. It is also presumed that the gods are pleased by alaṁkāras.
Abhinavagupta, commenting on the very first kārikā of the NŚ, says that
the use of anuprāsa (alliteration) in the compound pitāmahamaheśvarau
(meaning Brahmā and Śiva) is to please both these gods.5 That means that
besides devotion, the beauty of expression is also required to be
blessed with anugraha. The concept of alaṁkāra thus tends to make an art
form an abode of divine.

The nature and choice of alaṁkāras in metaphysical poetry or in a stotra
would differ from their use in secular literature — śr̥ṅgāra-kāvya or
vīra-kāvya (romantic or heroic poetry). In metaphysical poetry or in a
stotra, use of virodha or virodhābhāsa (contradiction) alaṁkāra may be
more meaningful than mere employment of alaṁkāras like upamā (simile).
It would seem contradictory in itself that the poetry that tends to
remove all contradictions of life, itself abounds in the use of
contradiction. Contradiction becomes effective to describe the Reality
that cannot be encompassed in the ambit of ordinary language. In such
cases it culminates into a paradox. This happens in many of the
Upaniṣadic sayings. For example:

pūrṇam adaḥ pūrṇam idaṁ pūrṇāt pūrṇam udacyate ।

pūrṇasya pūrṇam ādaya pūrṇam eva avaśiṣyate ।।6

This is full, that is full. Being full, it is enjoined with the full.

Taking out full from the full, full itself remains.

or

tad ejati tan nejati tad dūre tad u antike ।

tad antar asya sarvasya tad u sarvasya bāhyataḥ ।।

That moves, that moves not. That is far off, That is very near. That is
within all this and That is outside all this — Īśa Upaniṣad 5

Virodha as a figure of speech occurs in the statements regarding
coexistence of two opposite attributes in one stratum. Mammaṭa has
adumbrated ten varieties of virodha on the basis of permutations and
combinations of contradiction between jāti (universal), guṇa (quality),
kriyā (action) and yadr̥cchā (substance).7 These ten varieties encompass
a cosmic view of virodha. Some theoreticians have upheld the view that
virodha and virodhābhāsa are two different alaṁkāras, with the
distinction that the contradiction stands unresolved in the former
whereas it is just apparent in the latter and finally resolved. In fact,
be it virodha or virodhābhāsa, the contradiction in this alaṁkāra is not
real. In terms of Vedānta, it is a prātibhāsika-sattā.

Sometimes the description of transcendental reality requires the
combination of śleṣa (pun) or rūpaka (metaphor) with virodha. Such
combinations then assume a unique character. The śleṣa or the rūpaka
must then come as subservient to virodha in such cases. This type of
combination, termed as aṅgāṅgī-bhāva by the masters of literary theory,
would invest a poem, especially a stotra, with a unique character,
making it distinct from the other forms of literature.

Instances of such use of virodha alaṁkāra abound in Utpaladeva’s
stotras. He employs this alaṁkāra to bring out the extraordinary nature
of metaphysical experience. For example:

ātmā mama bhavadbhaktisudhāpānayuvā ’pi san ।

lokayātrārajorāgat palitair iva dhūsaraḥ ।। — Śivastotrāvalī I.2
(Bhaktivilāsa)

My soul, even being young by drinking the elixir of devotion to the
Lord, appears as if dusty with grey hair, due to the rāga (colour,
attachment) of the rajas (dust, rajoguṇa) during the course of the
journey in this world.

This is an example of virodha alaṁkāra based on contradiction between
guṇas (qualities). Youth and old age are two opposite guṇas, they are
shown to be present in one entity (the ātman). This makes the poem an
example of contradiction. But this contradiction is substantiated by
śleṣa in the word rajorāga — to suit the double context of the lokayātrā
(journey in this world).

In difference to the Vedāntic view that ātman is nirguṇa (devoid of
qualities), Utpaladeva apparently juxtaposes youth and old age
simultaneously in one substratum, bringing out the sound effect of
devotion to the Lord (bhavad bhakti). The kr̥t-suffix śatr̥ joined to the
root as (to be) in the words yuvā ’pi san emphasizes the continuity of
youth through devotion, whereas the word iva (as if) added in the
statement on old age suggests that the contradiction is not a part of
the Reality. Despite the apparent contradiction of youth and old age
manifesting in ātman simultaneously, Utpaladeva has carefully phrased
this situation to bring out a resolution. The contradiction is further
resolved due to subtle use of utprekṣā in palitair iva dhūsaraḥ (appears
as if dusty with grey hair). The ātman is neither young nor old, it
appears like that during the course of the journey in this world.

Śleṣa as an alaṁkāra is of two types — śabda-śleṣa (based on word) and
artha-śleṣa (based on the meaning). Here Utpala has used the former, as
the double meaning of the word rajorāga can be conveyed only through the
use of this particular word.

The ācāryas like Mammaṭa also uphold the view that śabda-śleṣa
culminates into simile. The rajas or dust gathered due to the journey in
this world thus becomes comparable to rajoguṇa. This fusion of
śabda-śleṣa and the upamā with virodha here creates deep structures of
metaphysical and philosophical speculations. The very imagery of ātman
being continuously invested with youth, and yet appearing as an old
person, is suggestive of the fact that the journey in life does afflict
the sādhaka (devotee) with its tinge of colours, but the grace of the
Lord will continue to be showered on him.

Utpala makes skilful use of virodha with other alaṁkāras to bring out
his philosophy in many other stanzas in Bhaktivilāsa-Stotra. Virodha in
such cases stands as aṅgī or main figure of speech whereas alaṁkāras
based on similarity or pun come as the aṅgas or subservient to virodha
to substantiate the premises of the poet.

Let us take up another example:

jayanti bhaktipīyūṣarasāsavavaronmadāḥ ।

advitīyā api sadā tvaddvitīyā api prabho ।।

— Śivastotrāvalī I.5 (Bhaktivilāsa)

Victorious are they who are intoxicated by bhaktipīyūṣarasāsavavara (the
best quality essence of the wine of the nectar of devotion). They are
advitīya (single, unique) and even then they are always tvaddvitīyā
(accompanied by you).

There is a metaphor in bhaktipīyūṣarasāsavavara (the excellent essence
of the wine of the nectar of devotion). The effects of the intoxication
of wine can terminate the discretion and the discriminatory powers of a
person. Here the bhaktipīyūṣarasāsavavara leads to the termination of
duality. The complexity of dualism and non-dualism going together is
emphasized by the use of virodha alaṁkāra. Here too, śabda-śleṣa and
rūpaka support virodha to project the uniqueness of experiences arising
out of devotion to the Lord. In the same way, the experience of seeing
the Lord when there is complete annihilation of all objects of knowledge
has been brought out in the following stanza:

nātha vedyakṣaye kena na dr̥śyo asy ekakaḥ sthitaḥ ।

vedyavedaikasaṅkṣobhe ’py asi bhaktaiḥ sudarśanaḥ ।। — Śivastotrāvalī
I.8 (Bhaktivilāsa)

Lord, who will not see you as the One standing alone, after the complete
annihilation of all objects of knowledge? After all the subject and
object are merged together, you are to be sighted easily.

If the seer and the seen are merged together, how can the Lord be seen
easily? This contradiction in the statement cannot be resolved unless
the stanza is considered to be having a tinge of bhāvika alaṁkāra. The
quality of a literary discourse leading the connoisseur to a clear
perception is bhāvika alaṁkāra. The happenings of past and things to
happen in future are portrayed so vividly that the reader is able to see
them. Defining bhāvika alaṁkāra in his Kāvyālaṁkāra, Bhāmaha says:

Bhāvika is that quality of a literary discourse where things of past and
future are perceived as if by eyes. It is caused by variety, sublimity
and dramatic quality of a narrative as well as by the clarity of words.8

Daṇḍin understands bhāva as the intention of the poet. The theme is
grand, and speech and expressions match it, so that everything becomes
subservient to the intention of the poet.9 Later authors have viewed
bhāvika as unfolding of the vision of past and future leading to
realization. Ruyyaka says that the past and the future become alive
before our eyes through bhāvika — they become perceptible and we stand
witness to them.10 Appaya Dīkṣita defines it as
bhūtabhavyārthasākṣāddarśanavarṇanam (direct vision and narration of the
past and the future). Āśādhara Bhaṭṭa in his commentary on Kuvalayānanda
defines bhāva in bhāvika as sākṣātkāra (vision) — bhāvāya sākṣātkārāya
prabhavati iti bhāvikaṁ. Ruyyaka also says that there are two types of
correspondences in poetry — subjective and objective — hr̥daya-saṁvāda
(empathy) and vastu-saṁvāda (objective visualization). In
rasavadalaṁkāra we have hr̥daya-saṁvāda and in svabhāvokti there is
vastu-saṁvāda. But in bhāvika it is neither vastu-saṁvāda nor
hr̥daya-saṁvāda; it is clear perception. The masters of literary theory
have used the term sākṣātkāra for the experience of poetry having
bhāvika alaṁkāra. The same term is used in Śaivism and Vedānta to define
the mystic experience. The mystic poems as those of Utpala lead to a
perception beyond time and space, and thus they illustrate bhāvika
alaṁkāra.

Asaṅgati (incongruity or disconnection) is another important alaṁkāra of
the group of alaṁkāras based on contradiction. It is used for situations
involving non-applicability of the rules of cause and effect, etc.
Asaṅgati is often used to bring a sense of saṅgati (connection).
Śobhākaramiśra has enumerated eight types of asaṅgatis enveloping a vast
spectrum of time and space. They are: (i) the effect manifests
elsewhere, (ii) the effect that should have been at two different places
manifests at one place; (iii-iv) the effect manifests earlier, or
manifests with the cause, (v-vi) the effect manifests much later or too
early; and (vii-viii) the effect belonging to this world is found in
another world and vice versa.11

Utpaladeva explores the disconnections or connections between the causes
and the effects through asaṅgati alaṁkāra with a view to establish the
uniqueness of metaphysical experiences. The following stanza from his
Stotra is a good example of asaṅgati alaṁkāra —

citram nisargato nātha duḥkhabījaṁ idaṁ manaḥ ।

tvadbhaktirasasaṁsiktaṁ niḥśreyasamahāphalam ।। — Śivastotrāvalī I.26
(Bhaktitavilāsa)

Strange as it is, O Lord, that my mind — a seed of sorrow by nature —
has yielded the great fruit of salvation.

The asaṅgati alaṁkāra here joins hand again with a complex metaphor,
wherein the mind is the earth, sorrow is the seed sown in it, bhakti
(devotion) is the rasa (water, bliss) and niḥśreyasa (salvation) is the
mahāphala (great fruit).

In fact, we do not find singular usages of alaṁkāras in this type of
poetry, as one alaṁkāra would be joined invariably by other members of
its group or the other group. This becomes necessary due to the
complexity and unique character of the experiences that are to be
delineated in devotional and mystic poetry. Rūpaka assumes a distinct
character, supported by an alaṁkāra like vyatireka. The following stanza
combines a number of alaṁkāras to bring out the unparalleled nature of
Lord Śiva:

viśvendhanamahākṣārānulepaśucivarcase ।

mahānalāya bhavate viśvaikahaviṣe namaḥ ।। — Śivastotrāvalī II.2
(Sarvātmaparibhāvana)

Salutations to you, O Big Fire, consuming the offering of the whole
Universe, and with your body having become pious by smearing the ashes
of the firewood of this world.

Rūpaka is the main alaṁkāra here, supported by virodha alaṁkāra. The
metaphor of the world as a fuel incorporates the contradiction or
virodha alaṁkāra, i.e. that the Lord is pious even when he smears his
body with the ashes of this fuel. The metaphor of mahānala (great fire)
is also suggestive of vyatireka alaṁkāra, as it implies that Lord Śiva
exceeds an ordinary fire. Again the metaphor and vyatireka in the second
line are supported by another metaphor of viśvaikahaviḥ — that the world
is a haviḥ (oblation) for the great fire that is Śiva. The whole stanza
is also an example of parikara alaṁkāra. Parikara alaṁkāra manifests by
the appropriate use of adjectives. There are three adjectives used here
for Lord Śiva — viśvendhanamahākṣārānulepaśucivarcas, mahānala and
viśvaikahaviḥ. All of them suitably bring out the distinct nature of the
Lord. Also as the adjectives so suitably used to describe Lord Śiva are
all suggestive of his extraordinariness and grandeur, the stanza is also
characterized by udātta alaṁkāra. In fact, Utpala’s poetry subtly
breathes in the mixture of such alaṁkāras like parikara, udātta with
rūpaka. It is the vision of the divine that leads to the expressions
structured with alaṁkāras like virodha, parikara, udātta, rūpaka and
vyatireka — with implications of atiśayokti.

Such specific combinations of alaṁkāras distinguish the poetry of
mystics like Utpala from other types of literary compositions. The
alaṁkāras employed in such poetry present a feast of contradictions that
invariably and unmistakably culminates in the state of bliss. The
contradictions then become the vehicles for a journey to travel beyond
the mundane. A glimpse of the transcendental can be had through the
scope created by contradictory statements, such as

sahasrasūryakiraṇādhikaśuddhaprakāśavān ।

api tvaṁ sarvabhuvanavyāpako ’pi na dr̥śyase ।। — Śivastotrāvalī III.19
(Praṇayaprasāda)

Having pure brilliance more than the rays of thousands of suns, you are
not visible even when you pervade all the cosmos.

This leads us to distinguish the specific nature of alaṁkāras and the
types of alaṁkāras that are used in the stotras of the
philosopher-poets, like Utpaladeva.

The following stanza 14 from Sarvātmaparibhāvana presents a combination
of rūpaka and udātta:

taṭeṣv eva paribhrāntaiḥ labdhās tās tā vibhūtayaḥ ।

yasya tasmai namas tubhyam agādhaharasindhave ।।

Salutations to thee, O unfathomed sea Lord Śiva, just by loitering upon
whose banks people get unaccountable prosperities.

Here also udātta is aṅga (subservient) to rūpaka. In all such instances,
atiśayokti forms the base. Ultimately, the saṅkara (commixture) of such
figures of speech enables the poet to create divine aesthetics. The
saṁsr̥ṣṭi (fusion) of alaṁkāras like rūpaka, parikara, vyatireka and
udātta leads to a samplava — a confluence of diverse streams forming
unfathomed sea — which Utpala terms as rāgarasa.

tvaccidānandajaladhes cyutāḥ saṁvittivipruṣaḥ ।

imāḥ kathaṁ me bhagavan na amr̥tāsvādasundarāḥ ।।

tvayi rāgarase nātha na magnaṁ hr̥dayaṁ prabho ।

yeṣāṁ ahr̥dayā eva te avajñāspadaṁ īdr̥śāḥ ।। — Śivastotrāvalī III.6-7
(Praṇayaprasāda)

The drops of consciousness trickling from the Sea of Bliss that is You —
will they not be beautiful to me like nectar? O Lord, heartless are they
whose hearts have not been submerged in the rāgarasa that You are. They
are not subjected to the grace from you.

References

Alaṁkāra-Ratnākara of Śobhākaramiśra, ed. C.R. Devadhar, Poona: Oriental
Book Agency, 1942.

Alaṁkāra-Sarvasva of Ruyyaka with Sañjīvinī of Śrīvidyācakravartin, ed.
R.C. Dwivedi, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1965.

Amarakośa – Edited by Hargovind Shastri, Kashi Sanskrit Granthamālā,
198, Chowkhambha Sanskrit Series Office, Varanasi, Vikram Saṁvat 2016.

Dhvanyāloka of Ānandavardhana, ed. K. Krishnamoorthy, Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass, 1982.

Dhvanyālokalocana (Locana): Dhvanyālokalocana- Kerala Commentaries,
vols. I-II, ed. C.M. Neelkanthan, Tripunithura: Centre for Heritage
Studies, 2011.

Īśādidaśopaniṣadaḥ, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1st edn., 1964, repr.
1975.

Kāvyādarśa of Daṇḍin with commentary of Ramachandra Mishra, Varanasi:
Chowkhambha Vidya Bhavan, 1958.

Kāvyālaṁkāra of Bhāmaha, ed. Raman Kumar Sharma, Delhi: Vidya Nidhi
Prakashan, 1994.

Kāvyaprakāśa of Mammaṭa with English translation by Sir Ganganatha Jha,
Delhi: Bharatiya Vidya Prakashan, 1985.

Nāṭyaśāstra (NŚ) – of Bharatamuni, ed. Ravishankar Nagar, vols. I-IV,
Delhi: Parimal Publications, 1983-84.

Śivastrotrāvalī of Utpaladeva, ed. Sushama Jadu, New Delhi: Rashtriya
Sanskrit Sansthan, 2010.

Siddhitrayī of Utpaladeva, ed. Surya Prakash Vyas, Varanasi: Chowkhambha
Sanskrit Sansthan, 1988.

Vakroktijīvitam of Kuntaka, ed. K. Krishmoorthy, Dharwad: Karnatak
University, 1977.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 NŚ, XXXIII.6.

2 alam bhūṣaṇaparyāptiśaktivāraṇavācakam — Amarakośa III.3.252; mā sma
mā alaṁ ca vāraṇe — ibid. 3.4.11.

3 Locana on Dhvanyāloka (Varanasi edn.), p. 499.

4 vakratāvividhaguṇālaṁkārasampadāṁ paraspara-spardhādhirohaḥ —
Vakroktijīvitam, p. 10.

5 pitāmahamaheśvarau iti kramaḥ chekānuprāsārthaḥ । sālaṁkārasya ca
vākyābhinayatāṁ darśayityuṁ । sālaṅkārasya devatāparitoṣahetutvaṁ ca
darśayituṁ । — Abhinavabhāratī on Nāṭyaśāstra I.1.

6 This verse occurs in the beginning of the fifth chapter of
Br̥hadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad. Śaṅkarācārya has commented upon it.
Īśādidaśopaniṣadaḥ, p. 950.

7 KP, X.110-11a: 407-08.

8 tad bhāvikam iti prāhuḥ prabandhaviṣayaṁ guṇaṁ ।

pratyakṣa iva dr̥śyante yatrārthāḥ bhūtabhāvinaḥ ।।

citrodāttādbhutārthatvaṁ kathāyāḥ svabhinīyatā ।

śabdānākulatā ca iti tasya hetuṁ pracakṣate ।। — Kāvyālaṁkāra III.53-54

9 bhāvaḥ kaver abhiprāyaḥ kāvyeṣv āsiddhisaṁsthitaḥ ।

parasparopakāritvaṁ sarveṣāṁ vastuparvaṇām ।।

viśeṣaṇānāṁ vyarthānām akriyā sthānavarṇanā ।

vyaktir uktikramabalād gabhīrasyāpi vastunaḥ ।।

bhāvāyattam idaṁ sarvam iti tad bhāvikaṁ viduḥ ।। — Kāvyādarśa II.364-65

10 Alaṁkāra-Sarvasva, sūtra 80, p. 328.

11 Alaṁkāra-Ratnākara, sūtra 55, p. 96.

9

