The Twelve Kālīs and Utpaladeva’s

Appraisal of the Sensory Experience

Aleksandra Wenta

The Twelve Kālīs and Pratyabhijñā

The Doctrine of the Twelve Kālīs constitutes one of the earliest
developments of the Kālīkula/Kālīkrama. Moreover, it represents the most
esoteric teaching in the entire Kashmiri Śaiva tradition predominant in
the Kashmir region in the early medieval period. The tenth-eleventhth
century Kashmiri Abhinavagupta understands the Twelve Kālīs to be the
most elevated esoteric aspect of his Trika system. For him, She Who
Draws Time to Herself (Kālasaṁkarṣaṇī), the goddess of the Kālīkrama, is
Beyond Parā (Parātīta) of the Trika goddesses consisting of the Supreme
Goddess (Parā), the Middle Goddess (Parāparā) and the Lower Goddess
(Aparā), that underline the doctrinal foundation of his Trika system.1

According to Abhinavagupta, it was Utpaladeva himself who appears in the
spiritual lineage that transmitted the Doctrine of the Twelve Kālīs to
him. The ninth-century Somānanda,2 the author of Śivadr̥ṣṭi and thus, the
first preceptor of the Pratyabhijñā system was, according to
Abhinavagupta, a disciple of the Krama teacher Govindarāja who, before
dying, passed to him the Doctrine of the Twelve Kālīs taught in the
Devīpañcaśatikā (Kālīkulapañcaśatakā). This doctrine was transmitted by
Somānanda, through his spiritual lineage of Utpaladeva and
Lakṣmaṇagupta, down to Abhinavagupta.3 Utpaladeva did not directly refer
to his spiritual heritage coming from the Krama’s descendants (probably
due to intentional promotion of non-tantric evaluation of the tradition
founded on the rational basis). Still, his emphasis on the sensory
experience saturated with the lunar nectar, systematically developed in
the Śivastotrāvalī (ŚSĀ), the magnum opus of the Kashmiri Śaiva
devotional literature, has strong affinity with the Kālīkrama’s
assessment of the sense-organs. The word “strong” is used here to
acknowledge the fact that the Krama system constitutes the important
foundation of the Pratyabhijñā, as well as the Trika and Spanda
schools.4 Perhaps not only these reasons were present in the minds of
Utpaladeva’s interpreters — Kṣemarāja and Maheśvarānanda — who
elaborated on the essential teachings of Utpaladeva in the light of the
Krama-Mahārtha. Especially worth mentioning is Kṣemarāja who, in his
commentary on Utpaladeva’s ŚSĀ,5 is firmly committed to establishing the
veracity of the Krama system.

On the other hand, the thirteenth-century Maheśvarānanda in his
commentary (Parimala) on his own Mahārthamañjarī (MM) — the south Indian
version of the Kālīkrama, set up in the pervasive Pratyabhijñā
framework, uses quotations from the ŚSĀ in the context of the scriptural
justification of the secret Kaula ritual (kulayāga) which he regards as
the practice of the empowered means (śāktopāya).6 This interesting
configuration displays a certain result, namely, the indistinct
correlation between the Krama and the Kaula7 “logically” provable by the
axiomatic system of the Pratyabhijñā;8 for example, the Twelve Kālīs as
the representation of the reflective awareness (vimarśa).

The Doctrine of the Twelve Kālīs is centred on the mystical experience
embodied in the Twelve Suns known as the Sequence of the Sun-Goddess
(bhānavī-krama)9 which is said to be the essential teaching of the
northern transmission (uttarāmnāya). The Twelve Kālīs represent: (1) the
dynamism of the cognitive act (saṁvit-cakra, saṁvit-krama); (2) the
universal pulse of consciousness (sāmānya-spanda); and (3) the twelve
divinized sense-organs (prakāśa-cakra, marīcidevatā-cakra, raśmi-cakra).
Within this conceptual scheme, the Twelve Kālīs stand for the method
(krama) and the tool (the senses) of the cognitive process that give
rise to the reflective awareness (vimarśa) that is the capacity of pure
luminous consciousness (prakāśa, bhāsa) to reflect upon its infinite
nature. The category of vimarśa constitutes one of the major
preoccupations of Utpaladeva established in his commentary (Vr̥tti) on
the Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Kārikā (ĪPK) where he defines vimarśa as the
power of the activity of consciousness (citikriyāśakti).10 In this
sense, the Twelve Kālīs constitute the analytical model of the cognitive
process where emphasis is placed on the cognitive energies themselves —
the sense-organs and thoughts accompanying sensory perception, pointing
the way to mystical communion with the phenomenal reality. Activated on
the basis of the purification of thought-constructs (vikalpa-saṁskāra),
the Twelve Kālīs give rise to the awakening of pure knowledge (śuddha
vidyā). This entrance to the condition free of thought-constructs
(nirvikalpa) is granted when the intellect “attains to the state of
intrinsic purity as a reflecting medium”,11 in this case, all that
remains is the universal agent of mental representations. Therefore, “he
who, having all as his essence, thus knows: ‘All this multiform
deployment is mine’, he, even in the flow of mental constructs, attains
the state of Maheśa”.12 In this way, also the individual subject who,
though continuing to produce mental constructs deriving precisely from
the power of the Lord — “mine is this multiform deployment of the
saṁsāra” — this subject, too, permeates the universe without any
differentiation and transforms all the mental constructs into pure
reflective awareness, attains the state of Maheśvara.13 Apart from this
epistemic bedrock systematized by the terminology of the Pratyabhijñā,
the Kālīkrama, along with the Twelve Kālīs core, constitutes the highest
theoretical development of the sensory experience and the hermeneutics
of this process, that cannot be found in any other Kashmiri Śaiva
tradition of that time. Notably, in this place where the functioning of
the senses is rendered experientially positive, the Kālīkrama and
Utpaladeva fuse. In Utpaladeva’s concept of devotion, the sensory
experience plays a prominent part. Indulgence in the senses entails
entering into the highest realization of Śiva’s nature, it is a sudden
recognition (sāhasa-abhijñāna),14 “saturated with the pure,
everlastingly flowing stream of the nectar of consciousness
(saṁvit-amr̥ta)”15 that comprises the cognition “that all is one”.16
However, apart from the frenzy dynamism performed by the religious zeal
of the senses, devotion has also another dimension. Initially it appears
static, suiting to the overall picture of what is called the secret
doctrine of the Kālīkrama, in so far as for Utpaladeva devotion is the
condition of equipoise and permanence (sthiti). Utpaladeva avers:

Nothing whatsoever is to be utilized

For becoming firmly established (sthiti-kr̥ta) in one’s own self,
luminosity is clearly apparent and eternal.

May this idea take a stronghold on me.17

Only those who are abiding in their own true selves (svasthā), are
devoted to you.18

Having settled (sthitvā) in the abode of your pure consciousness

Oh, may I ever worship you, O Lord,

By means of body, speech and mind [. . .].19

The condition of permanence (sthiti), apart from being only one phase of
the cognitive process (sr̥ṣṭi, sthiti, saṁhāra, etc.), also constitutes
the highest state of the Goddess Kālasaṁkarṣaṇī, marking the complete
stability in pure consciousness represented by the “purified cognition”
of the wheel of consciousness (saṁvit-cakra= Twelve Kālīs)20 and tasted
as the lunar nectar of immortality. The condition of permanence (sthiti)
unites the solar–lunar dimensions enclosed within the vidyā of
Kālasaṁkarṣaṇī. Therefore, what initially seems a static establishment
(sthiti) in pure consciousness involves astonishing richness of the
sensory experience embodied in the Sun of the Twelve Kālīs. The
functioning of the senses operates simultaneously in the expansive and
contractive manner. When expanded, they savour the blissful nectar of
the expanded consciousness represented by the Sixteen Digits of the Full
Moon, in the contracted state, they relish the innermost lunar nectar of
the śāmbhava state — the Seventeenth Digit of the New Moon.

Saṁvit-Mārga, Saṁvit-Cakra

One of the major preoccupations of Utpaladeva’s theory of recognition
(pratyabhijñā) is the attempt to establish a single dynamic subject,21
the “I” of Śiva that manifests within a duality of prakāśa-vimarśa, the
pure luminous consciousness (prakāśa/Śiva) and the reflective awareness
(vimarśa/Śakti). The polarization of prakāśa-vimarśa is carried out to
strengthen the experimental warrant of the ultimate non-dualism
(paramādvaita) tied up by the knot of their intrinsic unity (abheda).
This demonstrating procedure determines the unshaken ground for the
conceptions of “transcendence” and “immanence” when viewed from the
perspective of the phenomenology of perception leading to recognition of
the absolute (“I” of Śiva) in the entire objective phenomena. Indeed,
ŚSĀ portrays Śiva endowed with sunrays (bhānumarīcyaḥ)22 (due to which
the singleness of the dynamic subject is preserved). Śiva is the aim,
the light of pure consciousness (prakāśa) attainable through sunrays of
the reflective awareness (vimarśa). Sunbeams represent the cognizance of
the senses whose functioning employs the reflective awareness. For the
devotee, the path of the senses (saṁvit-mārga) is the path to attain
Śiva.23 On the more interiorized level of mystical absorption, the
senses are transformed into the sense-divinities whose sensory
perception is utilized as the sacrificial substances offered to Śiva.24

Hail to your terrible wheel of the goddesses of the senses
(śakti-vr̥nda)!

Who, by making an offering of the sense-objects,

Worship you through the enjoyment of delight.25

In the commentary on this verse of the ŚSĀ, Kṣemarāja defines
śakti-vr̥nda as the wheel of consciousness (saṁvit-cakra).26 Saṁvit-cakra
is extensively elaborated in chap. IV of Abhinavagupta’s TĀ, in the
section dedicated to the empowered means (śāktopāya)27 denoting the
Twelve Kālīs embedded in the dynamism of the cognitive process.
Kṣemarāja’s interpretation of śakti-vr̥nda is unique. This term never
appears in the Kālīkrama scriptures in the context of the Twelve Kālīs,
in so far as it is exclusively reserved to denote the collective reality
of the Kālīkrama’s metaphysics known as the Wheel of the Aggregate
(vr̥nda-cakra). However, an exception is found in the Cidgaganacandrikā
(CGC) of Śrīvatsa. In this text dating most probably from the thirteenth
century, śakti-vr̥nda refers to the countenance of the Goddess as the Sun
of Consciousness in the precise meaning of saṁvit-cakra. According to
scriptural testimony, this is the plane of the twelvefold sequence
manifested in the world in the form of words and everywhere else as the
squaring of the triads.28 The twelvefold scheme (3 x 4 = 12) represents
the processing of the cognitive energy taking place between the trinity
of the knower (pramātr̥), the means of knowledge (pramāṇa), and the
object of knowledge (prameya). Each follows the fourfold sequence of (1)
projection (sr̥ṣṭi), (2) maintenance (sthiti), (3) withdrawal (saṁhāra),
and (4) the inexplicable (anākhya). The attentive reflection on this
sequence (krama-parāmarśa) that is established as the ground of all
experience is the practical application of saṁvit-cakra. The projection
of the object in the outline of objectivity, generated by the unfolding
of will, is emergence (akalitollāsa/sr̥ṣṭi). Each time this will falls on
the external object, the sensual enjoyment (tatsambhoga/sthiti) is
maintained. Returning back to its own essential nature which is the
withdrawal of expansion for contraction is relish (carvaṇa/saṁhāra). The
final repose of the differentiated objects in the unity of
consciousness, where they are mirrored as reflections indistinct from
their primordial source (the absolute “I” (pūrṇa ahaṁ), is the phase of
the inexplicable cessation (virāma/anākhya).29 Although the inexplicable
cessation represents the state of consciousness that is free of the
duality of thought-constructs (nirvikalpa), it still cognizes, in so far
as it recognizes the movement of thoughts as the pure luminous
consciousness and, moreover, comprises a cognition: “all this is my
glory”. In this way, the inexplicable cessation retains the activities
of the senses and cognition but endows them with a new status close to
their divine nature.

Sunbeams of Devotion

Utpaladeva uses the sense-organs as a framework for his eulogy of
devotional experience in a way that their most exalted commitment is the
fullness of their realization. Devotion commands the experience through
the senses, generating the magnetic field of blissful elation which
grows in intensity as religious passion increases. Perhaps more
striking, authenticity of devotion is provable by the sensory rapture
that permeates the subjective and objective contents of the cognitive
process. As Utpaladeva tells us: “those only are your true devotees who
experience the subject and object through an expanded fund of
sensation”.30 The entire spectrum of sensorial intensity embedded in the
devotional “methodology”, “the sunbeams of devotion”,31 as Utpaladeva
calls it, brings forth a constitutive evaluation of the sensory
experience permitting a mystical absorption (samāveśa). Both Utpaladeva
and Kṣemarāja equate devotion (bhakti) with possession32 (āveśa) and
mystical absorption (samāveśa)33 in a way in which devotional commitment
of the senses is highlighted in the perspective of the sensory
involvement that leads naturally to immersion in exalted moods (rasa)
resulting in mystical communion with the absolute. At this stage, the
sense-organs unfold in accord with their innate spontaneity extracting
from the objective sphere the essence, the subtle portion, as fragrance,
colour, sound, etc. which serves as a means leading to intimate union
with pure consciousness, represented by the relishing of taste (rasa).
This savoury awareness of the senses is indicated by usage of such terms
as: the bliss of tasting (rasana), relish (carvaṇa), enjoying a flavour
(āsvāda). They convey the idea of universal interpenetration to the
point of final absorption. Relishing the savour is the image of
assimilation and the means for increase of power. Working at the
intersection of semiotic and symbolic, the act of tasting is
ontologically the activity of dissolution (carvaṇa = saṁhāra) that
exemplifies interiorization of the objective content (the krama rests in
the akrama). Destruction by licking carried out by the network of the
rays of the senses (represented by the Twelve Kālīs) intent on universal
dissolution, appears commonly in the scriptures of the Kālīkrama
tradition, standing for the epitome of reflective awareness (parāmarśa).
As Torella pointed out,34 the act of savouring, represented by such
terms as carvaṇa, āsvāda, rasana, is complementary to vimarśa and its
derivates.

Apart from palatable absorption, there is yet another notion implied by
the image of devotionally-imbued senses that also posits an
all-encompassing relatedness in virtue of which the senses lead to
recognition of the unity-in-difference (bhedābheda/kramākrama). The
notion is that of pervasion (vyāpti). Because of their pervasive nature,
the sense-organs transform into magnetic tools operating within the
field of devotional enchantment. The pervasion of the senses, the
concept of the intertwining of all things where the lower is pervaded by
the higher that contains it, lies at the foundation of the Kālīkrama
tradition.35 Sunrays symbolically represent the pervasion of the senses.
As much as solar energy, the sunbeams of the senses illumine the world
both partially (as every individual thing) and collectively. The solar
radiance spreads outwards, precisely this distribution in all directions
refers to the activity of pervasion.36 This symbolizes the fact that
everything is made manifest by the light of consciousness and, as such,
attains its true being by realizing its unity with all. As the
instrument of pervasion (vyāpti), the senses have a capacity of merging
things in their intrinsic unity. On that level, the senses have already
lost their differentiated character and became indistinct from the
supreme “I”. The supreme “I” is a subject having recognized the movement
of the senses as the activity of pure consciousness. Therefore, the
activity of merging evokes the dynamic character of pervasion that, on
the ground of the Kālīkrama, is enacted by the senses which are actually
the partisans of the energized union (mahāmelāpa).37 This synthesis
articulates the locus of the identity within the dynamism of the senses,
which, acting in an all-permeating manner (vyāpaka), are compelled to
savour the unifying taste of non-dual consciousness (sāmarasya) in each
and every moment of perception.38 Utpaladeva is clear in his intention
that seeks to affirm the constitutive character of the senses engaged in
union at the culminating point of his eulogy of devotion. Immersion in
the functioning of the senses penetrating the objective and the
subjective content with the intention of their endless conjunctions is
implied in Utpaladeva’s concept of the great festival of worship
(mahotsava). As Utpaladeva tells us:

I pay homage to Śiva, who

During the festival of dissolution

Is passionately and tightly embraced by Śivā (Pārvatī, Śakti)

Through whom the entire universe is enjoyed

By means of drinking, eating and decoration.39

Oh, hail to the great festival of worship

Inexplicable and sweet

From which even tears that fall

Bring forth the savour of the immortal nectar.40

In the context of tantric practice, mahotsava stands for the code of
sensorial excess, referring to the performance of the great banquet
where the siddhas and yoginīs come to unite (melāpa) with the sole aim
of generating nectar (amr̥ta). Indeed, Maheśvarānanda favours this
interpretation by establishing Utpaladeva’s mahotsava at the centre of
his Kaula-Krama definition of the empowered means (śāktopāya).41
However, withholding the urge for setting apart the implications of the
purely ritualistic kind, we put forward the “cognitive” interpretation,
pronouncing the siddhas and yoginīs to be representations of the deities
of sense-organs and the objects of senses fused in the pulsating union
that activates the unfolding of the nectar of bliss. The nectar of bliss
represents the expanded form of consciousness characterized by the
outpouring of the energies of the senses saturating and permeating the
world of phenomenal existences from within and without. The stream of
overflowing energy experienced through the penetrating rush of the
senses brings forth the pervasion that is essentially the undivided
state of oneness enabling everything to emerge, to be maintained, and to
dissolve within the infinite chain of interrelated conjunctions. The
pervasion is implicit in the nature of the senses which enjoy themselves
in expansion and contraction of their intrinsic energies encapsulating
all things in their essential unity.

Pūrṇa: The Lunar Nectar of Bliss

Intense longing for the spiritual experience of the perfect fullness
(pūrṇa) manifested in the lunar nectar, the immortal wine, permeates all
levels of the ŚSĀ. The most richly evoked by Utpaladeva is the meaning
of pūrṇa referring to the supreme condition of śāmbhava.42 This notion
is exemplified in the oozing of the full nectar of immortality
(amr̥ta-pūrṇatva)43 that fills and satisfies the world of phenomenal
existence with bliss. The perfect fullness (pūrṇa, paripūrṇa) is the
realization of the ontological identity between the world of the
phenomenal existences being indistinct from Śiva’s pure consciousness,
as expressed in the statement: “the whole world is your perfect
fullness”.44 Moreover, the attainment of the perfect fullness (pūrṇa) by
the senses is a necessary condition for their deification that endows
the faculties of the senses with the “brilliantly emissive splendour”.45
Pūrṇa often associated with the lunar symbolism illustrates the
self-regenerated source that simultaneously empties and fills itself
with the moonlight nectar. The apotheosis of the outward saturation is
symbolized by the full moon; on the contrary, the pinnacle of the inward
refilling is marked by the new moon. Both dimensions seem valid in
Utpaladeva’s exposition of the lunar nectar that carries the experience
of bliss.

1. Pūrṇa — the full moon of the sensory experience

Even while resting on their objects

The faculties of the senses provide

The devotees with the immortal wine [. . .]46

In the Kālīkrama’s hermeneutics of the senses, the experience of
objectivity obtained by the solar functioning of the sense-organs is
embodied in bliss whose form is lunar nectar. When the sunrays of the
sense-organs are filled with pure desire (icchā) towards their outward
outpour, they bring the emanation of sensory experience to its fullness.
The nectar of bliss arises from the will of making the sensory
experience complete. In this state the “condensed consciousness” is
experienced as a fivefold object of sense. Ten rays of the sense-organs
along with the mind (manas) and the intellect (buddhi), treated as one,
make eleven. In this way, the bliss of the sensory experience arises
sixteenfold. Sixteen is the symbolic number of the full moon of
objectivity, and its form is nectar; it is the bliss because it is based
on the great bliss of the object of desire that finds its fullness.47

2. Pūrṇa ahaṁ — the new moon of the perfect fullness of I-ness

Reverence to him

Whose unique activity is the destruction

Of the great darkness of delusion

Whose luminosity transcends all other lights

Whose symbol is the moon.48

The Lord who is free of thought-constructs (nirvikalpa) [. . .] The
perfect fullness of the highest bliss (mahānandapūrṇa).49

The perfect fullness of I-ness (pūrṇa ahaṁ) constitutes the aim of the
Pratyabhijñā system in so far as it represents the supreme condition of
śāmbhava. It is a state free of thought-constructs (nirvikalpa) where
the trinity of the cognitive process (the subject, object and means of
knowledge) are identified with pure consciousness (cinmātra). This
identification is supported by taking delight in their single flavour
(ekarasa). Pūrṇa ahaṁ is the state of repose (viśrānti) wherein the
activities of mind and senses, free from their differentiated character,
are empowered to operation by the power of bliss (ānanda-śakti). The
relation between the perfect fullness of I-ness (pūrṇa ahaṁ) and the
dynamism of the cognitive process enclosed within the functioning of the
senses is described in terms of catoptric symbolism. Pūrṇa ahaṁ
represents the mirror-like (bimba) substratum for the absolute freedom
(svātantrya) supporting the unity of the play of the cosmic reflections
(pratibimba) deployed in the cognitive process. With emphasis on the
reabsorbing character of Śiva who presides over the cosmic dissolution,
the perfect fullness of I-ness (pūrṇa) is symbolically depicted by the
seventeenth lunar digit of the new moon, and not by the full moon. The
seventeenth lunar digit represents the perfect fullness of the inward
realization that contains the lunar nectar of immortality which pours
down into the manifestation of the objective reality.

3. Pūrṇa — the composite of the transmental (unmanā) and “with mind”
(samanā).

Wherever I go with body, speech, and mind

All that is you only

May this ultimate truth indeed

Become fully realized (paripūrṇa) in me.50

Looking closely at Utpaladeva’s sensorial code of mystical experience,
we can notice that the perfect realization (paripūrṇa) experienced as
the savour of the immortal nectar (amr̥ta) is a fusion of two states. The
one, the expansion of the senses pulsating with bliss, is balanced by
the second state enclosed within the image of serenity of the śāmbhava.
In the Kālīkrama, they correspond respectively to the states known as
“with mind” (samanā) and the transmental (unmanā). The state “with mind”
stands for the sensual enjoyment of sense-perceptions experienced as
wonder (camatkr̥ti), which gives rise to the outlet of the senses by
which an adept apprehends the beauty of the sensory world in the form of
sound, touch, etc.; this is the sequence (krama) of the current of the
senses, flowing both inside and outside, experienced as the bliss of
tasting (rasana).51 When this activity ceases to exist, and dissolves
away, it enters into the state of transmental, the non-sequence
(akrama). The state of unmanā is the form of the eternally cognized
illumination where various cycles of perception shine in identity with
Śiva’s pure consciousness.52 In the interiority of the transmental, the
consumed objectivity is relished as nectar (amr̥ta). By means of this
nectar, the inner outpouring of the senses takes place and one
experiences the world of phenomenal existence as if submerged in divine
libation. The fusion of these two states unfolding in the mode of the
non-sequential sequence (kramākrama) is rooted in the supreme condition
of permanence (sthiti) that lies at the foundation of the Kālīkrama’s
hermeneutics of the sensory experience.

References

Manuscript Sources

CMSS = Ciñcinīmatasārasamuccaya. The manuscripts of the
Ciñcinīmatasārasamuccaya. All are paper MSS deposited in the National
Archives, Kathmandu (NA) photographed by the Nepal German Manuscript
Preservation Project (NGMPP).

Kālīkulapañcaśatakā (Devīpañcaśatikā) MS no. 5-358 (Bauddhatantra),
NGMPP: reel no. B 30/26; no. of folios: 88; size: 20.5 x 5 cm; Material:
palm-leaf; script: Newārī. Complete.

MS Kh: NA MS no.: 1-245 (Tantra) 411; NGMPP reel no. A 1177/7; no. of
folios: 36; size: 22.6 x 5.6 cm; script (remarks): DN; folios 1-21,
24-26, 30-41.

MS Gh: NA MS no.: 1-199 (Śaivatantra) 410; NGMPP reel no. B123/5; no. of
folios: 69; size : 22 1/2 x 7 cm; script: Devanāgarī.

Printed Editions

CGC = Cidgaganacandrikā by Kālidāsa, ed. Swami Trivikrama Tirtha, Arthur
Avalon Tantrik Text Series (John Woodroffe), Calcutta, 1937.

DhvĀ = Dhvanyāloka of Ānandavardhana with the Locana of Abhinavagupta,
ed. Daniel H.H. Ingalls, Jeffrey Mousaieff Masson and M.T. Patwardhan
(Harvard Oriental Series, 49), Cambridge, MA/London: Harvard University
Press, 1990.

ĪPK = Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Kārikā of Utpaladeva, and Vr̥tti, see Torella
1994.

MM = Mahārthamañjarī of Maheśvarānanda with the Auto-commentary
‘Parimala’, ed. Pt. Vrajavallabha Dviveda, Yogatantra-Granthamālā vol.
5, Varanasi: Sampurnanand Sanskrit University, 1992.

MNP = Mahānayaprakāśa of Śitikaṇṭha with commentary, ed. Mukund Ram
Śastri, Kashmir Śaivism Texts Studies, 1918.

MNP-T = Mahānayaprakāśa, anonymous, ed. K. Śambasiva Śastri, Trivandrum
Sanskrit Series 130, 1937.

SC = Stavacintāmaṇi of Bhaṭṭanārāyaṇa, see Silburn 1964.

ŚSĀ = Śivastotrāvalī of Utpaladeva, see Bailly 1987.

ŚSA-K = Śivastotrāvalī of Utpaladevācārya with the Sanskrit Commentary
of Kṣemarāja, edited with Hindi commentary by Rājānaka Lakṣmaṇa,
Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series, Varanasi, 1964.

TĀ = Tantrāloka of Abhinavagupta, with the Commentary of Jayaratha, ed.
R.C. Dwivedi and N. Rastogi, 8 vols., Delhi: Motilal Banarasidass, 1987.

Vātūlanāthasūtra of Anantaśaktipāda with Vr̥tti (KSTS 29), Bombay, 1923.

Studies and Translations

Bailly, Constantina Rhodes, 1987, Shaiva Devotional Songs of Kashmir: A
Translation and Study of Utpaladeva’s Shivastotravali, Albany: State
University of New York Press.

Sanderson, Alexis, 2007, “The Śaiva Exegesis of Kashmir”, in Tantric
Studies in Memory of Hélène Brunner, ed. D. Goodall, A. Padoux,
Collection Indologie 106, Pondicherry: Institut Français
d’Indologie/École française d’Ěxteme-Orient, pp. 231-442.

———, 1988, “Śaivism and the Tantric Traditions”, in Stewart
Sutherland/Leslie Houlden/Peter Clarke/Friedhelm Hardy (eds.) The
World’s Religions, New York/London: Routledge, pp. 668-97.

SenSharma, DebaBrata, 1990, The Philosophy of Sadhānā: With Special
Reference to the Trika Philosophy of Kashmir, Albany: State University
of New York Press.

Silburn, Lilian, 1964, La Bhakti: Le Stavacintāmaṇi de Bhaṭṭanārāyaṇa,
texte traduit et commenté, Éditions de Boccard, Paris.

Smith, Frederick M., 2009, Deity and Spirit Possession in South Asia,
Delhi: Motilal Banarasidass.

Torella, Raffaele, 1994, The Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikā of Utpaladeva with
the Author’s Vr̥tti, critical edition and annotated translation, Serie
Orientale Roma 71, Roma.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Cf. TĀ III.69 and Jayaratha’s commentary.

2 According to Sanderson, that Somānanda might have not been the author
of the Śivadr̥ṣṭi. If he were, Abhinavagupta would have addressed him in
a more reverential way, as he often does in other passages by affixing
the respectful pādāḥ to Somānanda’s name, [Sanderson 2007: 353].

3 Cf. ĪPVr̥ [Torella 1994: xiv].

4 Cf. Sanderson 1988: 668-89; Torella 1994: xiv.

5 I am immensely grateful to Bettina Bäumer for her suggestion to read
Kṣemarāja’s commentary on the Śivastotrāvalī (ŚSĀ-K) which she kindly
put at my disposal.

6 MM, stanza 58.

7 Ibid. commentary on stanza 68.

8 A similar example of the Pratyabhijñā’s apodicticity within the
Krama-Kaula construction is found in the anonymous Mahānayaprakāśa
edited by Śambaśiva Śāstrī in the Trivandrum Sanskrit Series (MP-T).

9 The Kālīkramapañcāśikā attributed to Niṣkriyānanda whom
Devīpañcaśatikā acknowledges as one of the first preceptors of the
Kālīkrama tradition describes the core of the Kālīkrama teachings in the
following words: “Kālī is the energy of the Sun (bhānavī) consisting of
the Twelve Risen Suns. Terrible, she manifests Time. This is the
Kālikākrama.” Cf. CMSS MS Kh, MS Gh 7.205ab.

10 Cf. ĪPV 1.5.14.

11 Cf. SenSharma 1990:130.

12 Cf. ĪPV 4.1.12, tr. Torella. This verse is quoted in the MM,
commentary on stanza 60.

13 Ibid.

14 ŚSĀ 9.6.

15 ŚSĀ 12.17.

16 Ibid.

17 Ibid. 5.25.

18 Ibid. 15.1.

19 Ibid. 17.11.

20 The condition of permanence (sthiti) is the inexplicable (anākhya),
it is the sun of consciousness (cit-arka), the freedom of Śiva who makes
creation, etc. (sr̥ṣṭi, etc.) manifest and dissolve away. Abhinavagupta
drew description of the highest state of the Goddess Kālasaṁkarṣaṇī
understood as the condition of permanence (sthiti) from the
Devīpañcaśatikā and the Yonigahvaratantra. Abhinavagupta acknowledged
the former as an authoritative text in the Kālīkrama.

21 ĪPVr̥ intro, p. xxix.

22 ŚSĀ 5.8.

23 Ibid. 1.10.

24 A similar description we find in the Mahānayaprakāśa (MNP) of
Śitikaṇṭha 12.4-6: “The object of experience is the favourite place of
the goddesses of the senses (khecarīvāhadevīs) who delight in consuming
it (upabhoga). When these goddesses of the senses have relished the
field of objectivity, they offer it to the Bhairava who is Consciousness
(Cidbhairava). Then, after offering themselves, they abandon it and come
to rest. This is the foundation of the enjoyment of worldly experience
(viṣayabhoga).”

25 ŚSĀ 2.23.

26 ŚSĀ-K: 32.

27 TĀ IV 122b-181a.

28 tvanmukhaṁ tripathanetri ! bhātmakaṁ śaktivr̥ndam iha turyathāgamam
(yad yathāgamam) । dvādaśa kramapadaṁ padādibhir jr̥mbhitaṁ jagati
taccatustrikaiḥ ।। — CGC 36

29 MNP ̵T 9.28-9.33.

30 ŚSĀ 16.27.

31 Ibid. 7.6.

32 Ibid. 16.6. Also Abhinavagupta in his commentary on the Dhvanyāloka
of Ānandavardhana describes bhakti as “absorption (āveśa) in that Lord
whose nature is the highest form of the self”, in The Dhvanyāloka of
Ānandavardhana with the Locana of Abhinavagupta [ed. Ingalls, Masson and
Patwardhan 1990], quoted in Smith 2009: 346.

33 ŚSĀ-K 5.13.

34 Cf. ĪPVr̥: 118-19.

35 MNP-T 2.34, 2.39.

36 Kālīkulapañcaśatakā (Devīpañcaśatikā) 4.6-4.8, MS no. 5-358.

37 MNP-T 2.25.

38 Ibid. Anantaśaktipāda in his commentary on the Aphorisms on the Mad
Lord (Vātūlanāthasūtra) explains that the great union (mahāmelāpa)
taking place between the siddhas and yoginīs in the ritual assembly
(cakra) is the mutual connection between the perceiving subject
(grāhaka) and perceived object (grāhya) conjoined within and by means of
the circle of sense-organs. Siddhas and yoginīs represent deities of the
sense-organs and the object of the senses fused in pulsating union
during every particular act of cognition. In this way, the great union
(mahāmelāpa) is the great fusion (mahāsāmarasya) abiding constantly and
everywhere in the absolute void of consciousness (niruttaracidvyomni)
where differentiation between objectivity and subjectivity ceases
completely. Cf. Vātūlanāthasūtra with Anantaśaktipāda’s Vr̥tti (KSTS 29),
Bombay, 1923, verse 5.

39 ŚSĀ 16.29.

40 ŚSĀ 17.1.

41 In this way Maheśvarānanda specifies that practice of the empowered
means (śāktopāya) is based on the application of the kulayāga which
results in tasting the nectar and ultimately leads an aspirant to the
experience of absorption into the supreme bliss of the śāmbhava state.
Cf. MM stanza 58.

42 ŚSĀ 2.9.

43 Ibid. 2.27.

44 Ibid. 6.6.

45 Ibid. 17.43-44.

46 Ibid. 17.16. (tr. Bailly).

47 MNP-T 5.1-5.12

48 ŚSĀ 11.15.

49 Ibid. 6.4.

50 ŚSĀ 6.3.

51 CMSS 7.175.

52 MNP of Śitikaṇṭha 3.5-6.

Appendix I*

Studies on Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vivr̥ti

